ELIZABETHTOWN, KENTUCKY
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
10. Rules of Construction; General Penalty
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
30. Mayor-Council Plan
31. City Officials
32. City Council
33. Code of Ethics
34. Agencies, Boards and Committees
35. City Policies
36. Personnel Policies
37. Police and Fire Departments
TITLE V: PUBLIC UTILITIES
50. Disconnection Policy
51. Gas
52. Water and Sewer
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
70. General Provisions
71. Traffic Rules
72. Parking Regulations
73. Bicycles and Motorcycles
74. Trucks
75. Traffic Schedules
76. Rescinded
77. Operation of Golf Carts on Public Roadways
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
90. Animals
91. Streets and Sidewalks
92. Nuisances
93. Blasting; Fire Prevention
94. Littering
95. Cemeteries
96. Fair Housing
97. Noise
98. Parks and Recreation
99. Yard Sales
100. Smoke Detector Installation & Maintenance
1
2018-S-1
2 Elizabethtown - Table of Contents
Chapter
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
110. Occupational Licenses
111. Peddlers, Itinerant Merchants, and Solicitors
112. Pawnbrokers
113. Insurance Companies
114. Commercial Business Establishments; Restaurants
115. Detective and Security Agencies
116. Scrap Dealers
117. Tourist and Convention Commission
118. Vehicles for Hire
119. Cable Television
120. Sexually Oriented Businesses
121. Hazardous Materials
122. Alcoholic Beverage Control – Pine Valley Golf Course
123. Rescinded
123A. Rescinded
124. Rescinded
125. Regulating Smoking in Public Places & Places of Employment
126. Restaurant Tax
127. Outdoor Cafe
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
130. Offenses Against Municipal Regulations
131. Prohibiting the Wearing of Hoods and Masks in Public Places
132. Regulating the use of Fire and/or Police Alarms
133. Requirements for Public Display, Sale, Possession, Transportation and Use of
Fireworks and Pyrotechnic Articles
134. Maintenance of Private Fire Protection Systems
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
150. Building Regulations
151. Flood Damage Prevention
152. Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks
153. Planning
154. Property Maintenance Code
155. Zoning Code
156. Cellular Tower Application Fee
157. Erosion Prevention & Sediment Control
158. Stormwater Quality Management
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Kentucky Revised Statutes
References to 1973 Code
References to Ordinances
INDEX
APPENDIX A - ANNEXATION
APPENDIX B – STREETS
APPENDIX C – SEWER ALLOCATION
2018-S-1
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter
10. RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
1
2 Elizabethtown - General Provisions
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
10.01 Short titles of ordinances
10.02 Definitions
10.03 Rules of construction
10.04 Computation of time
10.05 Reserved
10.06 Writings and signatures
10.07 Severability
10.08 Revivor
10.09 Rights and liabilities accruing before repeal of ordinance
10.10 Construction of section references
10.11 Ordinances repealed
10.12 Ordinances unaffected
10.13 Amendments to code; amendatory language
10.14 Reference to offices
10.15 Errors and omissions
10.16 Historical and statutory references
10.17 Adoption of standard codes by reference
10.99 Penalty
§ 10.01 SHORT TITLES OF ORDINANCES.
All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city as referenced, revised, codified, rearranged,
renumbered, and consolidated into component codes, titles, chapters, and sections shall be known and designated as the
Elizabethtown Code of Ordinances. Code, title, chapter, and section headings do not constitute any part of the law as
contained in the code. (KRS 446.140)
§ 10.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this code the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
ACTION. Includes all proceedings in any court of this state or City Council, Boards, or Commissions.
(KRS 446.010 (1))
ANIMAL. Includes every warm-blooded living creature except a human being. (KRS 446.010 (2))
CATTLE. Includes horse, mule, ass, cow, ox, sheep, hog, or goat of any age or sex. (KRS 446.010 (6))
2001 S-4 3
4 Elizabethtown - General Provisions
CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, or MUNICIPALITY. When used in this code shall denote the City of
Elizabethtown irrespective of its population or legal classification.
COMPANY and CORPORATIONS. May extend and be applied to any corporation, company, person,
partnership, joint stock company, or association. (KRS 446.010 (7))
COUNCIL. The city legislative body. (KRS 83A.010 (5))
COUNTY. Hardin County, Kentucky.
DIRECTORS. When applied to corporations, includes managers or trustees. (KRS 446.010 (10))
DOMESTIC. When applied to corporations, means all those incorporated or formed by authority of this state.
(KRS 446.010 (11))
DOMESTIC ANIMAL. Any animal converted to domestic habitat. (KRS 446.010 (12))
EXECUTIVE AUTHORITY. The Mayor. (KRS 83A.010 (6))
EXECUTIVE ORDER. An order issued by the Mayor which is binding upon the officers and employees of the
city and any governmental agency over which the city has jurisdiction. (KRS 83A.010 (7))
FEDERAL. Refers to the United States. (KRS 446.010 (13))
FOREIGN. When applied to corporations, includes all those incorporated or formed by authority of any other
state. (KRS 446.010 (14))
KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes all persons, whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent, or
employee.
KRS. Kentucky Revised Statutes.
LAND or REAL ESTATE. Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments and all rights thereto and interest
therein, other than a chattel interest. (KRS 446.010 (18))
LEGISLATIVE BODY. The City Council. (KRS 91A.010 (8))
LEGISLATIVE BODY MEMBER. A City Council member. (KRS 83A.010 (8))
MISDEMEANOR. An offense for which the criminal fine cannot exceed the amount set forth in KRS 534.040
(2)(a), or a term of imprisonment not to exceed the periods set forth in KRS 532.090(1), or both. (KRS 83A.065)
MUNICIPAL ORDER. An official act of the City Council which is binding upon the officers and employees of
the city and any governmental agency over which the city has jurisdiction. (KRS 83A.010 (9))
MUNICIPALITY. The City of Elizabethtown, Kentucky.
OATH. Includes AFFIRMATION in all cases in which an affirmation may be substituted for an oath.
(KRS 446.010 (22))
2001 S-4
Rules of Construction; General Penalty 5
OFFICER. Any person elected to a position by the voters or any person appointed to a position which:
(A) Is created by the Constitution, the General Assembly, or a city;
(B) Possesses a delegation of a portion of the sovereign power of government;
(C) Has powers and duties to be discharged which are conferred directly or by implication by the city;
(D) Has duties performed independently and without control of a superior power other than the law;
(E) Has some permanency;
(F) Requires an official oath;
(G) Is assigned by a commission or other written authority; and
(H) Provides for an official bond if required by proper authority.
(KRS 83A.010 (10))
ORDINANCE. An official action of a city legislative body, which is a regulation of a general and permanent
nature and enforceable as a local law or is an appropriation of money. (KRS 83A.010 (11))
PEACE OFFICER. Includes sheriffs, constables, coroners, jailers, metropolitan and urban-county government
correctional officers, marshals, policemen, and other persons with similar authority to make arrests.
(KRS 446.010 (24))
PERSON. May extend and be applied to bodies-politic and corporate, societies, communities, the public
generally, individuals, partnerships, registered limited liability partnerships, joint stock companies, and limited liability
companies. (KRS 446.010 (26))
PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes all property except real.
PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land and buildings.
PROPERTY. Includes real, personal, mixed estates and interests.
PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Includes boards of education; the municipal, county, state, or federal government, its
officers or an agency thereof; or any duly authorized public official.
PUBLIC PLACE. Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard, body of water or watercourse,
public conveyance, or any other place for the sale of merchandise, public accommodation, or amusement.
REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.
REGULAR ELECTION. The election in even numbered years at which members of Congress are elected and the
election in odd numbered years at which state officers are elected. (KRS 446.010 (28))
2001 S-4
6 Elizabethtown - General Provisions
SWORN. Includes AFFIRMED in all cases in which an affirmation may be substituted for an oath.
(KRS 446.010 (32))
STATE. The State of Kentucky.
STREET. Includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, highways, viaducts, and all other public
thoroughfares within the city.
SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in the chapter analysis and a
capitalized heading in the body of the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the
heading. Not all chapters have subchapters.
TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person holding a written or oral lease, or who
actually occupies the whole or any part of such premises, alone or with others.
VACANCY IN OFFICE. Such as exists when there is an unexpired part of a term of office without a lawful
incumbent therein, or when the person elected or appointed to an office fails to qualify according to law, or when there
has been no election to fill the office at the time appointed by law; it applies whether the vacancy is occasioned by
death, resignation, removal from the state, county, city, or district, or otherwise. (KRS 446.010 (34))
VIOLATE. Includes failure to comply with. (KRS 446.010 (35))
VIOLATION. An offense for which the criminal fine cannot exceed the amount set forth in KRS 534.040(2)(c).
(KRS 83A.065)
YEAR. Calendar year. (KRS 446.010 (37))
§ 10.03 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
(A) Singular includes plural. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several
persons or things, as well as to one person or thing, and a word importing the plural number only may extend and be
applied to one person or thing as well as to several persons or things. (KRS 446.020 (1))
(B) Masculine includes feminine. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to
females as well as males. (KRS 446.020 (2))
(C) Liberal construction. All sections of this code shall be liberally construed with a view to promote their
objects and carry out the intent of Council. (KRS 446.080 (1))
(D) Retroactivity. No ordinance shall be construed to be retroactive, unless expressly so declared. (KRS 446.080
(3))
(E) Technical terms. All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of
language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in
the law, shall be construed according to such meaning. (KRS 446.080 (4))
2001 S-4
Rules of Construction; General Penalty 6A
(F) From and after the passage, approval and publication of this section:
(1) The exact wording of all ordinances as appear in this code of ordinances have been edited by the
publisher and many nonessential words and phrases contained in the original signed and attested ordinance do not
appear therein.
(2) For the exact wording of all ordinances, reference is made in the histories and parallel references to the
original ordinance filed and maintained in the City Clerk's office at the city hall.
('73 Code, § 1-1.1) (Ord., passed 6-6-88)
§ 10.04 COMPUTATION OF TIME.
(A) In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by order of court, or by any applicable ordinance or
regulation, the day of the act, event, or default after which the designated period of time begins to run is not to be
included. The last day of the period so computed is to be included, unless it is a Saturday, a Sunday, a legal holiday, or
a day on which the public office in which a document is required to be filed is actually and legally closed, in which
event the period runs until the end of the next day which is not one of the days just mentioned. When the period of
time prescribed or allowed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays shall be
excluded in the computation.
(B) When an ordinance, regulation, or order of court requires an act to be done either a certain time before an
event or a certain time before the day on which an event occurs, the day of the event shall be excluded in computing the
time. If the day thereby computed on which or by which the act is required to be done falls on a Saturday, Sunday,
legal holiday, or a day on which the public office in which the act is required to be completed is actually and legally
closed, the act may be done on the next day which is none of the days just mentioned.
(C) If any proceeding is directed by law to take place, or any act is directed to be done, on a particular day of a
month and that day is Sunday, the proceeding shall take place, or the act shall be done, on the next day that is not a
legal holiday.
(KRS 446.030)
2001 S-4
6B Elizabethtown - General Provisions
Rules of Construction; General Penalty 7
(D) In all cases where the law requires any act to be done in a reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given,
such reasonable time or notice shall mean the time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of such duty
or compliance with such notice.
§ 10.05 RESERVED.
§ 10.06 WRITINGS AND SIGNATURES.
(A) When this code requires any writing to be signed by a party thereto, it shall not be deemed to be signed unless
the signature is subscribed at the end or close of the writing.
(B) Every writing contemplated by this code shall be in the English language.
(KRS 446.060)
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
If any part of any ordinance be held unconstitutional or unenforceable, the remaining parts shall remain in force,
unless the ordinance provides otherwise.
§ 10.08 REVIVOR.
(A) A repealed ordinance without a delayed effective date is revived when the ordinance that repealed it is
repealed by another ordinance enacted at the same meeting of Council.
(B) A repealed ordinance with a delayed effective date is revived by the enactment of a repealer of the ordinance
that repealed it at the same or any subsequent meeting of Council as long as it takes effect prior to the effective date of
the original repealer.
(C) An amended ordinance without a delayed effective date remains unchanged with respect to an amendment
which is repealed at the same meeting of Council which enacted the amendment.
(D) An amended ordinance with a delayed effective date remains unchanged with respect to that amendment if
the ordinance making the amendment is repealed at the same or at a subsequent meeting of Council as long as the
repealing ordinance takes effect prior to the effective date of the original amendment.
1995 S-1
8 Elizabethtown - General Provisions
(E) No other action of Council repealing a repealer or an amendment shall have the effect of reviving the original
language of the repealer or amendment as the case may be.
(KRS 446.100)
§ 10.09 RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES ACCRUING BEFORE REPEAL OF ORDINANCE.
No new ordinance shall be construed to repeal a former ordinance as to any offense committed against a former
ordinance, nor as to any act done, or penalty, forfeiture, or punishment incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act so committed or done, or any
penalty, forfeiture, or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes
effect, except that the proceedings thereafter had shall conform, so far as practicable, to the laws in force at the time of
such proceedings. If any penalty, forfeiture, or punishment is mitigated by any provision of the new ordinance, such
provision may, by the consent of the party affected, be applied to any judgment pronounced after the new ordinance
takes effect.
(KRS 446.110)
§ 10.10 CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION REFERENCES.
(A) Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a section or an inclusive group of sections,
such reference shall be construed to mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections included in the
reference.
(B) References in the code to action taken or authorized under designated sections of the code include, in every
case, action taken or authorized under the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by this code.
(C) Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, the reference shall extend and apply to
the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered, unless the subject matter be
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.11 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the provisions of a general nature pertaining to the
subjects herein enumerated and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code shall be
deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code of ordinances.
§ 10.12 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
(A) All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances pertaining to subjects not enumerated
and embraced in this code of ordinances, shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by
necessary implication.
Rules of Construction; General Penalty 9
(B) Same – In Possession of the City Clerk. Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall be
deemed to affect the validity of any of the following ordinances, and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as
continuing in full force and effect under their own terms and conditions:
(1) Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance
of any bonds of the city or evidence of the city's indebtedness.
(2) Any ordinance authorizing the borrowing of funds on behalf of the city.
(3) Any ordinance authorizing the execution of any contract, deed, lease, or other legal instrument.
(4) Any ordinance authorizing the purchase or sale of property or the expenditure of city funds.
(5) Any appropriation or apportionment or ordinance providing for an annual budget.
(6) Any ordinance authorizing the transfer of city funds.
(7) Any ordinance granting any franchise or other right.
(8) Any ordinance annexing territory to the city or reducing the city limits.
(9) Any zoning or subdivision ordinance.
(10) Any ordinance providing for the appointment or salary of city employees, not in conflict herewith.
(11) Any ordinance opening, closing, accepting, improving, or providing for the grade of any street or other
public way.
(12) Any ordinance establishing for the purpose of promoting public projects.
(13) Any ordinance levying or establishing any tax.
(14) Any ordinance establishing rates, fees and charges for any city utility.
(15) Any ordinance establishing rules and procedures for service by any city utility.
('73 Code, § 1-4)
§ 10.13 AMENDMENTS TO CODE; AMENDATORY LANGUAGE.
(A) Any chapter, section, or division amended or added to this code by ordinances passed subsequent to this code
may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this code and printed for inclusion herein. Any chapter,
section, or division repealed by subsequent ordinances may be excluded from this code by omission from reprinted
pages. Subsequent ordinances as printed or omitted shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until
Council shall adopt a new code of ordinances.
(B) The method of amendment set forth in § 32.37 should be used by the city to amend, add, or repeal a chapter,
section, or division of this code of ordinances.
1995 S-1
10 Elizabethtown - General Provisions
§ 10.14 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer, or employee of the city
exercising the powers, duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of functions or
change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.15 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
If a manifest error be discovered consisting of the misspelling of any word or words, the omission of any word or
words necessary to express the intention of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly intended to express the intention,
the spelling shall be corrected, and the word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provision shall have the same effect as though the correct words were contained in the text
as originally published. No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
such error.
§ 10.16 HISTORICAL AND STATUTORY REFERENCES.
(A) As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage date of the original ordinance, and the
most recent three amending ordinances, if any, are listed following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10,
passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. 20, passed
l-1-80; Am. Ord. 25, passed 1-1-85)
(B) If a KRS cite is included in the history, this indicates that the text of the section reads word-for-word the same
as the statute. Example: (KRS 83A.090) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-80; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-85). If a KRS cite is set
forth as a “statutory reference” following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer to that statute
for further information. Example:
§ 31.10 MAYOR.
The executive authority of the city shall be vested in and exercised by the Mayor.
(Ord. 10, passed 1-1-80)
Statutory reference:
For powers and duties of the Mayor, see KRS 83A.130
(C) If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of ordinances of the city published in 1973 and
subsequently amended, the 1973 code section number shall be indicated in the history by “('73 Code, § ).”
§ 10.17 ADOPTION OF STANDARD CODES BY REFERENCE.
The Council may adopt the provisions of any local, statewide, or nationally recognized standard code and
codifications of entire bodies of local legislation by an ordinance that identifies the subject matter by title, source, and
date and incorporates the adopted provisions by reference without setting them out in full, if a copy accompanies the
adopting ordinance and is made a part of the permanent records of the city.
(KRS 83A.060 (5))
1995 S-1 Repl.
Rules of Construction; General Penalty 11
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any prohibited act of this code and when no
specific penalty is provided, the violation of any provision of this code shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be
punishable by a fine not to exceed $500; provided that the fine for an offense under this code shall not be less than nor
greater than the fine imposed by any state statute for the same offense. Each day any violation of any provision of this
code shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. Applicable court costs shall be added in every case.
Whenever it is allowed by a subject ordinance, enforcement may be taken through the Code Enforcement Board
per ordinance enacted on the 30th day of April, 2003 by Ordinance #09-2003.
('73 Code, § 1-7) (Ord 13-2003, passed 06-16-2003)
2003-S-4
12 Elizabethtown - General Provisions
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
Chapter
30. MAYOR-COUNCIL PLAN
31. CITY OFFICIALS
32. CITY COUNCIL
33. CODE OF ETHICS
34. AGENCIES, BOARDS AND COMMITTEES
35. CITY POLICIES
36. PERSONNEL POLICIES
37. POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS
1
1995 S-1
2 Elizabethtown - Administration
CHAPTER 30: MAYOR-COUNCIL PLAN
Section
30.01 Form of government
30.02 Governing officers
30.03 Salaries of elected officers
§ 30.01 FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
The form of government provided for this city shall be known as the “Mayor-Council Plan.”
(KRS 83A.130 (1))
§ 30.02 GOVERNING OFFICERS.
(A) The city shall be governed by an elected executive who shall be called Mayor and by an elected legislative
body which shall be called the City Council, and by such other officers and employees as are provided for by statute or
city ordinance. (KRS 83A.130 (2))
(B) The City Council shall be composed of six members. (KRS 83A.030 (1))
§ 30.03 SALARIES OF ELECTED OFFICERS.
(A) Mayor: $42,000 per year base salary effective January 1, 1999
(Ordinance No. 10-1998, passed 05/04/1998)
(B) Council Members: $8,400 per year base salary effective January 1, 1994.
Cross reference:
Compensation established by City Council, see § 31.02
3
2004-S-2
4 Elizabethtown - Administration
CHAPTER 31: CITY OFFICIALS
Section
General Provisions
31.01 Oath; bond
31.02 Compensation
Elected Officials
31.20 Election procedure
31.21 Mayor; the term of office
31.22 Council members
Nonelected City Officials
31.35 Establishment of nonelected city offices
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 OATH; BOND.
(A) Oath. Each officer of the city shall, before entering upon the discharge of duties of the office, take the
following oath: "I do solemnly swear (or affirm, as the case may be) that I will support the Constitution of this
Commonwealth, and the Constitution of the United States, and be faithful and true to the Commonwealth of Kentucky,
so long as I continue a citizen thereof, and that I will faithfully execute, to the best of my ability, the office of ,
according to law; and I do further solemnly swear (or affirm) that, since the adoption of the present Constitution, I
being a citizen of this United States, have not fought a duel with deadly weapons within this State, nor out of it, nor
have I sent or accepted a challenge to fight a duel with deadly weapons, nor have I acted as a second in carrying a
challenge, nor aided or assisted any person thus offending, so help me God,” as established by Section 228 of the
Kentucky Constitution.
(B) Certification. The person administering the oath of office to an elected official shall certify in writing that
the oath was administered and the date of its administration. Said certification shall be filed in accordance with KRS
62.020.
(C) Bond.
(1) All officers, officials, and employees of cities, counties, urban county governments, charter county
governments, and special districts who handle public funds in the execution of their duties shall give a good and
sufficient bond to the local governing body for the faithful and honest performance of his or her duties and as security
for all money coming into that person's hands or under that person's control. The bond amount shall be based upon the
maximum amount of public funds the officer, official, or employee handles at any given time during a fiscal year cycle.
The local governing body shall pay the cost of the bond.
2001 S-4 5
6 Elizabethtown - Administration
(2) Elected officials who post bond as required by statute, and employees of their offices covered by a blanket or
umbrella bond, shall be deemed to have complied with subsection (1) of this section. (KRS 65.057)
§ 31.02 COMPENSATION.
(A) City Council shall establish the compensation of every elected city officer not later than the first Monday in
May in the year in which the officer is elected. An elected officer's compensation shall not be changed after the election
or during the term of office.
(1) An elected officer's compensation shall not be changed after the election or during the term of office
except to equate the compensation of Mayors and Council members with the purchasing power of the dollar. The
Department for Local Government computes by the second Friday in February of every year the annual increase or
decrease in the consumer price index of the preceding year by using 1949 as the base year in accordance with section
246 of the Constitution of Kentucky.
(2) The City Council shall set the compensation of these officers in accordance with KRS 83A.070 at a rate
no greater than that stipulated by the Department for Local Government.
(B) The City Council shall fix the compensation of each appointed city officer by ordinance and may change it by
ordinance.
(C) The City Council shall establish the compensation of city employees in accordance with the personnel and
pay classification plan of the city.
(D) All fees and commissions authorized by law shall be paid into the city treasury for the benefit of the city and
shall not be retained by any officer or employee.
Statutory reference:
Compensation, see KRS 83A.070 and 83A.075
ELECTED OFFICIALS
§ 31.20 ELECTION PROCEDURE.
(A) The city hereby determines that the nomination and election of candidates for Mayor and City Council shall
be elected on a nonpartisan basis in the general election in November, every four years in the case of the Mayor,
beginning with 1998, and every two years beginning in 1996 for members of City Council. The city hereby elects to
forego conducting a nonpartisan primary election for the nomination of candidates for Mayor and City Council,
regardless of the number of candidates running for the offices.
(B) All candidates for election to the office of Mayor and for Council members for the six seats on the City
Council shall file nomination papers with the County Clerk no earlier than the first Wednesday after the first Monday in
November of the year preceding the year in which the office will appear on the ballot and not later than the second
Tuesday in August before the day fixed by KRS Chapter 118 for holding a regular election for the office. The
nomination papers shall be filed not later than 4:00 p.m. local time, when filed on the last day on which the papers are
permitted to be filed.
2001 S-4
City Officials 7
(C) The election of Mayor and Council members shall be governed by Kentucky state law.
Statutory reference:
Election of city officers, see KRS 83A.050
Creation, abolishment of city offices, see KRS 83A.080(3), (4)
§ 31.21 MAYOR; THE TERM OF OFFICE.
(A) Election; term of office. The Mayor of this city shall be elected by the voters of the city at a regular election.
A candidate for Mayor shall be a resident of the city for not less than one year prior to the election. The term of office
begins on the first day of January following the election and shall be for four years and until a successor qualifies.
(B) Qualifications. The Mayor shall be at least 21 years of age, shall be a qualified voter in the city, and shall
reside in the city throughout the term of office.
(KRS 83A.040 (1)) (Am Ord 29-2012, passed 12-17-12)
(C) Vacancy. If a vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor, it shall be filled according to state law.
(D) Powers and duties.
(1) The executive authority of the city is hereby vested in and shall be exercised by the Mayor. The Mayor
shall enforce the Mayor-Council Plan, city ordinances and orders, and all applicable statutes. The Mayor shall
supervise all departments of city government and the conduct of all city officers and employees under their jurisdiction
and require each department to make reports to the Mayor as required by ordinance or as the Mayor deems desirable.
(2) The Mayor shall maintain liaison with related units of local government respecting interlocal contracting
and joint activities.
(3) The Mayor shall report to the Council and to the public on the condition and needs of city government as
the Mayor finds appropriate or as required by ordinance, but not less than annually. The Mayor shall make any
recommendations for actions by the Council found in the public interest. (KRS 83A.130(3))
(4) Subject to disapproval of the Council, the Mayor shall promulgate procedures to insure orderly
administration of the functions of city government and compliance with statutes or ordinances. Upon promulgation or
upon revision or rescission of the procedures, copies shall be filed with the person responsible for maintaining city
records. (KRS 83A.130(4))
(5) Any delegation of the Mayor's power, duties, or responsibilities to subordinate officers and employees
and any expression of official authority to fulfill executive functions shall be made by executive order. Executive
orders shall be sequentially numbered by years and kept in a permanent file. (KRS 83A.130(7))
(6) All bonds, notes, contracts, and written obligations of the city shall be made and executed by the Mayor
or agent designated by executive order. (KRS 83A.130(8))
(7) The Mayor shall be the appointing authority with power to appoint and remove all city employees,
including police officers, except as tenure and terms of employment are protected by statute, ordinance, or contract and
except for employees of the Council. (KRS 83A.130(9))
2013-S-1
8 Elizabethtown - Administration
(8) The Mayor shall provide for the orderly continuation of the functions of city government at any time he/she is
unable to attend to the duties of office by delegating responsibility for any function to be performed, in accordance
with division (D)(5) above. However, the Mayor may not delegate the responsibility of presiding at meetings of the
Council, and the authority to approve ordinances or promulgate administrative procedures may only be delegated to an
elected officer. With approval of the Council, the Mayor may rescind any action taken in the Mayor's absence under this
section within 30 days of such action. If for any reason the disability of the Mayor to attend to the Mayor's duties
persists for 60 consecutive days, the office of Mayor may be declared vacant by a majority vote of the Council and the
provisions of § 31.21(C) shall apply. (KRS 83A.130(10))
(9) The Mayor of Elizabethtown, in addition to the powers otherwise set out by ordinances, state statute or
state constitution shall have the power to take immediate steps wherein he/she deems that an emergency exists; this
includes but is not limited to acts of God, and the threat of immediate damage to persons or property which exists
because of fire, inclement weather, chemicals, bacteria or other causes, or where life or property of citizens of
Elizabethtown is found to be threatened. The Mayor may determine that an emergency exists and/or that a curfew
should be imposed and the same shall be enforced by the Mayor through any and all the city departments. No prior
notice shall be required under this section. However, an announcement should be made as public as possible under the
circumstances as determined by the Mayor. Violators of such declaration of the Mayor shall be deemed an emergency
and all violators or perpetrators who violate any curfew or other order shall be arrested, incarcerated and punished
according to § 31.21 (9) of the Elizabethtown Code of Ordinances, determined by the Mayor.
§ 31.22 COUNCIL MEMBERS.
For provisions concerning City Council, see Chapter 32.
NONELECTED CITY OFFICIALS
§ 31.35 ESTABLISHMENT OF NONELECTED CITY OFFICES.
(A) The following are nonelected city offices:
(1) City Attorney;
(2) City Clerk;
(3) Executive Assistant;
(4) Finance Director;
(5) City Treasurer;
(6) Director of Planning and Development;
(7) Police Chief;
2001 -S-4
City Officials 9
(8) Fire Chief;
(9) City Engineer;
(10) Superintendent of Public Works;
(11) Superintendent of Wastewater Treatment;
(12) Director of Parks & Recreation;
(13) Natural Gas System Manager/Engineer;
(14) Director of Stormwater Management;
(15) Director of Facilities Management;
(16) City Alcohol Beverage Control Administrator;
(17) City Administrator
(B) The duties and responsibilities of each city officer shall include, but are not limited to, all requirements of
state statutes, city ordinances, and the officer's job description. Copies of job descriptions are on file at the city
Personnel Office.
(C) Compensation shall be as established by the City Council as set forth in § 31.02.
(D) Each nonelected officer shall take the oath of office as required by state statute.
(E) All nonelected city officers shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of City Council.
(F) All nonelected officers may be removed by the Mayor at will unless otherwise provided by statute or
ordinance.
Statutory reference:
Nonelected city offices, see KRS 83A.080(1),(2) (Am. Ord. 01-2009, passed 01-20-09) (Am. Ord. 07-2006, passed
03-06-06) (Am. Ord. 30-2012, passed 12-17-12) (Am. Ord. 10-2016, passed 06-20-16) (Am. Ord. 09-2018, passed 02-
20-18)
2018-S-1
10 Elizabethtown - Administration
CHAPTER 32: CITY COUNCIL
Section
General Provisions
32.01 Members; election, qualifications, compensation
32.02 Vacancies
32.03 Powers and duties
Rules of Procedure
32.20 Mayor as Presiding Officer
32.21 Meetings
32.22 Quorum
32.23 Smoking in Council chamber
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.01 MEMBERS; ELECTION, QUALIFICATIONS, COMPENSATION.
(A) Election; term of office. Each Council member shall be elected at-large by the voters of the city at a regular
election. A candidate for City Council shall be a resident of the city for not less than one year prior to the election.
Terms of office begin on the first day of January following the election and shall be for two years.
(B) Qualifications. A member shall be at least 18 years of age, shall be a qualified voter in the city, and shall
reside in the city throughout the term of office.
(KRS 83A.040(4)) (Am. Ord. 29-2012, passed 12-17-12)
(C) Compensation. For provisions concerning compensation, see § 31.02.
§ 32.02 VACANCIES.
Vacancies on the Council shall be filled according to KRS 83A.175.
§ 32.03 POWERS AND DUTIES.
(A) The legislative authority of the city is hereby vested in and shall be exercised by the elected Council of the
city. The Council may not perform any executive functions except those functions assigned to it by statute. (KRS
83A.130 (11))
11
2013 S-1
12 Elizabethtown - Administration
(B) The Council shall establish all appointive offices and the duties and responsibilities of those offices and
codes, rules, and regulations for the public health, safety, and welfare.
(C) The Council shall provide, by ordinance, for sufficient revenue to operate city government and shall
appropriate the funds of the city in a budget which provides for the orderly management of city resources.
(KRS 83A.130 (12))
(D) The Council may investigate all activities of city government. The Council may require any city officer or
employee to prepare and submit to it sworn statements regarding the performance of his/her official duties. Any
statement required by the Council to be submitted or any investigation undertaken by the Council, if any office,
department, or agency under the jurisdiction of the Mayor is involved, shall not be submitted or undertaken unless and
until written notice of the Council's action is given to the Mayor. The Mayor may review any statement before
submission to the Council and to appear personally or through his/her designee on behalf of any department, office, or
agency in the course of any investigation. (KRS 83A.130 (13))
RULES OF PROCEDURE
§ 32.20 MAYOR AS PRESIDING OFFICER.
(A) Pursuant to KRS Chapter 83A, the duly elected Mayor shall preside at regular and special meetings of the
City Council. Further, in the event of a regular or special meeting of the City Council, and the Mayor is absent, a
presider will be selected on a rotating basis from a list of Council members who want to preside and who are in
attendance at the meeting. That Council member shall not lose his/her vote on action taken by the City Council. ('73
Code, § 2-1.1) (Ord. passed 7-19-82)
(B) The Mayor may participate in Council proceedings, but shall not have a vote, except when casting the
deciding vote in case of a tie. (KRS 83A.130 (5))
§ 32.21 MEETINGS.
(A) (1) Regular meetings of the City Council shall be held for the purpose of the conduct of business of the City
Council and the schedule shall be made available to the public at the City Clerk's office, city hall, upon request. The
meetings shall be held on the first and third Mondays of each month at 4:30 p.m., regular Elizabethtown time. In
addition, work sessions of the City Council shall be held on the second and fourth Monday, at 4:30 p.m., for the
purpose of discussion and consideration of the business of the city.
(2) Except as determined by executive authority, meetings of the City Council shall be held at the Council
meeting room in the city hall, Elizabethtown, Kentucky 42701.
1995 S-1
City Council 13
(3) Whenever any regular Council meeting (Monday meetings) falls on a holiday, the meeting shall be held
automatically on the following day at the same time and at the same place.
('73 Code, § 2-1) (Ord., passed 1-1-52; Am. Ord., passed 10-25-82; Am. Ord. 3-1990, passed 2-5-90; Am. Ord. 31-
1991, passed 8-19-91)
(B) Special meetings of the Council may be called by the Mayor or upon written request of a majority of the
Council. In the call, the Mayor or Council shall designate the purpose, time, and place of the special meeting with
sufficient notice for the attendance of Council members and for compliance with KRS Chapter 61.
(C) At a special meeting no business may be considered other than that set forth in the designation of purpose.
(D) The minutes of every meeting shall be signed by the person responsible for maintaining city records as
provided under § 31.36 and by the officer presiding at the meeting.
(KRS 83A.130 (11))
§ 32.22 QUORUM.
Unless otherwise provided by statute, a majority of the Council constitutes a quorum and a vote of a majority of a
quorum is sufficient to take action.
(KRS 83A.060 (6))
§ 32.23 SMOKING IN COUNCIL CHAMBER.
The smoking of any and all tobacco and other similar products is prohibited in the City Council chambers in the
city hall.
('73 Code, § 5-6) (Ord., passed 12-18-89) Penalty, see § 10.99
1995 S-1
14 Elizabethtown - Administration
CHAPTER 33: CODE OF ETHICS
Section
General Provisions
33.01 Title
33.02 Declaration
33.03 Purpose and authority
33.04 Definitions
Standards of Conduct
33.15 Conflicts of interest
33.16 Receipt of gifts
33.17 Use of city or county resources
33.18 Misuse of confidential information
33.19 Honoraria
Financial Disclosure
33.30 Who must file
33.31 When to file; amended statement
33.32 Control of financial statements
33.33 Requirements; contents
33.34 Public viewing
Nepotism
33.40 Prohibited
Enforcement
33.50 County Board of Ethics
33.51 Filing and investigation of complaints
33.52 Hearings
33.53 Appeals
33.54 Limitations of actions
33.55 Advisory opinions
33.56 Reprisals prohibited against persons disclosing violations
15
1995 S-1
16 Elizabethtown - Administration
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.01 TITLE.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Hardin County Code of Ethics".
(Ord. 28-1994, passed 10-24-94)
§ 33.02 DECLARATION.
The legislative body finds and declares that:
(A) Public office and employment with the city and county are public trusts.
(B) The vitality and stability of the city and county government depends upon the public's confidence in the
integrity of its elected and appointed officers, employees, board or commission members. Whenever the public
perceives a conflict between the private interests and public duties of a city or county officer, employee, board or
commission member, that confidence is imperiled.
(C) The city and county government has a duty to provide its citizens with standards by which they may determine
whether public duties are being faithfully performed, and to make its officers, employees, board or commission
members aware of the standards which the citizenry rightfully expects them to comply with while conducting their
public duties.
(Ord. 28-1994, passed 10-24-94)
§ 33.03 PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.
(A) It is the purpose of this chapter to provide a method of assuring that standards of ethical conduct and financial
disclosure requirements for officers, employees, board or commission members of the city and county shall be clearly
established, uniform in their application and enforceable, and to provide the officers, employees, board or commission
members of the city and county with advice and information concerning potential conflicts of interest which might arise
in the conduct of their public duties.
(B) It is the further purpose of this chapter to meet the requirements of KRS 65.230, as enacted by the 1994
Kentucky General Assembly.
(C) This chapter is enacted under the power vested in the city and county by KRS 82.082 and pursuant to
requirements of KRS 65.230
(Ord. 28-1994, passed 10-24-94)
§ 33.04 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires
a different meaning:
1995 S-1
Code of Ethics 17
BOARD OF ETHICS. The Hardin County Board of Ethics which is created and vested by this chapter with
responsibility of enforcing the requirements of the city's and county's Code of Ethics.
BUSINESS. Any corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, firm, enterprise, franchise, association,
organization, self-employed individual, holding company, joint stock company, receivership, trust, professional service
corporation, or any legal entity through which business is conducted for profit.
CANDIDATE. Any individual who seeks nomination or election to a city or county office. An individual is a
candidate when the individual files a notification and declaration for nomination for office with the County Clerk or
Secretary of State, or is nominated for office by a political party, or files a declaration of intent to be a write-in
candidate with the County Clerk or Secretary of State.
CITY. The Cities of Elizabethtown, Radcliff, Vine Grove and West Point, Kentucky.
CITY OR COUNTY AGENCY. Any board, commission, authority, non-stock corporation, or other entity created,
either individually or jointly, by the city or county.
COUNTY. Hardin County, Kentucky.
EMPLOYEE. Any person, whether full-time or part-time, and whether paid or unpaid, who is employed by or
provides service to the city or county. The term EMPLOYEE shall not include any contractor or subcontractor or any
of their employees.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER. A spouse, an unemancipated child residing in the officer's or employee's
household, or a person claimed by the officer or employee or the officer's or employee's spouse as a dependent for tax
purposes.
OFFICER. Any person, whether full-time or part-time, and whether paid or unpaid, who is one of the following:
(1) The Mayor.
(2) A Legislative Body Member.
(3) County Clerk.
(4) Circuit Court Clerk.
(5) County Attorney.
(6) Jailer.
(7) Coroner.
(8) Surveyor.
(9) Constable.
(10) Sheriff
1995 S-1
18 Elizabethtown - Administration
(11)County Judge Executive.
(12)Any person who occupies a non-elected office created under KRS § 83A.080.
(13)Property Value Administrator.
(Ord. 28-1994, passed 10-24-94)
STANDARDS OF CONDUCT
§ 33.15 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.
(A) Every officer and employee of the city and county shall comply with the following standards of conduct:
(1) No officer, employee, board or commission member, nor any immediate family member of any officer,
employee, or board or commission member, shall have an interest in a business or engage in any business, transaction,
or activity, which is in substantial conflict with the proper discharge of the officer's, employee's, board or commission
member's public duties.
(2) No officer, employee, board or commission member shall intentionally use or attempt to use his or her
official position with the city or county to secure unwarranted privileges or advantages for himself or herself or others.
(3) No city or county government officer, employee, board or commission member shall act in his official
capacity in any matter where he, a member of his immediate family, or a business organization in which he has an
interest, has a direct or indirect financial or personal involvement that might reasonably be expected to impair his
objectivity or independence of judgment.
(4) No city or county government officer, employee, board or commission member shall undertake any
employment or service, compensated or not, which might reasonably be expected to prejudice his independence of
judgment in the exercise of his official duties.
(5) Every officer, employee, board or commission member who has a prohibited financial interest which the
officer, employee, board or commission member believes or has reason to believe may be affected by his or her
participation, vote, decision or other action taken within the scope of his or her public duties shall disclose the interest
to the governing body of the city or county or city or county agency served by the officer, employee, board or
commission member and the disclosure shall be entered on the official record of the proceedings of the governing body.
The officer, employee, board or commission member shall refrain from taking any action with respect to the matter that
is the subject of the disclosure.
(6) No city or county government officer, employee, board or commission member or member of his
immediate family, or business organization in which he has an interest, shall solicit or accept any gift, favor, loan,
political contribution, service, promise of future employment, or other thing of value based upon an understanding that
the gift, favor, loan, contribution, service, promise, or other thing of value was given or offered for the purpose of
influencing him, directly or indirectly, in the discharge of
1995 S-1
Code of Ethics 19
his official duties. This provision shall not apply to the solicitation or acceptance of contributions to the campaign of an
announced candidate for elective public office of government by the Kentucky Revised Statutes.
(7) No city or county government officer, employee, board or commission member shall be prohibited from
giving or receiving an award publicly presented in recognition of public service, or reasonable hosting, including travel
and expenses, entertainment, meals or refreshments furnished in connection with public events, appearances,
ceremonies or fact-finding trips related to official city or county government business, or commercially reasonable loans
made in the ordinary course of a lender's business.
(8) No city or county government officer shall be prohibited from accepting a gratuity for solemnizing a
marriage.
(9) No city or county government officer, employee, board or commission member, or business organization
in which he has an interest shall represent any person or party other than the local government in connection with any
cause, proceeding, application or other matter pending before any agency in the local government in which he serves.
(10) No city or county government officer shall be deemed in conflict with these provisions if, by reason of
his participation in the enactment of any ordinance, resolution or other matter required to be voted upon or which is
subject to executive approval or veto, no material or monetary gain accrues to him as a member of any business,
profession, occupation or group, to any greater extent than any gain could reasonably be expected to accrue to any other
member of such business, profession, occupation or group.
(11) No elected city or county government officer shall be prohibited from making an inquiry for information
or providing assistance on behalf of a constituent, if no fee, reward or other thing of value is promised to, given to or
accepted by the officer or a member of his immediate family, whether directly or indirectly, in return therefore.
(12) Nothing shall prohibit any city or county government officer, employee, board or commission member or
members of his immediate family, from representing himself, or themselves, in negotiations or proceedings concerning
his or their own interests.
(13) No officer, employee, board or commission member shall be deemed in violation of any provision of this
section if, by reason of the officer's, employee's, board or commission member's participation, vote, decision, action or
inaction, no financial benefit accrues to the officer, employee, board or commission member, a family member, an
outside employer, or a business in which the officer, employee, board or commission member, or any family member
has a financial interest, or any business with which the officer, employee, board or commission member, or any family
member is negotiating or seeking prospective employment, or other business or professional relationship, as a member
of any business, occupation, profession, or other group, to any greater extent than any gain could reasonably be
expected to accrue to any other member of the business, occupation, profession, or other group.
(B) (1) No officer, employee, board or commission member of the city or county, or any city or county agency
shall directly or through others undertake, execute, hold, or enjoy, in whole or in part, any contract made, entered into,
awarded, or granted by the city or county, or a city or county agency, except as follows:
1995 S-1
20 Elizabethtown - Administration
(a) The prohibition in division (B)(1) of this section shall not apply to contracts entered into before
an elected officer filed as a candidate for city or county office, before an appointed officer was appointed to a city or
county, or city or county agency office, or before an employee was hired by the city or county, or city or county agency.
However, if any contract entered into by a city or county, or city or county agency officer, employee, board or
commission member, before he or she became a candidate, was appointed to office, or was hired as an employee, is
renewable after he or she becomes a candidate, assumes the appointed office, or is hired as an employee, then the
prohibition in division (B)(1) of this section shall apply to the renewal of the contract.
(b) The prohibition in division (B)(1) of this section shall not apply if the contract is awarded after
public notice and competitive bidding, unless the officer, employee, board or commission member is authorized to
participate in establishing the contract specifications, awarding the contract, or managing contract performance after the
contract is awarded. If the officer, employee, board or commission member has any of the authorities set forth in the
preceding sentence, then the officer, employee, board or commission member shall have no interest in the contract,
unless the requirements set forth in division (B)(1)(c) below are satisfied.
(c) The prohibition in division (B)(1) of this section shall not apply in any case where the following
requirements are satisfied:
1. The specific nature of the contract transaction and the nature of the officer's, employee's,
board or commission member's interest in the contract are publicly disclosed at a meeting of the governing body of the
city or county, or city or county agency and refrain from participating in voting.
2. The disclosure is made a part of the official record of the governing body of the city or
county, or city or county agency before the contract is executed.
3. A finding is made by the governing body of the city or county, or city or county agency that
the contract with the officer, employee, board or commission member is in the best interest of the public and the city or
county, or city or county agency because of price, limited supply, or other specific reasons.
4. The finding is made a part of the official record of the governing body of the city or county
or city or county agency before the contract is executed.
(2) Any violation of this section shall result in a civil fine payable to the Commission not to exceed $500.
Additionally, a violation of this section shall be grounds for removal from office or employment with the city or county
in accordance with any applicable provisions of state law and ordinances, rules or regulations of the city or county.
(Ord. 28-1994, passed 10-24-94)
§ 33.16 RECEIPT OF GIFTS.
No officer, employee, board or commission member of the city or county, or any city or county agency shall
directly or indirectly through any other person or business, solicit or accept any gift having a fair market value of more
than $100, whether in the form of money, service, loan, travel, entertainment, hospitality, thing or promise, or any other
form, under circumstances in which it could reasonably be
1995 S-1
Code of Ethics 21
inferred that the gift was intended to influence, or could reasonably be expected to influence the officer, employee,
board or commission member in the performance of his or her public duties.
(Ord. 28-1994, passed 10-24-94)
§ 33.17 USE OF CITY OR COUNTY RESOURCES.
No officer, employee, board or commission member of the city or county shall use or permit the use of any city or
county time, funds, personnel, equipment, or other personal or real property for the private use of any person, unless:
(A) The use is specifically authorized by a stated city or county policy; or
(B) The use is available to the general public, and then only to the extent and upon the terms that the use is
available to the general public.
(Ord. 28-1994, passed 10-24-94)
§ 33.18 MISUSE OF CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
No officer, employee, board or commission member of the city or county or any city or county agency shall
intentionally use or disclose information acquired in the course of his or her official duties, if the primary purpose of the
use or disclosure is to further his or her personal financial interest or that of another person or business. Information
shall be deemed confidential, if it is not subject to disclosure pursuant to the Kentucky Open Records Act, KRS 61.872
to 61.884, at the time of its use or disclosure.
(Ord. 28-1994, passed 10-24-94)
§ 33.19 HONORARIA.
(A) No officer, employee, board or commission member of the city or county or a city or county agency shall
accept any compensation, honorarium or gift with a fair market value greater than $100 in consideration of an
appearance, speech or article unless the appearance, speech or article is both related to the officer's, employee's, board
or commission member's activities outside of government service and is unrelated to the officer's, employee's, board or
commission member's service with the city or county.
(B) Nothing in this section shall prohibit an officer, employee, board or commission member of the city or county
from receiving and retaining from the city or county or on behalf of the city or county actual and reasonable
out-of-pocket expenses incurred by the officer, employee, board or commission member in connection with an
appearance, speech or article, provided that the officer, employee, board or commission member can show by clear and
convincing evidence that the expenses were incurred or received on behalf of the city or county, or city or county
agency, and primarily for the benefit of the city or county and not primarily for the benefit of the officer, employee,
board or commission member or any other person.
(Ord. 28-1994, passed 10-24-94)
1995 S-1
22 Elizabethtown - Administration
FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE
§ 33.30 WHO MUST FILE.
The following classes of officers, employees, board or commission members of the city and county or city and
county agencies shall file an annual statement of financial interests with the County Board of Ethics:
(A) Elected city and county officials.
(B) Candidates for elected city and county office.
(Ord. 28-1994, passed 10-24-94)
§ 33.31 WHEN TO FILE; AMENDED STATEMENT.
(A) The initial statement of financial interests required by this section shall be filed with the Board of Ethics, or
the administrative official designated as the custodian of its records by the County Board of Ethics, no later than 4:00
p.m. on the 15th day of April, 1995. All subsequent statements of financial interest shall be filed no later than 4:00
p.m. on the 15th day of April, each year, provided that:
(1) An officer, employee, board or commission member newly-appointed to fill an office or position of
employment with the city or county or city or county agency shall file his or her initial statement no later than 30 days
after the date of the appointment.
(2) A candidate for city or county office shall file his or her initial statement no later than 30 days after the
date on which the person becomes a candidate for elected city or county office. A write-in candidate shall file within
24 hours from the date of the filing of his affidavit for write-in candidacy.
(B) The County Board of Ethics may grant a reasonable extension of time for filing a statement of financial
interests for good cause shown.
(C) In the event there is a material change in any information contained in a financial statement that has been filed
with the Board, the officer, employee, board or commission member shall, no later than one year after becoming aware
of material change, file an amended statement with the Board.
(Ord. 28-1994, passed 10-24-94)
§ 33.32 CONTROL OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS.
(A) The County Board of Ethics shall be the official custodian of the statements of financial interests and shall
have control over the maintenance of the statements of financial interests. The statements of financial interests shall be
maintained by the Board of Ethics as the custodian, as public documents, available for public inspection immediately
upon filing.
(B) A statement of financial interests shall be retained by the Board, or the designated administrative official, for
a period of five years after filing, provided that:
1995 S-1
Code of Ethics 23
(1) Upon the expiration of three years after a person ceases to be an officer, employee, board or commission
member of the city or county or city or county agency, the Board shall cause to be destroyed any statements of financial
interests or copies of those statements filed by the person.
(2) Upon the expiration of three years after any election at which a candidate for elected city or county office
was not elected or nominated, the Board shall cause to be destroyed any statements of financial interests or copies of
those statements filed by the person.
(Ord. 28-1994, passed 10-24-94)
§ 33.33 REQUIREMENTS; CONTENTS.
(A) The financial disclosure statement should be filed with the local Ethics Commission by all filers who are
subject to the jurisdiction of the Commission. Failure to do so will result in a civil fine of a maximum of $500 payable
to the Commission. (Ord. 07-1999, passed 02-01-99)
(B) Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any officer, employee, board or commission member to
disclose any specific dollar amounts nor the names of individual clients or customers of business listed as sources of
income.
(C) Each statement shall be signed and dated by the individual filing the statement of financial interest. Signing a
fraudulent statement shall be a Class A misdemeanor.
(D) The financial disclosure statement should include the following information:
(1) Name of filer.
(2) Current business address, business telephone number and home address of filer.
(3) Title of filer's public office or office sought.
(4) Occupations of filer and spouse.
(5) Position held by the filer and any member of the filer's immediate family in any business organization or
nonprofit entity from which the filer or any member of the filer's immediate family received compensation in excess of
$10,000 during the preceding calendar year, and the name, address, and telephone number of the business organization
or nonprofit entity.
(6) Name, address and telephone number of each source of income from within the Commonwealth of
Kentucky of both filer and spouse which exceeded $10,000 during the preceding calendar year.
(7) Name, address and telephone number of each business organization located within the Commonwealth
in which the filer or any member of the filer's immediate family had an interest of $10,000 at fair market value or 5%
ownership interest or more during the preceding calendar year.
(8) The location and type (commercial, residential, agricultural) of all real property within the county, other
than the filer's primary residence, in which the filer or the filer's spouse had an interest of $10,000 or more during the
preceding calendar year.
1999 S-1
24 Elizabethtown - Administration
(9) Offices or directorships held by the officer, candidate, nominee, employee, board or commission
member, or members of his immediate family as of December 31 of the reporting year. Nonprofit, charitable, and
religious organizations shall be excluded from this disclosure.
(Ord. 28-1994, passed 10-24-94)
§ 33.34 PUBLIC VIEWING.
All financial disclosure statements shall be open records. Each individual or organization requesting to view
financial disclosure statements shall complete a form giving full name, address, telephone number and
organization/individual represented if other than the individual making the request. One copy of this form shall be
attached to the statement so requested and shall become a part of the record.
(Ord. 28-1994, passed 10-24-94)
NEPOTISM
§ 33.40 PROHIBITED.
(A) Nepotism is prohibited and the city's and county's personnel policies and procedures shall specifically define
the rules and regulations concerning nepotism.
(B) No officer, employee, board or commission member shall participate in any action relating to the employment
or discipline of a family member, except that this prohibition shall not prevent an elected or appointed official from
voting on or participating in the development of a budget which includes compensation for a family member, provided
that the family member is included only as a member of a class of persons or a group, and the family member benefits
to no greater extent than any other similarly situated member of the class or group.
(C) The prohibitions in this section shall not apply to any relationship or situation that would violate the
prohibition, but which existed prior to January 1, 1995.
(Ord. 28-1994, passed 10-24-94)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 33.50 COUNTY BOARD OF ETHICS.
(A) Establishment. The County Board of Ethics is established having the authorities, duties, and responsibilities
as set forth in this chapter to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(B) Composition of Board.
(1) Appointment. The County Board of Ethics shall consist of five members who shall be appointed by the
executive authority of the city or county, subject to the approval of the legislative body
1995 S-1
Code of Ethics 24A
(if different from the executive authority). The executive authorities of the Cities of Elizabethtown, Radcliff, Vine
Grove, and West Point, and the Judge Executive of Hardin County shall each appoint one of the five members of the
County Board of Ethics as outlined in this section.
(2) Term. The initial members of the County Board of Ethics shall be appointed within 60 days of the
effective date of this chapter. The members shall serve for a term of three years; except that with respect to the
members initially appointed, one member shall be appointed for a term of one year, two members shall be appointed for
a term of two years, and two members shall be appointed for a term of three years. The length of the initial term of a
member appointed by an executive authority shall be determined by a random draw. Thereafter, all appointments shall
be for a term of three years. The members may be reappointed for any number of consecutive terms.
(3) Requirements. No member of the County Board of Ethics shall hold any elected or appointed office,
whether paid or unpaid, or any position of employment with the city or county or any city or county agency. Each
member of the County Board of Ethics shall have been a resident of the city or county for at least one year prior to the
date of the appointment and shall reside in the city or county throughout the term in office. The members of the County
Board of Ethics shall be chosen by virtue of their known and consistent reputation for integrity and their knowledge of
local government affairs.
(4) Removal. A member of the County Board of Ethics may be removed by the executive authority
appointing them, subject to the approval of the legislative body (if different from the executive authority) for
misconduct, inability, or willful neglect of duties. Before any member of the Board of Ethics is removed from office
under this section, the member shall be afforded the opportunity for a hearing before the executive authority and the
legislative body (if different from the executive authority).
(5) Vacancies. Vacancies on the County Board of Ethics shall be filled within 60 days by the executive
authority appointing them, subject to the approval of the legislative body (if different from the executive authority). If a
vacancy is not filled by the executive authority within 60 days, the remaining members of the County Board of Ethics
shall fill the vacancy. All vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term.
(6) Compensation. Members of the County Board of Ethics shall serve without compensation, unless
otherwise approved by the legislative bodies, but shall be reimbursed for all necessary and reasonable expenses incurred
in the performance of their duties, subject to authorization by each legislative body.
(7) Chairperson. The Board of Ethics shall, upon the initial appointment of its members, and annually
thereafter, elect a chairperson from among the membership. The chairperson shall be the presiding officer and a full
voting member of the Board.
(8) Meetings. Meetings of the County Board of Ethics shall be held, as necessary, upon the call of the
chairperson or at the written request of a majority of the members.
(9) Voting. The presence of three or more members shall constitute a quorum and the affirmative vote of
three or more members shall be necessary for any official action to be taken. Any member of the County Board of
Ethics who has a conflict of interest with respect to any matter to be considered by the Board shall disclose the nature of
the conflict, shall disqualify himself or herself from voting on the matter, and shall not be counted for purposes of
establishing a quorum.
1995 S-1
24B Elizabethtown - Administration
(10) Minutes. Minutes shall be kept for all proceedings of the County Board of Ethics and the vote of each
member on any issue decided by the Board shall be recorded in the minutes.
(C) Facilities. Within the limits of the funds appropriated by the legislative body in the annual budget, the
legislative body shall provide the County Board of Ethics, either directly or by contract or agreement, with the facilities,
materials, supplies, and staff needed for the conduct of its business.
(D) Power and duties. The County Board of Ethics shall have the following power and duties:
(1) To receive and investigate complaints, hold hearings, and make findings of fact and determinations with
regard to alleged violations of the provisions of this chapter.
(2) To issue orders in connection with its investigations and hearings requiring persons to submit in writing
and under oath reports and answers to questions that are relevant to the proceedings and to order testimony to be taken
by deposition before any individual designated by the Board who has the power to administer oaths.
(3) To administer oaths and to issue orders requiring the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the
production of documentary evidence relating to an investigation or hearing being conducted by the Board.
(4) To refer any information concerning violations of this chapter to the executive authority of the city or
county, the city or county legislative body, the governing body of any city or county agency, the City or County
Attorney, or other appropriate person or body, as necessary.
(5) To render advisory opinions to the city or county and city or county agency officers, employees, board or
commission members regarding whether a given set of facts and circumstances would constitute a violation of any
provision of this chapter.
(6) To enforce the provisions of this chapter with regard to all officers, employees, board or commission
members of the city or county and city and county agencies who are subject to its terms by issuing appropriate orders
and imposing penalties authorized by this chapter.
(7) To control and maintain all statements of financial interests that are required to be filed by this chapter
and to insure that the statements are available for public inspection in accordance with the requirements of this chapter
and the Kentucky Open Records Act.
(8) To develop and submit any reports regarding the conduct of its business that may be required by the
executive authority or legislative body of the city or county.
(9) To adopt rules and regulations and to take other actions, as necessary, to implement the provisions of this
chapter, provided that the rules, regulations, and actions are not in conflict with the provisions of this chapter or any
state or federal law.
(Ord. 28-1994, passed 10-24-94)
§ 33.51 FILING AND INVESTIGATION OF COMPLAINTS.
(A) All complaints alleging any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be submitted to the Board of
Ethics, or the administrative official designated by the Board of Ethics. All complaints shall
1995 S-1
Code of Ethics 24C
be in writing, signed by the complainant, and shall meet any other requirements established by the Board of Ethics.
The Board of Ethics shall acknowledge receipt of a complaint to the complainant within ten working days from the date
of receipt. The Board shall forward within ten working days to each officer, employee, board or commission member
of the city or county or city or county agency who is the subject of the complaint, a copy of the complaint, and a general
statement of the applicable provisions of this chapter.
(B) Within 30 days of the receipt of a proper complaint, the Board of Ethics shall conduct a preliminary inquiry
concerning the allegations contained in the complaint. The Board shall afford a person who is the subject of the
complaint an opportunity to respond to the allegations in the complaint. The person shall have the right to be
represented by counsel, to appear and be heard under oath, and to offer evidence in response to the allegations.
(C) All proceedings and records relating to a preliminary inquiry being conducted by the Board of Ethics shall be
confidential until a final determination is made by the Board, except:
(1) The Board may turn over to the Commonwealth's Attorney or County Attorney evidence which may be
used in criminal proceedings.
(2) If the complainant or alleged violator publicly discloses the existence of a preliminary inquiry, the Board
may publicly confirm the existence of the inquiry, and, at its discretion, make public any documents, which were issued
to either party.
(D) The Board shall make a determination based on its preliminary inquiry whether the complaint is within its
jurisdiction and, if so, whether it alleges reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of this chapter has occurred. If
the Board concludes that the complaint is outside of its jurisdiction, frivolous or without factual basis, the Board shall
immediately terminate the inquiry, reduce the conclusion to writing, and transmit a copy of its decision to the
complainant and to all officers, employees, board or commission members against whom the complaint was filed.
(E) If the Board of Ethics concludes, based upon its preliminary inquiry, that the complaint is within its
jurisdiction and contains allegations sufficient to establish reasonable grounds to believe that a violation has occurred,
the Board shall notify the officer, employee, board or commission member who is the subject of the complaint and may:
(1) Due to mitigating circumstances, such as lack of significant economic advantage or gain by the officer,
employee, board or commission member; lack of economic loss to the city or county and its taxpayers; or lack of
significant impact on public confidence in city or county government, issue, in writing, a confidential reprimand to the
officer or employee concerning the alleged violation and provide a copy of the confidential reprimand to the executive
authority and governing body of the city or county or city or county agency.
(2) Initiate a hearing to determine whether there has been a violation.
(F) Any person who knowingly files with the Board a false complaint alleging a violation of any provision of this
chapter by an officer, employee, board or commission member of the city or county or any city or county agency shall
be subject to a civil fine not to exceed $500 payable to the Commission.
(Ord. 28-1994, passed 10-24-94)
1995 S-1
24D Elizabethtown - Administration
§ 33.52 HEARINGS.
(A) Notice of hearings. If the Board of Ethics determines that a hearing regarding allegations contained in the
complaint is necessary, the Board shall issue an order setting the matter for a hearing within 30 days of the date the
order is issued, unless the alleged violator petitions for and the Board consents to a later date. The order setting the
matter for hearing, along with a copy of any pertinent regulations of the Board relating to the hearing, shall be sent to
the alleged violator within 24 hours of the time the order setting a hearing is issued. The alleged violator shall have at
least ten days prior notice of any hearing.
(B) Hearing procedure.
(1) The Kentucky Rules of Civil Procedure and the Kentucky Rules of Evidence shall not apply to hearings
conducted by the County Board of Ethics; however, the hearings shall be conducted in accordance with this section and
in accordance with any additional rules and regulations adopted by the Board so as to afford all parties the full range of
due process rights required by the nature of the proceedings.
(2) Prior to the commencement of the hearing, the alleged violator, or his or her representative, shall have a
reasonable opportunity to examine all documents and records, intended to be introduced at the hearing, in connection
with the matter to be heard. The Board shall inform the alleged violator, or his or her representative, of any exculpatory
evidence in its possession.
(3) All testimony in a Board hearing shall be taken under oath and administered by the presiding officer. All
parties shall have the right to call and examine witnesses, to introduce exhibits, to cross-examine witnesses, to submit
evidence, and to be represented by counsel. All witnesses shall have the right to be represented by counsel.
(4) Any person whose name is mentioned during the hearing and who may be adversely affected thereby
may appear personally before the Board, with or without counsel, to give a statement regarding the adverse mention, or
may file a written statement regarding the adverse mention for incorporation into the record of the proceeding.
(5) All hearings of the County Board of Ethics shall be public, unless the members vote to go into executive
session in accordance with KRS 61.810.
(6) After the conclusion of the hearing, the County Board of Ethics shall, as soon as practicable, begin
deliberations in executive session for the purpose of reviewing the evidence before it and making a determination
whether a violation of this chapter has been proven. Within 30 days after completion of the hearing, the Board shall
issue a written report of its findings and conclusions.
(7) If the Board concludes in its report that no violation of this chapter has occurred, it shall immediately
send written notice of this determination to the officer, employee, board or commission member who was the subject of
the complaint and to the party who filed the complaint.
(8) If the Board concludes in its report that in consideration of the evidence produced at the hearing there is
clear and convincing proof of a violation of this chapter, the Board may:
(a) Issue an order requiring the violator to cease and desist the violation.
1995 S-1
Code of Ethics 24E
(b) In writing, publicly reprimand the violator for the violations and provide a copy of the
reprimand to the executive authority and governing body (if different than the executive authority) of the city or county
or city or county agency with which the violator serves.
(c) In writing, recommend to the executive authority and the governing body (if different than the
executive authority) that the violator be sanctioned as recommended by the Board, which may include a
recommendation for discipline or dismissal, or removal from office.
(d) Issue an order requiring the violator to pay a civil penalty of not more than $1,000.
(e) Refer evidence of criminal violations of this chapter or state law to the County Attorney or
Commonwealth's Attorney of the jurisdiction for prosecution.
(Ord. 28-1994, passed 10-24-94)
§ 33.53 APPEALS.
Any person who is found guilty of a violation of any provision of this chapter by the County Board of Ethics may
appeal the finding to the circuit court of the county within 30 days after the date of the final action by the County Board
of Ethics by filing a petition with the court against the Board. The Board shall transmit to the clerk of the court all
evidence considered by the Board at the public hearing.
(Ord. 28-1994, passed 10-24-94)
§ 33.54 LIMITATIONS OF ACTIONS.
Except when the period of limitation is otherwise established by state law, an action for a violation of this chapter
must be brought within one year after the person complained about leaves office or employment.
(Ord. 28-1994, passed 10-24-94)
§ 33.55 ADVISORY OPINIONS.
(A) The County Board of Ethics may render advisory opinions concerning matters under its jurisdiction, based
upon real or hypothetical facts and circumstances, upon its own initiative, or when requested by any officer, employee,
board or commission member of the city or county or a city or county agency who is covered by this chapter.
(B) An advisory opinion shall be requested in writing and shall state relevant facts and ask specific questions.
The request for an advisory opinion shall remain confidential unless confidentiality is waived, in writing, by the
requester.
(C) The Board may adopt regulations, consistent with the Kentucky Open Records Law, to establish criteria under
which it will issue confidential advisory opinions. All other advisory opinions shall be public documents, except that
before an advisory opinion is made public, it shall be modified so that the identity of any person associated with the
opinion shall not be revealed.
1995 S-1
24F Elizabethtown - Administration
(D) The confidentiality of an advisory opinion may be waived either:
(1) In writing by the person who requested the opinion.
(2) By majority vote of the members of the Board, if a person makes or purports to make public the
substance or any portion of an advisory opinion requested by or on behalf of the person. The Board may vote to make
public the advisory opinion request and related materials.
(E) A written advisory opinion issued by the Board shall be binding on the Board in any subsequent proceeding
concerning the facts and circumstances of the particular case if no intervening facts or circumstances arise which would
change the opinion of the Board if they had existed at the time the opinion was rendered. However, if any fact
determined by the Board to be material was omitted or misstated in the request for an opinion, the Board shall not be
bound by the opinion.
(F) A written advisory opinion issued by the Board shall be admissible in the defense of any criminal prosecution
or civil proceeding for violations of this chapter for actions taken in reliance on that opinion.
(Ord. 28-1994, passed 10-24-94)
§ 33.56 REPRISALS PROHIBITED AGAINST PERSONS DISCLOSING VIOLATIONS.
(A) No officer, employee, board or commission member of the city or county or any city or county agency shall be
subject to reprisal, or directly or indirectly use, or threaten to use, any official authority or influence in any manner
whatsoever which tends to discourage, restrain, deter, prevent, interfere with, coerce, or discriminate against any person
who in good faith reports, discloses, divulges, or otherwise brings to the attention of the Board of Ethics or any other
agency or official of the city, county, or the Commonwealth any facts or information relative to an actual or suspected
violation of this chapter.
(B) This section shall not be construed as:
(1) Prohibiting disciplinary or punitive action if an officer, employee, board or commission member of the
city or county or any city or county agency discloses information which he or she knows:
(a) To be false or which he or she discloses with reckless disregard for its truth or falsity.
(b) To be exempt from required disclosure under the provisions of the Kentucky Open Records Act,
KRS 61.870 through 61.884.
(c) Is confidential under any other provision of law.
(Ord. 28-1994, passed 10-24-94)
1995 S-1
CHAPTER 34: AGENCIES, BOARDS AND COMMITTEES
Section
General Provisions
34.01 Meeting times and terms of office
Airport Board
34.05 Establishment; nature
34.06 Purpose and duties
Code Enforcement Appeals Board
34.25 Rescinded; Ordinance No. 11-2013; passed 07-15-2013)
34.26 Rescinded; Ordinance No. 11-2013; passed 07-15-2013)
34.27 Rescinded; Ordinance No. 11-2013; passed 07-15-2013)
34.28 Rescinded; Ordinance No. 11-2013; passed 07-15-2013)
34.29 Rescinded; Ordinance No. 11-2013; passed 07-15-2013)
34.30 Rescinded; Ordinance No. 11-2013; passed 07-15-2013)
City Tree Board
34.50 Definitions
34.51 Establishment of City Tree Board
34.52 Term of office
34.53 Compensation
34.54 Duties and responsibilities
34.55 Operation
Cable Communications Authority
34.70 Establishment
34.71 Functions and powers
Code Enforcement Board
34.90 Definitions
34.91 Creation and Membership
34.92 Administration
34.93 Powers
34.94 Appointment of Members, terms of office; removal from office; oath; and compensation
34.95 Organization of Board; Meetings; Quorum; and Alternate Board Members
34.96 Conflict of Interest
34.97 Jurisdiction
34.98 Powers of the Code Enforcement Board
34.99 Enforcement Proceedings
34.100 Hearing; Notice; and Final Order
34.101 Presentation of Cases
34.102 Appeals, Final Judgement
34.103 Ordinance Fine Schedule
34.104 Liens, Fines, Charges and Fees
34.105 Lienholder Notification System
34.106 Liens
34.107 Severability
Elizabethtown Historic Preservation Commission
34.116 Intent and Declaration of Public Policy
34.117 Purpose
34.118 Definitions
34.119 Historic Preservation Commission; Establishment
34.120 Meetings.
34.121 Purposes and Duties
34.122 Staffing, Right to Receive and Spend Funds
34.123 Historic District and Landmarks
34.124 Certificates of Appropriateness
25
2018-S-1
26 Elizabethtown - Administration
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 34.01 MEETING TIMES AND TERMS OF OFFICE.
The following boards, commissions and committees are established:
(A) The Elizabethtown Tourism and Convention Bureau (Formerly Elizabethtown Visitors and Information
Commission) shall meet at The Office of the Commission 1030 North Mulberry Street, Elizabethtown, Kentucky at
9:00 a.m. on the first Wednesday of each month. Members shall serve three year terms. (Ord. No. 11-2004)
(B) The Elizabethtown Planning Commission shall meet in the Council Chambers at City Hall, Elizabethtown,
Kentucky on the second and fourth Tuesday of each month at 6:00 p.m. Members shall serve four year terms. (Ord.
No. 28-2005, passed 10-17-05)
(C) Rescinded; Ordinance No. 11-2013; passed 07-15-2013)
(D) The Elizabethtown Board of Zoning Adjustment shall meet at 4:00 p.m. on the first Tuesday of each month
at the Council Chambers, City Hall, Elizabethtown, Kentucky. Members shall serve four year terms. (Ord. No. 14-
2006, passed 07-17-06) (Am. Ord. 08-2018, passed 02-20-18)
(E) The Streets Committee will meet on Tuesday or Thursday as needed at 9:00 a.m. at the Council Chambers,
City Hall, Elizabethtown, Kentucky. There is no set term of office; members shall serve until a successor is appointed
by the Mayor. (Ord. No. 04-2000)
(F) The Bids Committee shall meet at 9:00 a.m. each Tuesday or Thursday as needed at the Council Chamber,
City Hall, Elizabethtown, Kentucky. There is no set term of office; members shall serve until a successor is appointed
by the Mayor. (Ord. No. 04-2000)
(G) The Elizabethtown Airport Board shall meet on the second Monday of each month at noon at Addington
Field in the airport office. Members shall serve four year terms. (Ord. No. 04-2000)
(H) The Elizabethtown Parks and Recreation Board shall meet at 7:30 p.m. on the third Thursday of any call
meeting month, at the Pritchard Community Center, Elizabethtown, Kentucky. There is no set term of office; members
shall serve until a successor is appointed by the Mayor. (Ord. No. 04 –2000)
(I) The Housing Authority of Elizabethtown shall meet on the first Thursday of the month of March, June,
September, and December and an annual meeting held on May 19th of each year at 4:00 p.m. at the Housing Authority
Office in the Huddleston House, Public Square, Elizabethtown, Kentucky. Members shall serve four year terms. (Ord.
No. 04-2000)
(J) The Tree Board shall meet on the third Tuesday of January, March, May, July, September and November at
4:00 p.m. in the Council chambers. Members shall serve three year terms. (Ord. No. 15-1998, passed 09-08-98)
(K) The Cable Authority Board shall meet on the second Tuesday of January, April, July, and October at 5:00
p.m. in the Council chambers. Members shall serve four year terms.
2013-S-1
Agencies, Boards and Committees 26A
(L) The Parking Enforcement Hearing Board shall meet on the first Monday of each month as needed at 10:00
a.m. There is no set term of office; members shall serve until a successor is appointed by the Mayor. (Ord. No. 04-
2000)
(M) The Hardin County Board of Ethics shall meet on the third Wednesday of January, Wednesday after April
15th, and as necessary. Members shall serve three year terms.
(Ord. 18, passed 11-16-92) (Ord.14-2006, passed 07-17-06)
(N) The Code Enforcement Board will meet on the third Tuesday of every month at 5:30 p.m. in the Council
Chamber, City Hall, Elizabethtown, Kentucky. Members shall serve for a three year term. (Ord. 9-2003, passed – 04-
21-2003; Am. Ord. 27-2003, passed 09-02-2003) (Ord. 14-2006, passed 07-17-06) (Ord 12-2013, passed – 08-19-
2013)
(O) The Historic Preservation Commission will meet on the first Thursday of each month at 9:00 a.m. in the
Council Chamber of City Hall. (Ord. 24-2012, passed 11-05-12)
Cross reference:
For additional provisions regarding the above boards and commissions, see the following sections:
Tourism and Convention Bureau, see §§ 117.01 – 117.13
Planning Commission, see § 153.02
Code Enforcement Board, see §34.90
Board of Zoning Adjustment, see § 155.02
Airport Board, see §§ 34.05 and 34.06
Tree Board, see § 34.52
Cable Authority Board, see § 34.70
Parking regulations (Parking Enforcement Board), see Ch. 72
Board of Ethics, see Ch. 33
Historic Preservation Commission, see Ch. 34.116-34.124
2013-S-1
26B Elizabethtown - Administration
Agencies, Boards and Committees 27
AIRPORT BOARD
§ 34.05 ESTABLISHMENT; NATURE.
There is hereby established an airport board to be known as the Elizabethtown Airport Board.
§ 34.06 POWERS AND DUTIES.
(A) The purpose of the board shall be to establish, maintain, operate and expand necessary, desirable or
appropriate airport and air navigation facilities to serve the citizens of the city and surrounding communities. In
furtherance of its purposes, the board shall have all the duties and powers, and be subject to all the limitations, set forth
in KRS Chapter 183 and in other applicable statutes.
(KRS 183.133)
(B) Submission of report on operations and activities. The Airport Board shall each year submit an audit report
in writing to the City Council concerning its operations and activities for the prior 12 month period.
Statutory reference:
For further provisions, see KRS 183.132
CODE ENFORCEMENT APPEALS BOARD
§ 34.25 Rescinded; Ordinance No. 11-2013; passed 07-15-2013)
§ 34.26 Rescinded; Ordinance No. 11-2013; passed 07-15-2013).
2013-S-1
28 Elizabethtown - Administration
§ 34.27 Rescinded; Ordinance No. 11-2013; passed 07-15-2013)
§ 34.28 Rescinded; Ordinance No. 11-2013; passed 07-15-2013)
§ 34.29 Rescinded; Ordinance No. 11-2013; passed 07-15-2013)
§ 34.30 Rescinded; Ordinance No. 11-2013; passed 07-15-2013).
2013 S-1
Agencies, Boards and Committees 29
CITY TREE BOARD
§ 34.50 DEFINITIONS.
PARK TREES. Any trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public parks and all areas owned by
the city.
STREET TREES. Any trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation on public right of ways.
(Ord. 24, passed 12-21-92), ( Ord. 1, passed 1-2-96, amended).
§ 34.51 ESTABLISHMENT OF A CITY TREE BOARD.
There is hereby created and established a City Tree Board for the city of Elizabethtown, Kentucky, which may
consist of five members, citizens and residents of this city, who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of
the City council.
(Ord. 24, passed 12-21-92), ( Ord. 1, passed 1-2-96 amended)
§ 34.52 TERM OF OFFICE.
The terms of the five persons to be appointed by the Mayor shall be three years. In the event that a vacancy shall
occur during the term of any member, his/her successor shall be appointed by the Mayor with the City Council approval
for the unexpired portion of the term.
(Ord. 24, passed 12-21-92), (Ord. 1 - passed 1-2-96 amended)
§ 34.53 COMPENSATION.
Members of the Board shall serve without compensation.
(Ord. 24, passed 12-21-92)
§ 34.54 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
It shall be the responsibility of the Board to work in cooperation with a City Arborist to coordinate the
comprehensive Tree Plan for the City as presented and updated annually. The board when requested by the City
Council shall consider, investigate, make finding, report and recommend upon any special matter of question coming
within the scope of its work.
(Ord. 24, passed 12-21-92), (Ord. 1, passed 1-2-96 amended)
30 Elizabethtown - Administration
§ 34.55 OPERATION.
The board shall choose its own officers, make its own Bylaws and keep a record of its proceedings. A majority of
the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business.
(Ord. 24, passed 12-21-92), (Ord. 1-96, passed 1-2-96 amended)
Cross-reference:
See also Streets and Sidewalks, Ch. 91
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS AUTHORITY
§ 34.70 ESTABLISHMENT.
There is hereby established the Elizabethtown Cable Communications Authority. The membership of the
Authority shall consist of seven members of which four shall be the residents of the city and three shall be members of
the Elizabethtown City Council. All members shall be appointed by the Mayor and approved by City Council. Each
resident member shall serve a term of four years, provided, however, that appointments to the first authority shall be for
1,2,3, and 4 year terms respectfully. Members from the City Council shall be appointed annually. Any vacancy in the
office shall be filled by appointment of the Mayor with approval of the City Council for the remainder of the term. No
employee or person with any ownership interest in any cable television franchise granted pursuant to ordinance shall be
eligible for membership on the authority. The Mayor or her authorized representatives, may serve as ex-officio, nonvoting
member of the authority. The Authority shall annually select from among its members a Chairman who shall
preside over the meetings.
(Ord. 7, passed 3-22-93)
§ 34.71 FUNCTIONS AND POWERS.
The Authority shall have the following functions and powers:
(A) Advise the Council on applications for franchises.
(B) Advise the Council on matters which might constitute grounds for revocation of the franchise in accordance
with the franchise agreement.
(C) Resolve disagreements among franchisee and public and private users of the system to the extent possible.
(D) Advise the Council on regulation of rates in accordance with the franchise agreement.
(E) Facilitate government, education, community groups and individual use of the public channels.
(F) Determine general policies relating to the services provided subscribers in the operation and use of the access
channels, with the view of maximizing the diversity of programs and services to the subscribers. The use of access
channels shall be allocated on a first come first serve basis subject to limitations on monopolization of system time, or
prime times.
Agencies, Boards and Committees 31
(G) Encourage use of access channels along the widest range of institutions, groups, or individuals within the city.
(H) Submit an annual report to the Council, including the total number of hours of utilization of access channels
and a review of any plans submitted during the year by franchisees for development of new services and relevant
information concerning education uses, public access for local programming under public control, local government
access, pay TV and channel leasing.
(I) Cooperate with other systems in supervising interconnecting of systems.
(J) Maintain a knowledge of current developments in cable communications by subscribing to trade publications
and attending cable communication seminars and meetings.
(K) Audit all franchise records required by the franchise agreement and, in the Authority's discretion, require the
preparation and filing of information additional to that required by the franchise.
(L) Conduct a detailed evaluation of the system at least every three years and make recommendations to the
Council for amendments to the franchise agreement.
(M) Employ, as necessary, services of a technical, accounting, legal and administrative nature.
(N) Act on behalf or as the designee of the Council for purposes of proposing regulations and arbitration
procedures as deemed necessary by the Council and/or to provide any other service to the Council that may be
reasonably required by the Board under the Authority of the franchise agreement.
(O) In conjunction with the renewal of franchises, as provided for under State or Federal law, the Authority shall
develop procedures for the implementation of a renewal procedure of the cable franchise.
(Ord. 7, passed 3-22-93)
CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD
§ 34.90 DEFINITIONS.
ABATEMENT COSTS. The City’s necessary and reasonable costs for and associated with clearing, preventing
unauthorized entry to, or demolishing all or a portion of a structure or premises, or taking any other actions with regard
to a structure or premises necessary to remedy a violation and to maintain and preserve the public health, safety and
welfare in accordance with any City Ordinance.
CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD. An Administrative body created and acting under the authority of the Local
Government Code Enforcement Board Act.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER/CITATION OFFICER. A Citation Officer as prescribed by KRS
83A.087 which shall have the authority to issue citations and which shall include city police officers, safety officers,
code enforcement officers, building inspectors, the Director of Planning & Development, the Director of Stormwater
Management, fire prevention officers, building officials and code officials.
(Am. Ord. 20-2008, passed 12-22-2008)
2018-S-1
32 Elizabethtown - Administration
FINAL ORDER. Any order:
1. Issued by the Code Enforcement Board following a hearing in accordance with Section 9(e) of this section;
2. Created because a violator neither paid nor contested the citation within seven (7) days as provided in Section
8 (f) of this section; or
3. Created because a violator failed to appear at a hearing the violator requested to contest the citation as
provided in Section 11 of this section.
IMMINENT DANGER. A condition which is likely to cause serious or life threatening injury or death at any
time.
ORDINANCE. An official action of a local government body, which is a regulation of a general and permanent
nature and enforcement as a local law and shall include any provisions of a code of ordinance adopted by the city
legislative body which embodies all or part of an ordinance.
OWNER. A person, association, corporation, partnership or other legal entity having a legal or equitable title in
real property.
PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land, including any structures upon it.
(Am. Ord. 24-2016, passed 12-23-16)
§ 34.91 CREATION AND MEMBERSHIP.
There is hereby created pursuant to KRS 65.8801 to KRS 65.8839 within the City, a Code Enforcement Board
which shall be composed of five members, all of whom shall be residents of the City for a period of at least one (1) year
prior to the creation of the board and shall reside there throughout the term in office.
(Ord. 09-2003, passes 04-21-2003)
§ 34.92 ADMINISTRATION.
The administration of the duties of the Code Enforcement Board and coordination of the enforcement thereunder
are assigned to the Director of the Department of Planning and Development. The Director of the Department of
Planning and Development may assign these duties toa member of that department. This department is charged with
the coordination of all other city departments as it pertains to the issuance of code enforcement citations.
(Ord. 09-2003, passes 04-21-2003)
§ 34.93 POWERS.
(A) The Code Enforcement Board shall have the power to issue remedial orders and impose civil fines as a
method of enforcing city ordinances when a violation of the ordinance as been classified as a civil offense.
(B) The Code Enforcement Board shall not have the authority to enforce any ordinance that violation of which
constitutes an offense under any provision of the Kentucky Revised Statutes, including specifically, any provision of the
Kentucky Penal Code and any moving motor vehicle offense.
(Ord. 09-2003, passes 04-21-2003)
2018-S-1
Agencies, Boards and Committees 32A
§ 34.94 APPOINTMENT, OF MEMBERS; TERMS OF OFFICE, REMOVAL FROM OFFICE; OATH;
AND COMPENSATION.
(A) The Board shall consist of five members. Members of the Code Enforcement Board shall be appointed by the
Mayor of the City, subject to the approval of the City Council.
(B) The initial appointment to the Code Enforcement Board shall be as follows:
1) One (1) member appointed for a one (1) year term.
2) Two (2) members appointed for a two (2) year term.
3) Two (2) members appointed for a three (3) year term.
All subsequent appointment shall be for a term of three (3) years. A member may be re-appointed, subject to the
approval of the legislative body.
(C) The Mayor may appoint, subject to the approval of the City Council, two (2) alternate members to serve on
the Code Enforcement Board in the absence of regular members. Alternate members shall meet all of the qualifications
and shall be subject to all of the requirements that apply to regular members of the Code Enforcement Board.
Alternates shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years.
(D) Any vacancy on the board shall be filled by the Mayor, subject to approval of the City Council within sixty
(60) days of the vacancy. If the vacancy is not filled within that time period, the remaining Code Enforcement Board
Members shall fill the vacancy.
(E) A Code Board Member may be removed from office by the Mayor for misconduct, inefficiency, or willful
neglect of duty. The Mayor must submit a written statement to the member and the City Council setting forth the
reasons for removal.
(F) All members of the Code Enforcement Board must, before entering upon the duties of their office, take the
oath of office prescribed by Section 228 of the Kentucky Constitution.
(G) No member of the Code Enforcement Board may hold any elected or non-elected office, paid or unpaid, or
any position of employment with the City.
(H) Each member shall be a resident of the City of Elizabethtown during their entire service on the board.
(Ord. 09-2003, passes 04-21-2003) (Am. Ord. 24-2016, passed 12-23-16)
§ 34.95 ORGANIZATION OF BOARD; MEETINGS; QUORUM AND ALTERNATE BOARD MEMBERS
(A) The Board shall annually elect a chair from among its members and other officers as deemed appropriate.
The Board may establish other offices through the adoption of bylaws to guide the operation of the Board. The
chairman shall be the presiding officer and a full voting member of the board.
(B) Regular meetings of the Code Enforcement Board shall be held on the 3rd Tuesday of every month at 5:30
P.M.. Meetings other than those regularly scheduled shall be special meetings held in accordance with the requirements
of the Kentucky Open Meetings Act.
2018-S-1
32B Elizabethtown - Administration
(C) All meetings and hearings of the Code Enforcement Board shall be held in accordance with the requirements
of KRS 65.8815(5) and the Kentucky Open Meetings Act.
(D) The vote of a majority of a quorum of the board shall be necessary for any official action to be taken.
(E) Minutes shall be kept for all proceedings of the Code Enforcement Board and the vote of each member on any
issue decided by the Board shall be recorded in the minutes. The minutes shall be kept by the Department of Planning
& Development acting as secretary for the Board under Section 3 of this ordinance.
(Ord. 09-2003, passed 04-21-2003; Am. Ord. 27-2003, passed 09-02-2003) (Am. Ord. 12-2013, passed 08-19-2013)
§ 34.96 CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
Any member of the Code Enforcement Board who has any direct or indirect financial or personal interest in any
matter to be decided, shall disclose the nature of the interest and shall disqualify himself from voting on the matter in
which he has an interest and shall not be counted for purposes of establishing a quorum. The members shall be subject
to the restrictions of the City of Elizabethtown/Hardin County Code of Ethics.
(Ord. 09-2003, passed 04-21-2003)
§ 34.97 JURISDICTION.
The Code Enforcement Board shall have jurisdiction to enforce and shall enforce those City Ordinances and Code
Provisions which specifically provide for Code Board Enforcement authority.
(Ord. 09-2003, passed 04-21-2003)
§ 34.98 POWERS OF THE CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD.
The City of Elizabethtown Code Enforcement Board shall have the following powers and duties:
(A) To adopt rules and regulations to govern its operations and the conduct of its hearings.
(B) To conduct hearings to determine if there has been a violation of an ordinance over which it has jurisdiction.
(C) To subpoena alleged violators, witnesses and evidence to its hearings. Subpoenas issued by the Code
Enforcement Board may be served by any Code Enforcement Officer.
(D) To take testimony under oath. The presiding officer at the hearing shall have the authority to administer
oaths for the purpose of taking testimony.
(E) To make findings of fact and issue orders necessary to remedy any violation of a City Ordinance or Code
Provision which the Board is authorized to enforce.
(F) To impose civil fines, as authorized, on any person found to have violated an ordinance over which the board
has jurisdiction. (Ord. 09-2003, passed 04-21-2003)
§ 34.99 ENFORCEMENT PROCEEDINGS.
The following requirements shall govern all enforcement proceedings before the board:
(A) Enforcement proceedings before the Code Enforcement Board shall only be initiated by the issuance of a
citation by the Code Enforcement Officer or other authorized personnel.
2018-S-1
Agencies, Boards and Committees 32C
(B) Except as provided in subsection (c) below, if a Code Enforcement Officer believes, based on his personal
observation or investigation, that a person has violated a City Ordinance he shall issue a Notice of Violation to the
offender allowing the offender a specified period of time to remedy the violation without fine. If the offender fails or
refuses to remedy the violation within the time specified, the Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to issue a citation.
(C) Nothing in this ordinance shall prohibit the City from taking immediate action to remedy a violation of its
ordinances where there is reason to believe that the violation presents a serious threat to public health, safety and
welfare, or if in the absence of immediate action, the effects of the violation will be irreparable or irreversible.
(D) The Code Enforcement Officer is not required to issue a Notice of Violation to an owner when the Board has
previously issued an order for compliance relating to the violation.
(E) The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a citation by one of the following methods:
(1) Personal service to the alleged violator;
(2) Leaving a copy of the citation with any person eighteen (18) years of age or older who is on the
premises, if the alleged violator is not on the premises at the time the citation is issued; or
(3) Posting a copy of the citation in a conspicuous place on the premises and mailing a copy of the citation
by regular, first-class mail to the owner of record of the property, if no one is on the premises at the
time the citation is issued.
(F) The citation issued by the Code Enforcement Officer shall contain the following information:
1) The date and time of issuance;
2) The name and address of the person to whom the citation is issued;
3) The date and time the offense was committed;
4) The facts constituting the offense;
5) The section of the Code or the number of the Ordinance violated;
6) The name of the Code Enforcement Officer;
7) The physical address of the premises where the violation occureed;
8) The civil fine that will be imposed for the violation if the person does not contest the citation;
9) The maximum civil fine that may be imposed if the person elects to contest the citation;
10) The procedure for the person to follow in order to pay the civil fine or to contest the citation; and
11) A statement that if the person fails to pay the civil fine set forth in the citation or contest the citation,
within the time allowed, the person shall be deemed to have waived the right to a hearing before the
Code Enforcement Board to contest the citation and that the determination that the violation was
committed shall be final; the citation as issued shall be deemed a final order determining that the
violation was committed and imposing the civil fine as set forth in the citation; and the person shall be
deemed to have waived the right to appeal the final order to District Court.
(G) After issuing a citation to an alleged violator, the Code Enforcement Officer shall notify the Code
Enforcement Board by delivering the citation to the Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his
designee.
(H.1) The person to whom the citation is issued shall respond to the citation within seven (7) days of the date
of issuance by either paying the civil fine or requesting, in writing, a hearing before the Code Enforcement Board to
contest the citation. If the person fails to respond to the citation within seven (7) days, the person shall be deemed to
have waived the right to a hearing and the determination that a violation was committed shall be considered final. In
this event, the citation as issued shall be deemed a final order determining that the violation was committed and
imposing the civil fine as set forth in the citation, and the person shall be deemed to have waived the right to appeal the
final order to District Court.
(H.2) Notice of final order shall be provided to the cited violator by regular first-class mail; certified mail,
return receipt requested; personal delivery; or by leaving the notice at the person’s usual place of residence with
any individual residing therein who is eighteen (18) years of age or older and who is informed of the contents of
the notice.
(I) If the alleged violator does not contest the citation within the time prescribed, the Code Enforcement Board
shall enter a final order determining that the violation was committed and impose the civil fine set forth in the citation.
A copy of the final order shall be served on the person guilty of the violation.
(Ord. 09-2003, passed 04-21-2003) (Am. Ord. 24-2016, passed 12-23-16)
2018-S-1
32D Elizabethtown - Administration
§ 34.100 HEARING, NOTICE; and FINAL ORDER.
(A) When a hearing has been requested, the Code Enforcement Board shall schedule a hearing.
(B) Not less than seven (7) days before the date of the hearing, the Code Enforcement Board shall notify the
requestor of the date, time and place of hearing. The notice may be given by regular first-class mail, certified mail,
return receipt requested; by personnel delivery; or by leaving the notice at the person’s usual place of residence with
any individual residing therein who is eighteen years (18) of age or older and who is informed of the content of the
notice.
(C) Any person requesting a hearing before the Code Enforcement Board who fails to appear at the time and
place set for the hearing shall be deemed to have waived the right to a hearing to contest the citation and the
determination that a violation was committed shall be final. The Code Enforcement Board shall enter a final order
determining the violation was committed and shall impose the civil fine set forth in the citation, and the alleged violator
shall be deemed to have waived the right to appeal the final order to District Court. A copy of the final order shall be
provided to the cited violator by regular first-class mail, personal delivery or by posting the order on the premises..
(D) All testimony shall be taken under oath and recorded. Testimony shall be taken from the Code Enforcement
Officer, the alleged violator, and any witnesses to the violation offered by the Code Enforcement Officer or alleged
violator. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but fundamental due process shall be observed and shall govern the
proceedings.
(E) The Code Enforcement Board shall, based on the evidence, determine whether a violation was committed. If
it determines that no violation was committed, an order of dismissing the citation shall be entered. If it determines that
a violation was committed, an order may be issued upholding the citation and either imposing a fine up to the maximum
authorized by this or other ordinance or requiring the offender to remedy a continuing violation to avoid a fine, or both.
(F) Every final order of the Code Enforcement Board shall be reduced to writing, which shall include the date the
order was issued. A copy shall be furnished to the person named in the citation. If the person named in the citation is
not present when the final order is issued, the order shall be delivered in accordance with the procedures set forth in
subsection (b) above. (Ord. 09-2003, passed 04-12-2003) (Am. Ord. 24-2016, passed 12-23-16)
§ 34.101 PRESENTATION OF CASES.
Each case before the Code Enforcement Board shall be presented by the Director of the Department of Planning &
Development or by an appointed Code Enforcement Official for the city. The City Attorney shall be counsel to the
Code Enforcement Board. (Ord. 09-2003, passed 04-12-2003)
§ 34.102 APPEALS; FINAL JUDGEMENT.
(A) An appeal from any final order of the Code Enforcement Board may be made to the Hardin County District
Court within thirty (30) days of the date the order is issued. The appeal shall be initiated by the filing of a complaint
and copy of the Code Enforcement Board’s order in the same manner as any civil action under the Kentucky Rules of
Civil Procedure.
(B) If no appeal from a final order of the Code Enforcement Board is filed within the time period set in
subsection (a) above, the Code Enforcement Board’s order shall be deemed final for all purposes.
(Ord. 09-2003, passed 04-12-2003)
2018-S-1
Agencies, Boards and Committees 32E
§ 34.103 ORDINANCE FINE SCHEDULE.
Violation of ordinances that are enforced by the City Code Enforcement Board shall be subject to the following
schedule of civil fines:
(A) If a citation for a violation of an ordinance is not contested by the person charged with a violation, the
penalties set forth in this subsection shall apply; however, the board may waive all or any portion of a penalty for an
uncontested violation, if in its discretion, the board determines that such waiver will promote compliance with the
Ordinance in issue.
Violation 1st Offense 2nd Offense All Others
Nuisance Ordinance $ 150.00 $ 200.00 $ 300.00
Property Maintenance Code $ 200.00 $ 250.00 $ 350.00
Fire and Security Alarms $ 100.00 $ 250.00 $ 500.00
Sewer Use Violations:
a. Interior Under Sink Traps $ 50.00 $ 50.00 $ 100.00
b. Exterior Traps $ 200.00 $ 200.00 $ 400.00
c. Reporting $5.00 per day $5.00 per day $5.00 per day
d. All other greasetrap violations * * *
Non-Maintenance Grease $ 50.00 $ 50.00 $ 50.00
Traps - Undersink
Non-Maintenance Grease $ 200.00 $ 200.00 $ 200.00
Traps - Exterior
Noise Ordinance $ 20.00 $ 250.00
Sanitary Sewer Surcharge Ord. $ 100.00 $ 250.00 $ 500.00
Erosion Control Ord. (Single- $ 100.00 $ 250.00 $ 500.00
Family Residential)
Erosion Control Ord. (all $ 200.00 $ 500.00 $1,000.00
Development except Single-
Family
Illicit Discharge & Illicit $ 100.00 $ 500.00 $ 500.00
Zoning Ordinance $ 200.00 $ 250.00 $ 500.00
All Other Violations $ 50.00 ** $ 75.00 ** $ 200.00 **
* As determined according to related ordinance
** Unless specifically mandated by related ordinance
(B) If the citation is contested and a hearing before the Code Board is required, the following maximum penalties
may be imposed at the discretion of the Code Board.
Violation 1st Offense 2nd Offense All Others
Nuisance Ordinances $ 250.00 $ 400.00 $ 500.00
Property Maintenance Code $ 500.00 $ 750.00 $ 1,000.00
Sewer Use Violations:
a. Interior Under Sink Traps $ 100.00 $ 100.00 $ 200.00
b. Exterior Traps $ 400.00 $ 750.00 $ 1,000.00
c. Reporting $10.00 per day $10.00 per day $10.00 per day
d. All other greasetrap Up to $25,000/day Up to $25,000/day Up to $25,000/day
violations
Zoning Ordinance $ 500.00 $750.00 $ 1,000.00
All Other Violations $ 500.00 * $ 750.00 * $ 1,000.00 *
2018-S-1
32E-1 Elizabethtown - Administration
* Unless additional fees are established by the adopting ordinance
(Ord. 09-2003, passed 04-21-2003) (Am. Ord. 07-2004, passed 05-17-2004) (Am. Ord. 03-2005, passed 02-21-2005)
(Am. Ord. 04-2007, passed 02-20-07) (Am. Ord. 07-2008, passed 06-16-08) (Am. Ord. 22-2008, passed 12-22-2008)
§ 34.104 LIENS; FINES; CHARGES; AND FEES.
(A) The City shall possess a lien on property owned by the person found by a final, non-appealable order of the
Code Enforcement Board, or by a final judgment of the court, to have committed a violation of a City Ordinance for all
fines assessed for the violation and for all charges and fees incurred by the City in connection with the enforcement of
the ordinance.
(B) The lien shall be recorded in the office of the County Clerk. The lien shall be notice to all persons from the
time of its recording and shall bear interest until paid. The lien shall continue for ten (10) years following the date of the
nonappealable final order or final court judgement.
(C) The lien shall take precedence over all other subsequent liens, except state, county, school board, and city
taxes, and may be enforced by judicial proceedings.
(D) In addition to the remedy prescribed in subsection (a), the person found to have committed the violation shall
be personally responsible for the amount of all fines assessed for the violation and for all charges and fees incurred by
the City in connection with the enforcement of the ordinances. The City may bring a civil action against the person and
shall have the same remedies as provided for the recovery of a debt.
(Ord. 09-2003, passed 04-21-2003) (Am. Ord. 24-2016, passed 12-23-16)
§ 34.105 LIENHOLDER NOTIFICATION SYSTEM.
The City shall obtain and maintain priority over previously filed liens, as provided in Section 34.104 of this
section, in accordance with the following provisions:
a. Individuals and entities, including by not limited to lienholders, may register with the City to receive
electronic notification of final orders entered pursuant to this section.
b. In order to receive the notification, the registrant shall submit the following information to the City Clerk:
1. Name;
2. Mailing Address;
3. Phone number; and
4. Electronic mailing address.
c. A registrant may use the electronic form provided on the City website to submit the information required by
subsection (b) of the Section. It shall be the responsibility of the registrant to maintain and update the
required contact information with the City. The City shall inform a registrant of any evidence received that
the electronic mailing address is invalid or not functional so that the registrant may provide an updated
electronic mailing address.
d. At least once a month, the City shall electronic mail notification of all final orders entered pursuant to this
section since the last date of notification to each party registered pursuant to this section. The notification
shall provide an electronic link to the City code enforcement database located on the City website. The
database shall include the following information regarding each final order:
1. The name of the person charged with the violation;
2. The physical address of the premises where the violation occurred;
3. The last known mailing address for the owner of the premises where the violation occurred;
4. A copy of the full citation;
5. A copy of the full final order; and
6. The status of the final order regarding its ability to be appealed pursuant to this section.
2018-S-1
Agencies, Boards and Committees 32E-2
e. If an appeal is filed on a final order pursuant to this section, the City shall send electronic mail notification to
all registrants.
f. Within ten (10) days of the issuance of a final order pursuant to this section, the City shall update it code
enforcement database to reflect the issued final order, and shall post the notification required by subsection
(d) of this section containing an updated line to the code enforcement database on the City website.
g. The City shall maintain the records created under this section for ten (10) years following their issuance.
(Ord. 24-2016, passed 12-23-16)
§ 34.106 LIENS.
A. A lienholder of record who is registered pursuant to Section 34.105(b) of this section may, within forty-five
(45) days from the date of issuance of notification under Section 34.105(b) of this section:
1. Correct the violation, if it has not already be abated; or
2. Pay all civil fines assessed for the violation, and all charges and fees incurred by the City in
connection with enforcement of the ordinance, including abatement costs.
B. Nothing in the section shall prohibit the City from taking immediate action if necessary under section 34.99
of this section.
C. The lien provided by section 34.104 of this section shall not take precedence over previous recorded liens if:
1. The City failed to comply with the requirements of Section 34.105 of this section for notification of
the final order; or
2. A prior lienholder complied with subsection (A) of this section.
D. A lien that does not take precedence over previously recorded liens under subsection (C) of this section shall,
if the final order remains partially unsatisfied, continue to take precedence over all other subsequent liens
except liens for state, county, school board and city taxes.
E. The City may record a lien before the forty-five (45) period established in subsection (A) of this section
expires. If the lien is fully satisfied prior to the expiration of the forty-five (45) day period, the City shall
release the lien in the county clerk’s officer where the lien is recorded within fifteen (15) days of the
satisfaction.
F. Failure of the City to comply with sections 34.105 and 34.106 of this section, or failure of the lien to take
precedence over previously filed liens as provided in subsection (C) of this section, shall not limit or restrict
any other remedies the City has against the property of the violator.
(Ord. 24-2016, passed 12-23-16)
§ 34.107 SEVERABILITY.
If any clause, sentence, subdivision, paragraph, section or part of this Ordinance be adjudged by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgement shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof, but
shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, subdivision, paragraph, section or part thereof directly
involved in the controversy in which said judgement shall have been rendered.
(Ord. 09-2003, passed 04-21-2003)
2018-S-1
32F Elizabethtown - Administration
ELIZABETHTOWN HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
§ 34.116 INTENT AND DECLARATION OF PUBLIC POLICY.
(A) The City Council finds that buildings within the City of Elizabethtown having historic, architectural or
cultural value have been significantly altered or destroyed notwithstanding the feasibility and desirability of preserving
these buildings or altering them in an appropriate way.
(B) The Council finds that the historic and architectural character of Elizabethtown is of vital importance in
maintaining the economy of the City.
(C) The Council finds that Elizabethtown has played an important role in the development of Kentucky and
that the history of the city is shown today through buildings representing the activities and events during its growth.
The Council finds that the city has buildings that represent the persons who live or have lived in Elizabethtown during a
period of more than 100 years. It is the finding of the City Council that the distinctive and significant character of the
city can only be maintained by protecting and enhancing its historic, architectural and cultural heritage and by
preventing unnecessary injury to its historic district and its landmarks which are a civic and community asset.
(D) The Council finds that the Federal and Kentucky Governments have passed laws to protect historic
districts and landmarks and that the National Historic Preservation Act was amended in 1980 to establish a Certified
Local Government program creating a new federal-state-local partnership to encourage the efforts by cities to protect
and preserve their historic districts and landmarks.
(E) The Council finds that the adoption of an ordinance to provide an historic preservation program will
benefit all the residents of Elizabethtown and all the owners of property.
(F) The City Council declares as a matter of public policy that the preservation, protection and use of
historic districts and landmarks are a public benefit because they have a special character and historic, architectural and
cultural value and thus serve as visible reminders of the history and heritage of this city, state and nation. The Council
declares as a matter of public policy that this section is required in the interest of the health, prosperity, safety, welfare
and economic well-being of the people.
(G) The Council finds that the Main Street Program has contributed to the revival of the central business
district in Elizabethtown, that it has increased the awareness of the value of the older buildings in the City and that the
historic preservation program will strengthen the current revitalization work in the City.
(Ord. 16-2012, passed 08-06-12)
§ 34.117 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this section is to effect the goals as set forth in the above findings and declarations of public policy
and specifically, but not exclusively, to:
(A) Effect and accomplish the preservation, protection and use of the Historic District and individual landmarks
which have a special character and historic, architectural and cultural value to the city, state and nation;
(B) Promote the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of the people and safeguard the city’s history
and heritage as embodied and reflected in its Historic District and landmarks;
2013-S-1
Agencies, Boards and Committees 32G
(C) Stabilize and improve property values in such district and in the city as a whole;
(D) Foster civic pride in the value of notable accomplishments of the past;
(E) Strengthen the economy of the city;
(F) Protect and enhance the city’s attractions to residents and visitors; and
(G) Enhance the visual and aesthetic character, diversity and interest of the city.
(Ord. 16-2012, passed 08-06-12)
§ 37.118 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this Section, certain terms are defined as follows:
Alteration Any construction, replacement or change to the exterior of a building or structure when it is visible to the
public. An alteration shall include a proposed sign or changes to an existing sign. Painting and ordinary maintenance
and repairs shall not be considered alterations.
Building Any structure designed or constructed for residential, commercial, industrial or other use.
Certificate of Appropriateness (COA) The permit, issued by the Elizabethtown Historic Preservation Commission,
which provides for its approval for work or demolition to be done in the historic district or on a landmark.
Certified Local Government (CLG) A government meeting the requirements of the National Historic Preservation
Act and the implementing or regulations of the U. S. Department of the Interior and the Kentucky Heritage Council.
Commission The Elizabethtown Historic Preservation Commission
Council The Elizabethtown City Council
Demolition Any act that destroys in whole or in part, a landmark or a building or structure in the historic district.
Designated Property A landmark or a building or structure in an historic district. Designated property shall include
all lots within an historic district and the entire lot containing a landmark.
Historic District An area of architectural, historical or cultural significance which meets one or more of the criteria
contained in this section and which has been designated by the City of Elizabethtown.
Landmark A building or structure of architectural, historical or cultural significance which meets one or more of
the criteria contained in this section and which has been designated by the City of Elizabethtown.
Major Structural Change Structural alterations and structural repairs made within any twelve (12) month period
costing in excess of fifty percent (50%) of the value of the structure, as determined by comparison of the extent/value of
the alterations involved and the replacement value of the structure at the time the plans for the alteration are approved.
2013-S-1
32H Elizabethtown - Administration
New Construction An addition to an existing building or structure or the construction a new building or structure.
Ordinary Maintenance and Repairs Any work, the purpose of which is to correct deterioration or to prevent
deterioration of a designated historic property. The work shall restore the property to its appearance prior to
deterioration or shall result in the protection of its present appearance. The work shall involve the use of the same
building materials or available materials that are as similar to the original materials as feasible. Work that changes the
external appearance of a property shall be considered an alteration for the purposes of this section.
Planning Commission The Elizabethtown Planning Commission.
Structure Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent location to the ground or attached
to something having permanent location on the ground.
(Ord. 16-2012, passed 08-06-12)
§ 34.119 HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISISON, ESTABLISHMENT.
There is hereby created the Elizabethtown Historic Preservation Commission (EHPC), an administrative body of the
City of Elizabethtown, Kentucky. Hereafter to be known as “The Commission”, or the “Commission”.
The Commission shall consist of the following: Five (5) qualified persons, competent and informed on historical,
architectural and cultural traditions of the City of Elizabethtown. The five (5) qualified persons shall be appointed by
the Mayor and approved by the City Council. One member of the City Council shall sit as an ex-officio non-voting
liaison member of the Commission.
At least two Commission members are required by state law to be in preservation-related professions. This includes
the professions of historic preservation, architectural history, architecture, history, archaeology, historic preservation
planning, or related disciplines, such as American studies, urban planning, American civilization, cultural geography, or
anthropology. When one or two professional members are not available, the Mayor may appoint other persons
interested in historic preservation to serve. When the Commission reviews an issue that is normally evaluated by a
professional member and that field is not represented by the Commission, the Commission shall seek expert advice
before rendering its decision. All members must have a demonstrated interest in historic preservation.
(A) TERM OF OFFICE.
Of the original members, one (1) shall be appointed for a term of one (1) year; two (2) shall be appointed
for a two (2) year term and two (2) for a three (3) year term. Terms commence on July 1 of each year and
conclude on June 30 of the following year. Thereafter, members shall serve for three (3) year staggered terms.
Members shall be exempt from any provision of any other ordinance of the City limiting the number of terms
that a member of any Board or Commission may hold. Commission members may serve for as many
succeeding terms as such member may be appointed to by the Mayor.
(B) OFFICERS.
The Commission shall select from among its members a Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson. The
Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson shall be citizen members. The officers shall serve for 1 year terms. At the
first regularly scheduled meeting of each calendar year officer elections shall be held. Officers may be elected
for succeeding terms. The Chairperson shall preside at meetings and the Vice-Chairperson shall preside in the
absence of the Chairperson. The Secretary shall be appointed a member of the City staff designated by the
Mayor and shall record the proceedings of each meeting.
2013-S-1
Agencies, Boards and Committees 32I
(C) VACANCIES.
Vacancies on the Commission shall be filled within 60 days. When a vacancy occurs during a term of
office, it shall be filled within 60 days, and the person selected shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of
the term.
(D) CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
No member of the Commission shall vote on any matter that may affect the property, income or business
interest of that member.
(Ord. 16-2012, passed 08-06-12)
§ 34.120 MEETINGS.
All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public. The Commission shall comply with all applicable
Kentucky Revised Statutes and Kentucky Administrative Regulations relating to open meetings.
The Commission shall adopt and make public rules for the transaction of its business and shall hold monthly public
meetings and special public meetings, when necessary. Meetings will be held on the first Thursday at 9:00 a.m. in the
Council Chambers of City Hall. (Am. Ord. 24-2012, passed 11-05-12)
All meetings shall have a previously available agenda and shall comply with the Kentucky Open Meeting Statute,
KRS 61.805. A simple majority of the membership shall be required for decisions involving historic districts and
landmarks.
(Ord. 16-2012, passed 08-06-12)
§ 34.121 PURPOSES AND DUTIES.
(A) SPECIFIC POWERS In addition to the powers and duties stated elsewhere, the Commission shall take action
necessary and appropriate to accomplish the purpose of this section. These actions may include, but are not limited to,
the following:
1. The Commission shall perform all the functions assigned under federal law, state law or city ordinance to
the Commission.
2. The Commission shall survey and study the entire city which might include, but shall not be limited to
research and investigation of potential and existing historical sites, buildings, neighborhoods, and shall obtain
suggestions from the public by available means, including but not limited to public hearings, requests for written
suggestions, oral and written surveys. In making its survey of historic buildings and areas, the Commission shall
conduct this work in accordance with the guidelines of the Kentucky Heritage Council. The Commission shall provide
that its survey and preservation plan shall be maintained and continued.
3. The Commission shall use the preservation plan to assist the City and the County in their overall planning
efforts.
4. The Commission shall maintain and update a list of all historical landmarks, buildings, sites and
neighborhoods in the city having historical significance. Such lists shall contain a brief description of the site or area
and shall list the reasons for inclusion in the list. The listing of sites may also include drawings, photographs,
descriptions and other documents.
5. The Commission shall inform property owners, adjacent property owners and tenants of a property’s
inclusion on the list. The Commission shall also inform the City Council, state authorities dealing with historical areas
and historic landmarks and the appropriate federal authorities of a property’s inclusion. The Commission shall take all
steps necessary to gain state and federal recognition of these sites.
6. The Commission shall recommend to the City Council the designation of Historic Districts and individual
landmarks;
2013-S-1
32J Elizabethtown - Administration
7. The Commission shall present recommendations to the City Council on proposed ordinances and
guidelines to preserve protect and restore all such historic areas, historic buildings, historic landmarks and
neighborhoods.
8. The Commission shall regulate alterations visible to the public that are proposed for designated property;
regulate demolitions, relocations, and new construction involving designated property;
9. The Commission shall work with and advise the federal, state and county governments and others parts of
City government;
10. The Commission shall advise and assist property owners and other persons and groups including
neighborhood organizations who are interested in historic preservation;
11. The Commission shall review applications for a Certificate of Appropriateness in any historic district as
referred to them by the Elizabethtown Planning Commission, Elizabethtown Board of Zoning Adjustment or other duly
constituted body.
12. Individual sites, structures, which are determined to be of historic significance or which stand alone and are
suitable as monuments shall be located and designated by the Commission. Upon discovery of such sites, or locations,
the Commission may recommend to the City Council the establishment of the historical monument and its possible
acquisition by the City. Upon such acquisition, provision shall be made for continuous and proper maintenance of the
monument.
13. The Commission may initiate and encourage plans for the preservation and rehabilitation of individual
historic buildings.
The Commission shall, on a regular basis, give recognition to owners and tenants who maintain or rehabilitate
their historic buildings with care and thus contribute to the preservation of the history of the city.
(B) CERTIFIED LOCAL GOVERNMENT PROGRAM In the development of the Certified Local Government
Program, the City may ask the Commission to perform other responsibilities that may be delegated to the City under the
National Historic Preservation Act.
(C) NOMINATIONS TO NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES
1. Initiation of Nominations: To participate in the Certified Local Government program, the City shall initiate
all local nominations to the National Register of Historic Places and shall request the Mayor and the Commission to
submit recommendations on each proposed nomination to the National Register. The Mayor and the Commission shall
obtain comments from the public that shall be included in their National Register recommendations. Within 60 days of
the receipt of a nomination from a private individual or the initiation of a nomination by the City, the City shall inform
the Kentucky Heritage Council and the owner of the property of the two recommendations regarding the eligibility of
the property. If the Mayor and Commission are not in agreement, both opinions are forwarded in the City’s report. If
both the Mayor and Commission recommend the property not be nominated, the Kentucky Heritage Council shall
inform the property owner, the Kentucky Historic Preservation Review Board and the State Historic Preservation
Officer, and the property will not be nominated unless an appeal is filed with the State Historic Preservation Officer.
2. Review of Nominations: If the Mayor and the Commission agree that a property should be nominated, or if
either of them feel that a property should be nominated, the nomination will receive a preliminary review by the
Kentucky Historic Preservation Review Board. The Review Board shall make a recommendation to the State Historic
Preservation Officer who decides whether to forward the nomination to the U.S. Secretary of the Interior who shall
make the decision on listing the property on the National Register. The Mayor, the Commission or the property owner
may appeal the final decision by the State Historic Preservation Officer.
(Ord. 16-2012, passed 08-06-12)
2013-S-1
Agencies, Boards and Committees 32K
§ 34.122 STAFFING, RIGHT TO RECEIVE AND SPEND FUNDS.
(A) STAFF The Commission may avail themselves of such staff as needed from time to time as assigned by
the Mayor. Assignments shall be consistent with policies established by the City.
(B) RIGHT TO RECEIVE AND SPEND FUNDS The Commission, in addition to any appropriations made by
the City, shall have the right to receive, hold and spend funds which it may legally receive from any and every source
both in and out of the Commonwealth of Kentucky for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 16-2012, passed 0806-12)
§ 34.123 HISTORIC DISTRICTS AND LANDMARKS.
(A) ADOPTION OF GUIDELINES Before its first public hearing on a designation, the Commission shall
adopt general guidelines that will apply to Historic Districts and landmarks and will assist owners in the preservation
and rehabilitation of their property. The guidelines shall include the Secretary of the Interiors Standards for
Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings and may include other guidelines that will apply to
all designated property in the city. In its guidelines and in its decisions the Commission shall not limit new construction
to any one architectural style but shall seek to preserve the character and integrity of the historic districts and landmarks.
The Commission may expand or amend the guidelines it has adopted provided it holds a public hearing on the changes
and submits the proposed changes to the City Council for its comments.
(B) PUBLIC HEARINGS AND NOTICE To initiate the designation process, the Commission shall assemble
information about the district or property being considered for designation and shall schedule a public hearing on the
proposed designation. Advertised notice of the hearing shall be given, including conspicuous posting in the proposed
district or on the lot of the proposed landmark for 14 consecutive days immediately prior to the hearing. Notice shall
also be given in a local news publication serving the city. At least 14 days prior to the public hearing written notice
shall be given by first class mail to the owners of property under consideration and the owners of all adjoining property.
The Secretary of the Commission or other officer of the Commission shall certify that the notices were mailed. Written
notice shall be considered sufficient when it is mailed to the person listed as the owner of record in the office of the
Hardin County Property Valuation Administrator (PVA).
(C) RECOMMENDATIONS AND DESIGNATIONS The Commission shall recommend to the City Council the
designation of Historic Districts and individual landmarks, and the City Council may make these designations by the
enactment of ordinances.
(D) CRITERIA FOR DSIGNATION A Historic District or a landmark shall qualify for designation when it
meets one or more of the following criteria which shall be discussed in a Commission report making its
recommendations to the City Council:
1. Its character as an established and geographically definable residential neighborhood, united by culture,
architectural styles or physical plan and development;
2. Its character as a geographically definable area possessing a significant concentration of buildings or
structures united by past events or by its plan or physical development;
3. Its value as a reminder of the cultural or archeological heritage of the city, state or nation;
4. Its location as a site of a significant local, state or national event;
5. Its identification with a person or persons who significantly contributed to the development of the city,
state or nation;
6. Its identification as the work of a master builder, designer, or architect whose individual work has
influenced the development of the city, state or nation;
7. Its value as a building that is recognized for the quality of its architecture and that retains sufficient elements
showing its architectural significance; or
8. It’s distinguishing characteristics of an architectural style valuable for the study of a period, method of
construction, or use of indigenous materials.
2013-S-1
32L Elizabethtown - Administration
(E) RECOMMENDATION AND REPORT TO CITY COUNCIL After evaluating the testimony at its public
hearing, survey information and other material it has assembled, the Commission shall make its recommendation to the
City Council with a written report on the area or property under consideration. The report shall contain information
about the buildings identified for inclusion in the proposed designation.
(F) NOTIFICATION OF DESIGNATION The Commission shall notify each owner of the decision relating to
its property and its designation as a landmark or as a part of a Historic District. The Commission shall also give notice
of the designation to the government offices of the City, which shall retain them for future reference. The Commission
shall also send a map of the approved Historic District to the Planning Commission and request the Planning
Commission to make a note on the zoning map of the existence of the Historic District and make the map of it available
to the public. The Commission shall also request the Planning Commission to include the approved Historic District
and approved landmarks in the Comprehensive Plan and any amendments thereto and such new Comprehensive Plan as
may thereafter be adopted.
(G) AMENDMENT OR RECISION OF A DESIGNATION The amendment or recision of any designation shall
be accomplished through the same steps as were followed in the original designation.
(H) ACTION BY CITY COUNCIL The City Council shall approve, modify or disapprove the proposed
designation within 60 days after receiving the recommendation and report of the Commission.
(Ord. 16-2012, passed 08-06-12)
§ 34.124 CERTIFICATES OF APPROPRIATENESS.
(A) CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS REQUIRED A certificate of appropriateness from the
Commission shall be required before a person may undertake the following actions affecting a landmark or a
property in a Historic District:
1) Alteration of the exterior part of a building or structure that is visible to the public;
2) New construction;
3) Demolition; or
4) Relocation.
A certificate of appropriateness is required even when the proposed work does not require a building
permit. When seeking a building permit from the City for a project involving designated property, a person must
submit a certificate of appropriateness approving any of the work listed in this section.
(B) APPLICATION TO COMMISSION An applicant shall be referred to the Commission when proposing an
exterior alteration visible to the public, new construction, demolition or relocation affecting a landmark or a property in
a Historic District. The applicant shall supply the Commission with the information required in order to render a
decision on the application for a Certificate of Appropriateness. The applicant shall provide, where applicable,
drawings of the proposed work, photographs of the existing building or site and adjacent properties, and information
about the building materials to be used. When an applicant proposes to demolish a landmark or building or structure
within a Historic District, if applicable, the applicant shall submit detailed plans for the replacement building or
structure and the time table for completion of the new construction.
(C) CONSULTATION WITH APPLICANT Before an applicant prepares plans, they may bring a tentative
proposal to the Commission for comments. The Commission shall be aware of the importance of finding a way to meet
the current needs of the applicant. The Commission shall also recognize the importance of approving plans that will be
reasonable and economically feasible for the applicant to implement.
2013-S-1
Agencies, Boards and Committees 32M
(D) GUIDELINES FOR DECISION ON APPLICATION In rendering a decision on an application, the
Commission shall use its adopted guidelines. The Commission shall consider the effect of the proposed work on the
landmark or the property in the historic district upon which work is to be performed, and the relationship between such
work and other adjacent or nearby buildings and property. In evaluating the effect and the relationship, the
Commission shall consider historical and architectural significance, architectural style, design, texture, materials and
color. The certificate from the Commission shall not relieve the applicant from complying with the requirements of
other state and local laws and regulations.
(E) ACTION BY COMMISSION; NOTICE TO APPLICANTS
1. The Commission shall hold a public meeting on each Certificate of Appropriateness within 30 days
after a completed application is received. The Commission shall render a decision on the application within 45 days
after the receipt of a completed application provided that the Commission may extend the time for decision an
additional 60 days when the application is for demolition or new construction. The Commission shall approve or
disapprove each application, and it shall give its reasons for its decision using the criteria contained in this section and
in its guidelines.
2. Should the Commission, by majority vote, determine that the application has a significant impact on
the neighborhood and/or a Historic District, in lieu of approving or disapproving the application at the public meeting,
the Commission, by majority vote, may set a public hearing on the Certificate of Appropriateness which shall be held
within 45 days of the date of the vote. The Commission may suggest modifications to an application and may then
approve a Certificate of Appropriateness providing for revisions in the plans submitted. If the Commission fails to
decide on an application within the specified time period, the application shall be deemed approved.
3. Applicants, and all owners of property that adjoin the property for which the Certificate of
Appropriateness is sought, shall be given notice of the public meetings and hearings relating to their application and
shall be informed of the Commission’s decision. Advertised notice of the public hearing shall be given, including
conspicuous posting on the property for fourteen (14) consecutive days immediately prior to the hearing. Notice of a
public hearing shall also be given in a local news publication serving the city. The Commission may include in its
application fee a charge for the cost of giving notice of the public hearing.
4. Upon approval of the application, the applicant will receive a Certificate of Appropriateness.
(F) LENGTH OF VALIDITY OF CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS A Certificate of Appropriateness
shall remain valid for one year after it is issued. Work is required to start before the end of the one year period. If the
approved work has not been completed within two years after the Certificate of Appropriateness was issued, the
Commission shall review the situation and may require an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness for the work
that remains to be done.
(G) STOP WORK ORDER; INJUNCTION In the event work is being performed without the required
Certificate of Appropriateness, the City shall issue a stop work order. All work shall cease on the designated property.
No additional work shall be undertaken as long as such stop work order shall continue in effect. The Commission shall
meet with the owner or tenant to resolve the problem. The City Attorney may seek in Circuit Court an injunction and
any other appropriate relief in order that the intent of this section be carried out. The procedures authorized in this
section may be used in the event work is being performed not in accordance with the Certificate of Appropriateness
issued by the Commission.
2013-S-1
32N Elizabethtown - Administration
DEMOLITION OF LANDMARK, BUILDING OR STRUCTURE IN HISTORIC DISTRICT When an applicant wishes
to demolish a landmark or a building or structure in a Historic District, the Commission may negotiate with the
applicant to determine if there is a viable alternative to demolition. The Commission may ask interested individuals and
organizations for assistance in seeking an alternative to demolition and in obtaining estimates on rehabilitation costs for
the threatened building. After its public meeting, the Commission may determine that a building or structure in a
historic district may be demolished if it does not contribute to the historic district. On all other demolition applications,
the Commission shall study the question of economic hardship on the applicant and shall determine whether the
landmark or the property in a historic district has a reasonable and beneficial use without the approval of the demolition
application. In the case of an income-producing building, the Commission shall also determine whether the applicant
can obtain a reasonable return from his building. The Commission may ask applicants for additional information to be
used in making these determinations. If economic hardship or obtaining a reasonable return is not proven, the
Commission shall deny the demolition application unless the Commission finds grounds to grant the demolition
application under the points contained in this section. When the Commission approves demolition of a building or
structure, that approval shall be valid for one year from the date of final action taken by the Commission. If demolition
has not commenced and completed within one year, the Commission shall review the circumstances and shall require a
new application to authorize the demolition, or to authorize any work remaining.
(H) MOVING A LANDMARK, BUILDING OR STRUCTURE IN HISTORIC DISTRICT When an applicant
wishes to move a landmark, building or structure in a historic district, or when an applicant wishes to move a building
or structure to a lot containing a landmark, or to a property in a historic district, the Commission shall consider the
contribution the building or structure makes to its present setting; whether there are definite plans for the site to be
vacated; whether the building or structure can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity; and the
compatibility of the building or structure to its proposed site and adjacent properties. These considerations shall be in
addition to the points contained in this section.
(I) EMERGENCY SITUATIONS When a property is damaged by fire, a storm or other unexpected event, the
owner or tenant may receive approval from the Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson of the Commission for work to be
done in response to this emergency. At its next meeting the Commission shall be informed of the Certificate of
Appropriateness that was issued. In situations requiring temporary action, an owner may do work in order to protect
temporarily his property from further damage provided he reports this work to the Commission within two business
days. In any case where the City determines that there are emergency conditions dangerous to life, health or property
affecting a landmark or a property in a historic district, the City may order the remedying of these conditions without
the approval of the Commission. When it is possible, the City shall consult with the Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson of
the Commission about the action being taken. If consultation is not possible, the City shall notify the Commission of the
action taken after the completion of the work.
(J) ROUTINE ALTERATIONS; ORDINARY MAINTENANCE. The Commission shall prepare a list of routine
alterations that shall receive immediate approval from the Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson of the Commission without
a public meeting, when an applicant complies with the specifications of the Commission. The list shall include paint
colors appropriate for different types of buildings. At each meeting the Commission shall be informed of the
Certificates of Appropriateness that have been issued under this provision. Ordinary repairs and maintenance may be
undertaken without a Certificate of Appropriateness provided this work on a landmark or a property in a historic district
does not change its exterior appearance that is visible to the public. Every person in charge of a landmark or a property
in a historic district shall keep in good repair all of the exterior portions of such buildings or structures; and all interior
portions thereof which, if not so maintained, may cause such buildings or structures to deteriorate or to become
damaged or otherwise to fall into a state of disrepair. The purpose of this provision is to prevent a person from forcing
the demolition of his building by neglecting it and by permitting damage to the building because of weather or
vandalism. No provision in this section shall be interpreted to require an owner or tenant to undertake an alteration or to
restore his building to its original appearance. The provisions of this section shall be in addition to the provisions of the
Kentucky Building Code requiring buildings and structures to be kept in good repair.
(Ord. 16-2012, passed 08-06-12)
2013-S-1
CHAPTER 35: CITY POLICIES
Section
Equal Opportunity
35.01 Federal and state compliance
§ 35.01 FEDERAL AND STATE COMPLIANCE.
(A) It is the policy of the city to safeguard all individuals within the city from discrimination because of race,
color, creed, religion, sex, ethnic group, familial status, disability or national origin. This policy shall be in conformance
with federal and state constitutional rights.
(B) Employment with the city shall be in compliance with all federal and state equal employment opportunity
laws and regulations.
(C) The city has adopted Kentucky Justice Cabinet Title VI Implementation Plan, and has appointed a Title VI
Coordinator who will identify all federal programs from which federal funds are received and take all steps necessary to
implement full compliance.
33
1995 S-1
34 Elizabethtown - Administration
CHAPTER 36: PERSONNEL POLICIES
Section
Retirement and Pension Plan
36.01 Establishment
RETIREMENT AND PENSION PLAN
§ 36.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
All city employees must join C.E.R.S. except those who elected to participate in the city's Defined Contribution
Plan, prior to August 1989.
35
36 Elizabethtown - Administration
CHAPTER 37: POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS
Section
37.00 Police and Fire Departments Established
Police Department
37.01 Carrying concealed weapon authorized
37.02 Disposition of fees for arrests; subpoenas and the like
Fire Department
37.10 Work shifts; salary; overtime pay
Civil Service
37.15 Commission established
User Fees
37.20 Deployment of Public Safety Services for Motor Vehicle Accidents and Technical Rescues
Cross-reference:
Personnel policies, see Ch. 36
Investigation by Police Department of animals as nuisances, § 92.110
§ 37.00 POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS ESTABLISHED.
There being created and established a full-time Police Department and Fire Department for the protection and
benefit of the citizens of Elizabethtown, the provision of this chapter are hereby reaffirmed. (Ord. No. 5-2000, passed
04-03-00)
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 37.01 CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPON AUTHORIZED.
(A) All members of the City Police Department who carry deadly weapons on or about their persons in their
regularly scheduled duties as police officers for the city, may carry concealed deadly weapons on or about their persons
at all times within the state. ('73 Code, § 15-7)
(B) Deadly weapons that may be carried by members of the City Police Department within the state are those
weapons that are usually carried by such officers in performing their duties while on regularly scheduled shift of duty
for the city. ('73 Code, § 15-8)
(Ord., passed 11-16-70)
37
2005-S-2
38 Elizabethtown - Administration
37.02 DISPOSITION OF FEES FOR ARRESTS; SUBPOENAS AND THE LIKE.
The Chief of Police and members of the City Police Department, when executing warrants of arrest, processes,
subpoenas and attachment for witnesses and other duties as prescribed by law, and are due a fee for same, the same
shall be paid into the city treasury or general fund, it appearing that the Chief of Police and members of the City Police
Department are employed on salaries.
('73 Code, § 2-13) (Ord. 10-1990, passed 3-19-90)
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 37.10 WORK SHIFTS; SALARY; OVERTIME PAY.
(A) Members of the City Fire Department shall be required to work for a period of 24 hours after which they
will be off duty for a period of 48 hours and continuing thereafter on that basis.
(B) Members of the City Fire Department shall be paid a sum equal to at least their weekly, bi-weekly,
monthly and annual salary heretofore established.
(C) Members of the City Fire Department shall be paid time and one-half for all hours worked over 40 hours
per week and shall receive a minimum salary as set from time to time by ordinance.
('73 Code, § 17-108.1) (Ord., passed 6-17-74)
CIVIL SERVICE
§ 37.15 COMMISSION ESTABLISHED.
There is hereby created and established a Civil Service Commission for the Police and Fire Departments of
the city, and the City Council hereby elects to operate the civil service system under the provisions of KRS 90.300
through 90.390. The Police and Fire Departments shall operate under standard operating procedures (SOP) approved by
the City Council.
('73 Code, § 17-101) (Ord., passed 10-17-72) (Ord. No. 02-2015, passed 03/02/15)
Statutory reference:
Authority of fourth class city to adopt provisions of KRS 90.300 through 90.390, see KRS 95.761
§ 37.17 CIVIL SERVICE CLASSIFICATIONS
The following number and classifications of the City of Elizabethtown Police and Fire Departments are
hereby created.
ELIZABETHTOWN POLICE DEPARTMENT
JOB TITLE NUMBER CLASSIFICATION (Classification and Salary
Schedule on file in office
Sergeants * 9 * 7P of the Director of Finance)
Police Officers 50 6P
* Authorized number also included as police officers
2018-S-1
Elizabethtown – Administration 39
ELIZABETHTOWN FIRE DEPARTMENT
JOB TITLE NUMBER CLASSIFICATION (Classification and Salary
Fire Captains * 3 * 8F Schedule on file in the office
Fire Lieutenants * 9 * 7F of the Director of Finance)
Fire Fighters 50 6F
* Authorized number also included as Firefighters.
The Chief of Police and any Deputy Chiefs of police, the Fire Chief and any Battalion Chiefs are specifically
excluded from the classified service, but are protected under the provisions of KRS 90.380.
All radio operators, school guards and meter attendants are specifically excluded from the above classified service
in the City of Elizabethtown. (Ord. Passed 8-19-96; Ord. No. 05-2000, passed 04-03-00, Ord. No. 15-2008, passes 11-
17-2008) (Am. Ord. No. 27.2011, passed 12-21-11) (Am. Ord. 11-2016, passed 06-24-16)
USER FEES
§ 37.20 USER FEES FOR THE DEPLOYMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY SERVICES FOR MOTOR VEHICLE
ACCIDENTS AND TECHNICAL RESCUES
The City desires to implement a fair and equitable procedure by which to collect Motor Vehicle Accidents (MVA)
and technical rescue fees from insurance companies and non-tax payers and establish a billing system in accordance
with State and Federal laws, regulations and guidelines:
1. The City of Elizabethtown’s Fire Department shall establish fees for the delivery of Fire Department services,
personnel, supplies and equipment to the scene of motor vehicle accidents and technical rescues. The rate of
the user fees shall be that which is the usual, customary and reasonable costs, which includes any services,
personnel, supplies and equipment and may fluctuate based on the needs of the accident. The user fees may
include police services for traffic control and accident reconstruction for certain accidents involving fatalities.
2. The user fees shall be filed to the motor vehicle or accident insurance companies, representing an add-on-cost
of the claim for damages.
3. The City may make rules or regulations and from time-to-time and may amend, revoke or add rules and
regulations not inconsistent with this Ordinance as it may deem necessary or expedient in respect to billing for
these fees or the collection thereof.
4. If any part of this section is declared to be unenforceable or unconstitutional for any reason then the same shall
not affect the validity of the remainder of this section.
(Ord. No. 07-2005, passed 03/31/05)
2018-S-1
40 Elizabethtown - Administration
TITLE V: PUBLIC UTILITIES
Chapter
50. DISCONNECTION POLICY
51. GAS
52. WATER AND SEWER
1
2 Elizabethtown - Public Utilities
CHAPTER 50: DISCONNECTION POLICY
Section
50.01 Disconnection for nonpayment; restrictions and charges on reconnection
50.02 City not liable for interruption of service
Cross-reference:
Permit required for wires or structures over streets; issuance of permit to utility, see § 91.01
Termination of utilities when public nuisance exists, see § 92.112
§ 50.01 DISCONNECTION FOR NONPAYMENT; RESTRICTIONS AND CHARGES ON
RECONNECTION.
The following regulations shall apply to water, sewer, and gas customers:
(A) After service has been discontinued for nonpayment of bills, all past-due bills and fees must be paid up to
date before service will be restored.
(B) A service charge from $10 to $20 shall be levied to restore service after discontinuance for nonpayment of
bills. This service fee must be paid before service is continued.
(C) After services have been interrupted or discontinued for nonpayment of bills to any person, the services will
not be granted to other members of the family living under the same roof until all past-due bills have been paid in full.
(D) After services have been interrupted or discontinued for nonpayment of bills, service charges, or fees and the
gas or water meter has been sealed by the city, it shall be unlawful for any person to break any seal on any water or gas
meter or to tamper or turn on the water or gas. In addition to any criminal conviction and penalties, the city may collect
a service charge from $10 to $200 from the service account for the unlawful tampering or turning on of the gas or
water.
(E) Should water, sewer or gas service be disconnected or discontinued for an extended period, for any reason,
the city may remove its meters from the service or may otherwise secure its service line. The city shall charge the
applicable reconnection fees and deposits required.
('73 Code, § 20-2) (Ord., passed 4-21-69) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 50.02 CITY NOT LIABLE FOR INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE.
No claim shall be made against the city by reason of breakage of any main or service pipe, or any other
interruption of the supply, breakage of machinery or stoppage for necessary repairs for any city utility.
3
1995 S-1
4 Elizabethtown - Public Utilities
CHAPTER 51: GAS
Section
General Provisions
51.01 Definitions
51.02 Conditions to provision of gas service
51.03 Connection permit required; tap-on fees
51.04 Reconnection after voluntary turn-off; fee
51.05 Reconnection of meter; fee
51.06 Requirements and fees for gas tap and extensions for subdivision and private developments; rebate
policy
Service Rate Schedules
51.15 General Rate
51.16 Heat Rate
51.17 High Load Rate
51.18 Interruptible Industrial Service
51.19 Interruptible Industrial Service with Standby
51.20 Firm Industrial Service
52.21 Interruptible Fixed Price Service
51.22 Curtailment Notice and Charge for Failure to Obey
51.23 Adjustment for Increase in Rate
51.24 Overcharges and undercharges; adjustment of errors in billing
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires
a different meaning.
DWELLING UNIT. Each dwelling unit in an apartment house shall be considered as a separate customer and
shall be separately metered, except when the apartment house is centrally heated.
GAS PIPING. The gas pipe from the gas meter outlet to the gas burning appliance, apparatus or fixture.
FACILITY CHARGE. The facility charge shall be charged to each account monthly. The base rate and
commodity rate shall be charged in addition to the facility charge.
MCF. One “mcf” is 1000 cubic feet of gas at standard temperature and pressure.
SERVICE LINE. The gas pipe from the city's main to the meter location.
SYSTEM or GAS SYSTEM. The natural gas distribution system of the city.
('73 Code, § 20-11) (Ord., passed 4-1-57) (Ord. 18-2003, passed – 06-23-2003) (Am. Ord. No. 11-2012; passed 06-18-
12)
2013-S-1 5
6 Elizabethtown - Public Utilities
§ 51.02 CONDITIONS TO PROVISION OF GAS SERVICE.
The city shall provide gas and gas service to any potential consumer who may apply for same provided that the
demand for gas by the potential consumer can be supplied by the gas system and provided, further, that the revenues to
be derived from supplying the potential consumer with gas and gas service justify the cost to the city of extending the
gas and gas service to the consumer.
('73 Code, § 20-18) (Ord., passed 4-1-57)
§ 51.03 CONNECTION PERMIT REQUIRED; TAP-ON FEES.
(A) At or before the time of any initial connection of any premises to the gas system, the owner or occupant of the
premises shall be required to pay a connection fee and deposit. The owner or occupant of the premises shall be required
to pay the cost of installing that part of the service line from the curb or property line to the meter and regulator
location. No such service line shall be installed until the owner or occupant of the premises has paid the connection fee
to the city covering such installation. All service lines shall be installed in accordance with the codes containing the
requirements for installing same and which codes will be available at the city hall. The applicable codes hereby (and as
otherwise provided) adopted by reference are the most current additions of the following codes as approved by City
Council: National Fuel Gas Code (NFPA54), Pipeline Safety Regulations - 49CFR, Kentucky Standards of Safety ( Fire
Prevention Code), National Fire Code (National Fire Protection Association), and the city of Elizabethtown Plans and
Specifications for Gas Service Piping Installations. The installation, construction, reconstruction and repair of all gas
piping, service lines, gas appliances, fixtures and apparatus, now or hereafter to be placed on or in any manner directly
attached to any premises served by the gas system shall be inspected and approved by the city before any gas is turned
into any service line on the premises.
(B) Tapping or connection fees for gas service for customers located inside the city as well as those who live
outside the city shall be set by ordinance passed by City Council from time to time and kept on file in the office of the
City Clerk for public inspection.
(C) All connections to the gas system and the installation, construction, reconstruction and repair of gas piping,
service lines, gas appliances, fixtures and apparatus shall be made under such other regulations as the City Council may
prescribe by ordinance.
('73 Code, § 20-17) (Ord., passed 4-1-57; Am. Ord., passed 4-3-72; Am. Ord., passed 5-20-85) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.04 RECONNECTION AFTER VOLUNTARY TURN-OFF; FEE.
In the event the owner or occupant of any residential, commercial and industrial establishment, or other property,
building or structure of any kind, connected with, or serviced by the natural gas system shall request that service be cut
off or discontinued, there is hereby established a turn-on fee of $25 which shall be paid before service is resumed to the
property previously cut off or discontinued, and shall be in addition to deposits now required.
('73 Code, § 20-19) (Ord., passed 4-20-59) (Am. Ord. No. 11-2012; passed 06-18-12)
2013-S-1
Gas 7
§ 51.05 RECONNECTION OF METER; FEE.
In the event the owner or occupant of any property as set out in § 51.04 shall cause the gas meter to be removed,
there is hereby established a meter hook-up fee of $50 which shall be paid before the meter is reconnected to the
property, which fee shall be in addition to deposits now required.
('73 Code, § 20-20) (Ord., passed 4-20-59) (Am. Ord. No. 11-2012; passed 06-18-12)
§ 51.06 REQUIREMENTS AND FEES FOR GAS TAP AND EXTENSIONS FOR SUBDIVISION
AND PRIVATE DEVELOPMENTS; REBATE POLICY.
(A) Inside city limits.
(1) A tap fee shall be paid for each service. The tap fee shall be determined annually by the City Finance
Department based upon material, labor and equipment costs.
(2) Developers of subdivisions and private developments shall pay the City for all mainline extensions
necessary to install lines to and/or within the development. The charge for extensions shall be based upon costs
determined by the City Finance Department annually and shall be charged per foot of line installed by the City or its
contractor. All payments for extensions shall be made to the City according to signed contract before constructions shall
begin.
(3) Rebates shall be refunded once each year to the developer or owner utilizing tap fees paid over a ten year
period. The rebates shall not exceed the extension contract amount.
(B) Outside city limits.
(1) A tap fee shall be paid for each service. The tap fee shall be determined annually by the City Finance
Department based upon materials, labor and equipment costs.
(2) Developers of subdivisions and private developments shall pay the City for all mainline extensions
necessary to install lines to and/or within the development. The charge shall be determined and set annually by the City
Finance Department and shall be charged per foot of line installed by the City of its contractor. All payments for
extensions shall be made to the city according to signed contract before construction shall begin.
(3) Rebates shall be refunded once each year to the developer or owner utilizing tap fees paid over a ten-year
period. The rebase shall not exceed the extension contract amount.
('73 Code, § 20-21) (Ord. 18-1990, passed 6-4-90) (Am Ord. 21-2004, passed 10-04-04)
SERVICE RATE SCHEDULES
§ 51.15 GENERAL RATE.
(A) Rates. The general rate shall be charged to any customer not qualifying for any other rate schedule. The rate
shall consist of a facility charge, base rate and commodity rate. The facility charge and base rate shall be established in
relation to costs of service, maintenance, debt service and other operational costs. The commodity rate shall be
determined based upon the monthly cost of gas supply.
Facility Charge $6.00
Base Rate $1.60 per mcf
Commodity Rate (Cost of gas + interstate fuel and transport
charges + loss/unaccounted for) per mcf
2013-S-1
8 Elizabethtown - Public Utilities
(B) Deposit. A deposit of $50.00 will be required for each residential user and a deposit of $100.00 for each
business or commercial user. The deposit will be refundable at the termination of the service.
(C) Terms of payment. All bills are due and payable ten (10) days from the date of the bill. If not paid within this
ten-day period, the above rates plus a $10 to $20 restoring charge shall apply. The city also reserves the right to
discontinue service and hold the deposit until the bill is paid in full.
('73 Code, § 20-12) (Ord., passed 1-19-70; Am. Ord., passed 11-2-87; Am. Ord. 9-1988, passed 3-21-88; Am. Ord.,
passed 11-22-93) (Am. Ord. 18-2003, passed 06-23-2003) (Am. Ord. No. 11-2012, passed 06-18-12)
§ 51.16 HEAT RATE.
(A) Rates. The heat rate shall be charged to any customer utilizing service for space heating purposes only.
Facility Charge $6.00
Base Rate $2.00 per mcf
Commodity Rate (Cost of gas + interstate fuel and transport
charges + loss/unaccounted for) per mcf
(B) Deposit. A deposit of $50.00 will be required for each residential user and a deposit of $100.00 for each
business or commercial user. The deposit will be refundable at the termination of the service.
(C) Terms of payment. All bills are due and payable ten (10) days from the date of the bill. If not paid, within
this ten (10) days period, the above rate plus a $10 to $20 restoring charge will apply. The city also reserves the right to
discontinue service and hold the deposit until the bill is paid in full.
('73 Code, § 20-13) (Ord., passed 1-19-70; Am. Ord., passed 11-2-87; Am. Ord. 9-1988, passed 3-21-88; Am Ord.,
passed 11-22-93) (Am. Ord. 18-2003, passed 06-23-2003) (Am. Ord. No. 11-2012, passed 06-18-12)
§ 51.17 HIGH LOAD RATE.
The high load rate is available to customers whose use of gas during the month of least consumption is at least
50% of the use of gas during the month of greatest consumption. High load rate customers may be subject to
curtailment under the provisions in this ordinance titled “Curtailment Notice and Charge for Failure to Obey”. Such
curtailment shall be based upon end use priority standards.
(A) Rates.
Facility Charge $25.00
Base Rate $1.35 per mcf
Commodity Rate (Cost of gas + interstate fuel and transport
charges + loss/unaccounted for) per mcf
(B) Deposit. A deposit of $100.00 will be required on all service of this classification. The deposit will be
refunded at the termination of the service. The City, at its sole discretion, reserves the right to exempt from this
requirement any person, firm or corporation, who can furnish a satisfactory and acceptable credit rating or experience.
2013-S-1
Gas 9
(C) Terms of payment. All bills are due ten (10) days from the date of the bill. If not paid within this ten (10) day
period, the above rate plus a $50.00 to $100.00 restoring charge shall apply. The city also reserves the right to
discontinue service and hold the deposit until the bill is paid in full.
('73 Code, § 20-14) (Ord., passed 1-19-70; Am. Ord., passed 11-2-87; Am. Ord. 9-1988, passed 3-21-88; Am. Ord.,
passed 11-22-93) (Am. Ord. 18-2003, passed 06-23-2003) (Am. Ord. No. 11-2012, passed 06-18-12)
§ 51.18 INTERRUPTIBLE INDUSTRIAL SERVICE
Based upon available supplies and system capacity, interruptible industrial service may be offered to
commercial/industrial customers whose use of gas is principally for process purposes, and where space heating is
incidental. The City reserves the right to deny this service at any time when, in the City’s opinion, the gas system lacks
capacity and/or supplies at the point of service or when this interruptible service would conflict with priority services
being rendered. All sales shall comply with the City’s administrative and operational policies and Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission requirements. Under this rate schedule, the customer shall adhere to all terms of the
“Curtailment Notice and Charge for Failure to Obey” provisions of this chapter.
(A) Rates.
Facility Charge $125.00
Base Rate $0.75 per mcf
Commodity Rate (Cost of gas + interstate fuel and transport charges) per mcf
('73 Code, § 20-15) (Ord., passed 1-19-70; Am. Ord., passed 11-2-87; Am. Ord. 9-1988, passed 3-21-88; Am. Ord.,
passed 11-22-93, Am. Ord. 18-2003, passed 06-23-03, Am. Ord. 38-2007, passed 11-19-07) (Am. Ord. No. 11-2012,
passed 06-18-12)
§ 51.19 INTERRUPTIBLE INDUSTRIAL SERVICE WITH STANDBY
Interruptible industrial service with standby under this rate schedule may be offered to a commercial/industrial
customer who has standby fuel capability for curtailment periods. All sales shall comply with the City’s administrative
and operational policies and Federal Energy Regulatory Commission requirements. The City shall interrupt this service
at any time when, in the City’s opinion, the gas system lacks capacity and/or supplies at the point of service or when the
interruptible service would conflict with other services being rendered. The customer shall adhere to all terms of the
“Curtailment Notice and Charge for Failure to Obey” provisions of this chapter. This service provides natural gas
supplies at monthly market prices.
(A) Rates.
Facility Charges $125.00
Base Rate $0.55 per mcf
Commodity Rate (Cost of gas + interstate fuel and transport charges) per mcf
('73 Code, § 20-15) (Ord., passed 1-19-70; Am. Ord., passed 11-2-87; Am. Ord. 9-1988, passed 3-21-88; Am. Ord.,
passed 11-22-93,Am. Ord. 18-2003, passed 06-23-2003, Am Ord. 38-2007, passed 11-19-07) (Am. Ord. No. 11-2012,
passed 06-18-12)
2013-S-1
10 Elizabethtown - Public Utilities
§ 51.20 FIRM INDUSTRIAL SERVICE.
Based upon available supplies and system capacity, firm industrial service may be offered by contract to
commercial/industrial customers whose use of gas is principally for process purposes and where space heating is
incidental. The City reserves the right to deny this service at any time when, in the City’s opinion, the gas system lacks
capacity and/or supplies at the point of service or when this firm service would conflict with higher priority services
being rendered. All sales shall comply with the City’s administrative and operational policies and Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission requirements. Under this rate schedule, the customer shall adhere to all terms of the contract
and the “Curtailment Notice and Charge for Failure to Obey” provisions of this chapter. This service provides natural
gas supplies at monthly market prices. Contracts shall be required between the Firm Sales Service customer and the
City for any fixed price purchase agreements. These contracts shall be determined on a specific and short term basis at
the discretion of the City.
(A) Rates.
Facility Charges $125.00
Base Rate $0.95 per mcf
Commodity Rate (Cost of gas + interstate fuel and transport charges) per mcf
('73 Code, § 20-15.1) (Ord., passed 11-2-87; Am. Ord. 9-1988, passed 3-21-88, Am. Ord. 18-2003, passed 06-23-
2003, Am. Ord. 38-2007, passed 11-19-07) (Am. Ord. No. 11-2012, passed 06-18-12)
§ 51.21 INTERRUPTIBLE FIXED PRICE SERVICE.
Interruptible fixed price service under this rate schedule may be offered by contract to commercial/industrial
customers who have contracted for a fixed rate of gas from the City’s supplier for up to six (6) months. Volumes to be
transported shall comply with the City’s administrative and operational polices and Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission requirements. The City reserves the right to deny this service at any time when, in the City’s opinion, the
gas system lacks capacity at the point of service or when this interruptible service would conflict with other services
being rendered. The customer shall adhere to all terms of the contract and the “Curtailment Notice and Charge for
Failure to Obey” provisions of this chapter. The customer shall be responsible for all contractual charges including
balancing expenses, City operational costs and administrative fees.
(A) Rates.
Facility Charge $125.00
Base Rate $0.95 per mcf
(Ord. 38-2007, passed 11-19-07) (Am. Ord. No. 11-2012, passed 06-18-12)
§ 51.22 CURTAILMENT NOTICE AND CHARGE FOR FAILURE TO OBEY.
Whenever curtailment or interruption of gas delivered hereunder is required, the City shall issue a curtailment
order to customers affected, specifying the quantity of gas to be curtailed and the time at which such curtailment is to be
made. When restoration of service is permissible, the City shall similarly issue a restoration order specifying the
quantity of gas to be restored and the time at which such restoration is to be made therein. A curtailment order shall be
issued at least one hour in advance of the effective time.
2013-S-1
Gas 11
If customer fails to comply with a curtailment order calling for curtailment or interruption and should the City not
fully sever service, then for each such failure to comply by the customer shall be deemed to have created a “firm
demand” equal to the full volume of gas taken between the effective time of such curtailment order and the effective
time of the next succeeding restoration order. If the period of time between the effective time of such curtailment order
and the effective time of the next succeeding restoration order exceeds 24 hours, the demand so created shall be the
largest volume of gas taken in any continuous 24 hours period while the curtailment order is in effect. Each “firm
demand” so created shall be billed to the customer at the rate of $15.00 per month per 1,000 cubic feet for a period of
12 months beginning with the month of which such demand was created. The City, at its discretion, may waive
demand created hereunder for minor violations or curtailment order.
('73 Code, § 20-16) (Ord., passed 4-1-57; Am. Ord., passed 3-17-75; Am. Ord. 9-1988, passed 3-21-88; Am. Ord.,
passed 11-22-93, Am. Ord. 18-2003, passed 06-23-2003, Am. Ord. 38-2007, passed 11-19-07) (Am. Ord. No. 11-2012,
passed 06-18-12)
§ 51.23 ADJUSTMENT FOR INCREASES IN RATE.
The rate schedules adopted herein are based upon operational costs and commodity costs (cost of gas).
Adjustments to the monthly rate schedule will be made by the City to include the effect of commodity increases or
decreases, and such adjustments shall automatically become part of the applicable rate schedule.
('73 Code, § 20-16.1) (Ord., passed 1-3-77, Am. Ord. 18-2003, passed 06-23-2003, Am. Ord. 38-2007, passed 11-19-
07))
§ 51.24 OVERCHARGES AND UNDERCHARGES; ADJUSTMENT OF ERRORS IN BILLING.
Where the city has supplied natural gas to a customer, if it shall be found that at any time or times the customer has
been overcharged or undercharged in any form whatsoever under the provisions for rates and charges for the use and
services rendered by the natural gas distribution system of the city and if the customer shall have actually paid the bills
containing the overcharge or undercharge, then within 30 days after the final determination thereof, the city shall refund
the amount of any the overcharge with interest thereon at the then effective prime interest rate (Chase Manhatten Bank)
from the time such overcharge was paid to the date of refund, and the customer shall pay the amount of any such
undercharge, but without interest. In the event an error is discovered in the amount billed any statement rendered by the
city, the error shall be adjusted within 30 days of the determination thereof, provided that claim therefore shall have
been made within 30 days from the date of discovery of the error but in any event, within 12 months from the date of
payment.
(’73 Code, § 20-16.1) (Ord., passed 1-3-77, Am. Ord. 38-2007, passed 11-19-07)
2013-S-1
12 Elizabethtown - Public Utilities
2008-S-1
CHAPTER 52 WATER AND SEWER
Section
General Provisions
52.01 Purpose
52.02 Sewer use ordinance adopted by reference
52.03 Water and sewer rates adopted by reference
52.04 Tapping or connection permit
52.05 Tapping fees for water and sewer
52.06 Prohibited water usage
52.07 Emergency surcharges for water & sewer customers
Water and Sewer Rates
52.20 Annual rate for standby fire protection taps
52.21 Private fire hydrants outside city
52.22 Meter deposits
52.23 Existing provisions reaffirmed
Discharge into Sanitary Sewer System
52.30 Discharge of surface or stormwater or groundwater into the sanitary sewer system of the city is
prohibited
52.31 Penalties
52.32 Severability
Cross-reference:
Sewage discharge deemed a public nuisance, see §§ 92.075 through 92.077
Minimum fire protection requirements; water supply and fire hydrants, see § 93.27
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.01 PURPOSE.
This chapter sets forth the requirements for usage of city water and sewer distribution and collection systems and
establishes certain rates and charges for the service provided by the water and sewer systems.
§ 52.02 SEWER USE ORDINANCE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
An ordinance repealing the existing city sewer use ordinance and enacting the new sewer use ordinance and
pretreatment program for the city is hereby incorporated by reference and shall govern in all respects the publicly
owned treatment works including the municipal sanitary sewerage collection system, treatment plant and appurtenances
thereto, setting forth policy, definitions, rules and regulations
2008-S-1 13
14 Elizabethtown - Public Utilities
governing the building of sewers and connections, wastewater volume determination, pollutant discharge and discharge
limits, pretreatment program administration in part, wastewater discharge permits, general discharge prohibition,
establishing the right of the city to charge fees and charges for administrating the city's reasonable necessary functions
related to the aforesaid, monitoring and sampling, permittee reporting requirements, accidental or slug discharges, spill
prevention and control plans and delineating powers and authority of the city and setting forth the methods and
procedures for enforcement of the ordinance including enforcement response actions including penalties for violations
of the ordinance and repealing prior ordinances.
(Ord. 7, passed 4-27-92) (Ord. 11-2002, passed 07-01-2002) (Am. Ord. 06-2004, passed 5-17-04) (Am. Ord. 03-2007,
passed 02-20-07) (Am. Ord. 19-2007, passed 06-23-07) (Am. Ord. 02-2013, passed 03-04-13) (Am. Ord. 07-2016,
passed 05-20-16) (Am. Ord. 01-2017, passed 03-10-17)
§ 52.03 WATER AND SEWER RATES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
An ordinance amending previous ordinances fixing water and sewer rates is hereby incorporated by reference and
shall establish the rate and charge necessary for the providing of services and the proper operation of the water and
sewer systems.
(Ord. 35, passed 09-20-99) (Am. Ord. 33-2003, passed 11-07-03) (Am.Ord. 35-2007, passed 11-05-07) (Am.Ord. No.
12-2012, passed 06-18-12) (Am Ord. 27-2013, passed 12-02-13) (Am. Ord. 07-2014, passed 02-18-2014)
§ 52.04 TAPPING OR CONNECTION PERMIT.
(A) Water and sewer mains shall be tapped or connected only by permit issued by the city and payment by the
applicant of the fees prescribed. The city will furnish and install the water meter, meter setter, meter box and lid, and
supply pipe from the water main to the property line for taps two inches in diameter and less. For taps larger than two
inches in diameter, the materials must be purchased by the applicant and approved by the city. The city will furnish the
meter and install the tapping materials only if requested. The applicant shall provide and install according to city
specifications the lines from the tap to the premises.
(B) The city will furnish and install the sewer tap and service line from the main to the property line. The owner
of the premises shall provide and install the sewer from the property line to the premises.
(Ord. 14, passed 5-20-85)
(C) Connection to the sanitary sewerage system shall not be permitted for property outside of the corporate limits
of the City of Elizabethtown.
§ 52.05 TAPPING FEES FOR WATER AND SEWER.
(A) Tapping fees for water service shall consist of a materials fee and a connection fee.
(1) The materials fee shall be based upon the actual cost of supplies (including meter, necessary parts and
meter box) for each service size and shall be determined and set by the City Finance Department at least once per year.
(2) The connection fee for water service shall be determined by ordinance passed by City Council from time
to time and kept on file in the office of the City Clerk for public inspection.
(3) The service size shall be determined by the meter size, or the tap size from the main to the meter,
whichever is larger. In the case of multiple meter settings from one tap, a connection fee shall be charged for each
service meter set, but no connection fee for the tap line shall be charged.
2018-S-1
Water and Sewer 15
(B) Tapping or connection fees for sewer service shall be set by ordinance passed by City Council from time to
time and kept on file in the office of the City Clerk for public inspection. Each residence, dwelling unit, or business
unit, shall pay a connection fee.
(Ord. 14, passed 5-20-85) (Amended by Ordinance No. 29 - 1997).
§ 52.06 PROHIBITED WATER USAGE
When the Mayor has declared that a water shortage emergency exists, the following activity will be prohibited.
1. Residential – All residents of residential communities are hereby prohibited from the exterior usage of water,
including but not limited to:
a. the exterior washing of homes and/or windows;
b. the water of lawns;
c. the usage of irrigation systems;
d. the watering of flowers;
e. the watering of shrubs;
f. the watering of gardens;
g. the washing of any type of motor vehicle;
h. the washing of any type of pleasure craft;
i. the filling up or topping off of swimming pools of any size;
j. the washing of sidewalks, driveways, patios or parking areas; and
k. the refilling of decorative water fountains.
2. Restaurants – The owners and/or operators of all restaurants are hereby prohibited from the usage of water as
follows:
a. all exterior uses as outlines above; and
b. restrict service of water to customers only when requested.
3. Businesses – The following water usage for businesses are hereby prohibited:
a. any and all exterior usage as outlined above, with the exception of the need of those businesses which use
water which becomes part of their final product or service.
(Ord. 23 – 1999, passed 07-26-99)
§ 52.07 EMERGENCY SURCHARGES FOR WATER AND SEWER CUSTOMERS
When the Mayor has declared that a water shortage emergency exists, any individual or entity who violates Title
V, Section 52.06 of the Elizabethtown Code of Ordinance, as enacted on July 26, 1999, shall be assessed the following
surcharges.
1. Residential:
a. 1st offense Warning
b. 2nd offense $50.00 surcharge
c. 3rd & subsequent offenses $100.00 surcharge and/or possible termination of water service
2. Restaurants:
a. 1st offense Warning
b. 2nd offense $100.00 surcharge
c. 3rd & subsequent offenses $200.00 surcharge and/or possible termination of water service
3. Businesses:
a. 1st offense Warning
b. 2nd offense $100.00
c. 3rd & subsequent offenses $200.00 surcharge and/or possible termination of water service
1999-S-3
16 Elizabethtown - Public Utilities
Any citizen who violates said section 52.06 will be issued a citation. Citations will be written by those employees
of the City authorized by the Mayor.
Any citizens who choose to appeal any aspect of this Ordinance are authorized to take their appeals directly to the
City Council.
(Ord. 24 – 1999, passed – July 26, 1999)
WATER AND SEWER RATES
§ 52.20 ANNUAL RATE FOR STANDBY FIRE PROTECTION TAPS.
The charge for alternate or standby service from the City water system for meter sizes up to and including two
inches (2”) shall be $200.00 and shall cover service for one year from the date of initiation of usage. The minimum
monthly bill ($7.78) may be paid in lieu of the fee. For meter sizes larger than two inches (2”), the charge as prescribed
shall be $500.00 or a minimum monthly bill of $25.00 may be paid.
('73 Code, § 20-40) (Ord., passed 11-20-78; Am. Ord., passed 12-8-80; Am. Ord., passed 4-19-82; Am. Ord. 8, passed
2-4-91; Am. Ord. 35, passed 9-20-99; Am. Ord. No. 17-2007, passed 04-16-07)
§ 52.21 PRIVATE FIRE HYDRANTS OUTSIDE CITY.
An annual charge of $500.00 shall be collected for City water system fire service when sprinkler facilities are
utilized by an entity which is not a City water system customer. A fee of $100.00 per hydrant shall be collected annually
for each privately maintained fire hydrant supplied by the City water system and utilized by an entity which is not a City
water system customer or which does not have sprinkler facilities.
An annual charge of $500.00 shall be collected for alternate or standby fire service from the City water system.
The entire fee shall be billed upon initiation of actual usage and shall cover service for one year.
('73 Code, § 20-41) (Ord., passed 11-20-78; Am. Ord., passed 12-8-80; Am. Ord., passed 4-19-82; Am. Ord. 8, passed
2-4-91; Am. Ord. 35-1999, passed 9-20-99; Am. Ord. 17-2007, passed 04-16-07)
§ 52.22 METER DEPOSITS; WATER AND SEWER.
Meter deposits for water and sewer service will be required of customers at a rate in an amount to be determined
by ordinance passed by City Council from time to time for homes and $60 for commercial and industrial users inside
city limits; if the customer is located outside the city, the amount shall be determined by ordinance passed by City
Council from time to time.
('73 Code, § 20-42) (Ord., passed 11-20-78; Am. Ord., passed 8-3-81; Am. Ord., passed 4-19-82; Am. Ord., passed 4-
27-92; Am. Ord. 35-1999, passed 9-20-99)
§ 52.23 EXISTING PROVISIONS REAFFIRMED.
All existing provisions as to reading of meters, rendition of bills and payment, collection and disconnection
charges and related provisions of existing ordinances are hereby reaffirmed, re-enacted and readopted, except to the
extent that same may be inconsistent herewith.
('73 Code, § 20-32.1)
2008-S-1
Water and Sewer 17
DISCHARGE INTO SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
§ 52.30 Discharge of surface or stormwater or groundwater into the sanitary sewer system of the city is
prohibited.
As a condition of initial or continued water or sewer service by the Elizabethtown Sanitary Sewer System,
owners or occupants of premises served by the City Sanitary Sewer System shall eliminate surface/stormwater or
groundwater connections to the sanitary sewer and shall pay a surcharge in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) per
month until such time that the property owner or occupant shall allow the City to verify by inspection of the premises
that the discharge of surface/stormwater or groundwater has been eliminated.
The City shall identify the affected properties and shall adopt policies and procedures for the administration of
this ordinance including prior notification to all owners and occupants before any enforcement action or initiation of the
surcharge.
The surcharge shall be assessed against the receiver of the service, whether an occupant or an owner. If no
wastewater billings are otherwise made for the property in question, the owner shall be billed for surcharge. Failure to
timely pay the surcharge shall be cause to terminate service to the affected property.
(Ord. No. 02-2007, passed 02-20-07)
§ 52.31 Penalties
Any person violating this ordinance may be cited for a civil offense pursuant to the Code Enforcement Board
Ordinance and Fine Schedule. Each day of violation may be considered a separate occurrence. The civil fine shall be
paid directly to the City of Elizabethtown. If the fine is not paid within thirty (30) days from the date of notification,
then the City may recover said fine in a civil action in a court of proper jurisdiction. The City may also obtain
injunctions or abatement orders to insure compliance with this ordinance.
Nothing in this section shall negate the ability of the City to pursue civil penalties of up to $25,000 or to pursue
criminal penalties as prescribed by law.
The citing officer may at his or her discretion cite the offender to appear before the Code Enforcement Board.
(Ord. #9-2003).
(Ord. No. 02-2007, passed 02-20-07)
§ 52.32 Severability
If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this ordinance shall be held invalid or ineffective for any
reason, the remainder hereof shall continue in full force and effect, it being expressly hereby found and declared that
the remainder of this ordinance would have been adopted despite the invalidity of such section, paragraph, clause or
provision.
(Ord. No. 02-2007, passed 02-20-07)
2008-S-1
18 Elizabethtown - Public Utilities
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
Chapter
70. GENERAL PROVISIONS
71. TRAFFIC RULES
72. PARKING REGULATIONS
73. BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES
74. TRUCKS
75. TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
76. RESCINDED
77. OPERATION OF GOLF CARTS IN PUBLIC ROADWAYS
2018 S-1
1
2 Elizabethtown - Traffic Code
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
Generally
70.01 Definitions
70.02 Required obedience to traffic directions
70.03 Powers and duties of Police Department
70.04 Authority for enforcement
70.05 Temporary regulations
Traffic-Control Devices
70.15 Signal legends
70.16 Establishment and maintenance of traffic-control devices
70.17 Obedience to signals
70.18 Interference with signals
70.19 Unauthorized signals or markings
GENERALLY
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this title the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES. Vehicles of the Fire Department or Police Department, vehicles of
the Commonwealth Attorney's office when on official business, and ambulances on an authorized emergency run.
BUSINESS DISTRICT. Any portion of any street between two consecutive intersections in which 50% or more
of the frontage on either side of the street is used for business purposes.
CROSSWALK. That portion of the roadway included within the extension of the sidewalk across any intersection,
and such other portions of the roadway between two intersections, as may be legally designated as crossing places and
marked by stanchions, paint lines, or otherwise.
CURB. The physical boundary of the street created by a vertical barrier.
3
1995 S-1
4 Elizabethtown - Traffic Code
INTERSECTION. That part of the public way embraced within the extensions of the street lines of two or more
streets which join at an angle whether or not one such street crosses the other.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, signals, warnings, directions, markings, and devices
placed or erected or maintained by authority of the city or state.
ONE-WAY STREET. A street on which vehicles are permitted to move in one direction only.
OPERATOR. Every person who is in actual physical control of the guidance, starting, and stopping of a vehicle.
PARK. When applied to vehicles, to leave a vehicle standing, whether occupied or not, for a period of time longer
than is necessary to receive or discharge passengers or property.
PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.
POLICE DEPARTMENT. The Police Department or other persons or agency authorized to perform the duties of
§ 70.03 or any other acts necessary to implement and enforce this traffic code.
PUBLIC WAY. The entire width between property lines of every way, dedicated passway, or street set aside for
public travel, except bridle paths and foot paths.
REVERSE TURN. To turn a vehicle on any street in such a manner as to proceed in the opposite direction.
RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate and preferential use of the street.
ROADWAY. That portion of any street, improved, designated, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.
SIDEWALK. The hard surface walkway adjacent to or within the right-of-way of the street which is customarily
used by pedestrians.
STOPPING. As applied to vehicles, to stop a vehicle longer than is actually necessary to receive or discharge
passengers.
STREET. Every public way, including alleys.
TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, buses, and other conveyances, individually or
collectively, while using any street for the purpose of travel.
VEHICLE. Includes all agencies for the transportation of persons or property over or upon the public highways of
the Commonwealth and all vehicles passing over or upon the highways. MOTOR VEHICLE includes all vehicles, as
defined above except, road rollers; road graders; farm tractors; vehicles on which power shovels are mounted;
construction equipment customarily used only on the site of construction and which is not practical for the
transportation of persons or property upon the highways; vehicles that travel exclusively upon rails; vehicles propelled
by electric power obtained from overhead wires while being operated within any municipality or where the vehicles do
not travel more than five miles beyond the city limits of any municipality; and vehicles propelled by muscular power.
(KRS 189.010(19))
2001 S-4
General Provisions 5
§ 70.02 REQUIRED OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC DIRECTIONS.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order, signal, or direction given
by a uniformed police officer, or to fail or refuse to comply with any of the traffic regulations of this traffic code.
(B) The provisions of this traffic code shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned or used in the service of the
United States government, this state, county, or city, and it shall be unlawful for any such driver to violate any of the
provisions of this traffic code, except as otherwise permitted in this traffic code or by state statute.
(C) Every person propelling any pushcart or riding a bicycle or an animal on any roadway, and every person
driving any animal on any roadway, and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle shall be subject to the
provisions of this traffic code applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those provisions of this traffic code which
by their very nature can have no application.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 70.03 POWERS AND DUTIES OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.
It shall be the duty of the Police Department to direct all traffic in conformance with this traffic code and to
enforce the traffic regulations as set forth in this traffic code, to make arrest for traffic violations, to investigate
accidents, and to cooperate with other officers of the city in the administration of the traffic laws, and in developing
ways and means to improve traffic conditions.
§ 70.04 AUTHORITY FOR ENFORCEMENT.
Authority to direct and enforce all traffic regulations of this city in accordance with the provisions of this traffic
code and to make arrests for traffic violations is given to the Police Department, and, except in case of emergency, it
shall be unlawful for any other person to direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand, whistle, or any other signal.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 70.05 TEMPORARY REGULATIONS.
When required for the convenience and safety of the public and to alleviate unusual traffic problems, the Chief of
Police or other authorized city official shall, at his/her discretion, have authority to impose such traffic regulations as
he/she may deem necessary for temporary periods not to exceed two weeks. If these temporary regulations are
necessary for a period longer than two weeks, the City Clerk shall be notified in writing of the extended order.
2001 S-4
6 Elizabethtown - Traffic Code
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
§ 70.15 SIGNAL LEGENDS.
Whenever traffic is regulated or controlled exclusively by a traffic-control sign or signs exhibiting the words “Go,”
“Caution,” or “Stop,” or exhibiting different colored lights for purposes of traffic control, the following colors only
shall be used, and these terms and lights shall indicate and be obeyed as follows:
(A) Green alone or “Go”: Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left
unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. However, vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to other
vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection at the time such signal is exhibited.
(B) Steady yellow alone or “Caution” when shown following the green or “Go” signal: Vehicular traffic facing
a steady yellow signal is thereby warned that the related green movement is being terminated or that a red indication
will be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter the intersection. Vehicular traffic facing
a steady yellow signal may enter and clear the intersection.
(C) Red alone or double red or “Stop”: Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the nearest
crosswalk at an intersection or at such other point as may be indicated by a clearly visible line, and shall remain
standing until green or “Go” is shown alone.
(D) Flashing red alone: Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an
intersection or at such other point as may be indicated by a clearly visible line, and shall not again proceed until it can
do so without danger.
(E) Flashing amber alone: Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall reduce its speed and proceed cautiously
across the intersection controlled by such signal.
(F) “Yield Right-of-Way”: Vehicular traffic facing the “Yield Right-of-Way” sign shall bear the primary
responsibility of safely entering the primary intersecting or merging right-of-way. All traffic facing the sign shall yield
the right-of-way to all vehicles and pedestrians within the primary intersecting or merging right-of-way. No vehicle
facing a “Yield Right-of-Way” sign shall enter the merging or intersecting right-of-way at a speed in excess of 15 miles
per hour, except that this speed limit shall not apply to vehicles entering an expressway.
(G) Lane lights: When lane lights are installed over any street for the purpose of controlling the direction of flow
of traffic, vehicular traffic shall move only in traffic lanes over which green arrows appear. However, when flashing
amber lights appear above a lane all left turns shall be made from that lane. Where red arrows appear above the lanes,
vehicles shall not move against them. If flashing amber lights show above a lane, that lane shall be used only for
passing and for left turns unless a sign at such place prohibits the turn.
(H) Arrows: A green arrow has right of way over other traffic.
Penalty, see § 10.99
Statutory reference:
Traffic-control signals, see KRS 189.338
2001 S-4
General Provisions 7
§ 70.16 ESTABLISHMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
The city shall establish and maintain all official traffic-control devices necessary within the city on city streets. All
traffic-control devices, including signs, shall be employed to indicate one particular warning or regulation, shall be
uniform, and as far as possible shall be placed uniformly. All traffic-control devices and signs shall conform to
required state specifications.
§ 70.17 OBEDIENCE TO SIGNALS.
(A) It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to disobey the signal of any official traffic-control device
placed in accordance with the provisions of this traffic code or of a traffic barrier or sign erected by any of the public
departments or public utilities of the city, or any electric signal, gate, or watchman at railroad crossings, unless
otherwise directed by a police officer. However, the type and the right to or necessity for the barrier or sign must be
approved by the city.
(B) The sign, signal, marking, or barrier shall have the same authority as the personal direction of a police officer.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 70.18 INTERFERENCE WITH SIGNALS.
No person shall without authority attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down, or remove any official
control device or any railroad sign or signal, or any inscription, shield, or insignia thereon, or any part thereof.
Penalty see § 10.99
§ 70.19 UNAUTHORIZED SIGNALS OR MARKINGS.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to place, maintain, or display on or in view of any street any unauthorized
sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic device or
railroad sign or signal which attempts or purports to direct the movement of traffic, or which conceals or hides from
view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official control device or any railroad sign or signal. Nothing in this
section shall be construed as restricting any public department or public utility of the city in any emergency or
temporarily from marking or erecting any traffic barrier or sign whose placing has been approved by the city.
(B) Every prohibited sign, signal, or marking is declared to be a public nuisance and the city is empowered
forthwith to remove it or cause it to be removed.
Penalty, see § 10.99
2001 S-4
8 Elizabethtown - Traffic Code
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC RULES
Section
Operation Generally
71.01 Obstructing traffic
71.02 Reverse or U turns
71.03 Backing vehicles
71.04 Vehicles crossing sidewalks
71.05 Rail traffic
Parades
71.20 Definitions
71.21 Permit required
71.22 Application for permit
71.23 Standards for issuance of permit
71.24 Notice of rejection of permit
71.25 Appeal procedure when permit denied
71.26 Alternative permit
71.27 Notice to city and other officials when permit issued
71.28 Contents of permit
71.29 Duties of permittee
71.30 Public conduct during parades
71.31 Revocation of permit
OPERATION GENERALLY
§ 71.01 OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC.
(A) It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle or permit it to remain standing in any street in such manner as to
create an obstruction thereof.
(B) It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to enter any intersection or crosswalk unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle without obstructing the
passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding the indication of any traffic-control signal which may be
located at the intersection or crosswalk.
(C) Any intersection deemed by the city to be of special or critical importance to the movement of traffic shall be
marked in such distinctive manner as to indicate its importance. Should the operator of any vehicle enter any
intersection so marked when there is insufficient room on the other side of the
9
10 Elizabethtown - Traffic Code
intersection to accommodate the vehicle, the indication of any traffic-control signal notwithstanding, he/she shall be
deemed to have violated this division rather than division (B) above.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.02 RESERVED.
§ 71.03 RESERVED.
§ 71.04 VEHICLES CROSSING SIDEWALKS.
(A) It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive within any sidewalk space except at a permanent
or temporary driveway or by special permit from the Chief of Police or other authorized city official.
(B) It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive the vehicle out of any alley, driveway, building, or
lot and across a sidewalk, or its extension across the alley, unless the vehicle has been brought to a complete stop
immediately prior to crossing the sidewalk or its extension. On entering the roadway from the alley, driveway, or
building the operator shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway. The operator of any
vehicle intending to cross a sidewalk and turn into an alley from the roadway may do so at low speed and with caution.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.05 RAIL TRAFFIC.
No rail, train or other traffic may travel at a speed greater than 40 miles per hour through the city.
('73 Code, § 19-18) (Ord., passed 5-20-85) Penalty, see § 10.99
PARADES
§ 71.20 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
1995 S-1 Repl.
Traffic Rules 11
PARADE. Any march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant, or procession of any kind, or any similar display, in
or upon any street, sidewalk, park or other public place in the city.
PARADE PERMIT. Written authority from the city for a parade, as required in this subchapter.
('73 Code, § 19-80) (Ord., passed 8-21-67)
§ 71.21 PERMIT REQUIRED.
(A) No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form, or start any parade unless a parade permit has been
obtained from the Chief of Police.
(B) This subchapter shall not apply to:
(1) Funeral processions;
(2) Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, providing the
conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities;
(3) A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
('73 Code, § 19-81) (Ord., passed 8-21-67) Penalty, see § 10.99 .
(C) In addition, the permittee is required to obtain any state department of transportation permit for state
maintained highways as required by state law.
§ 71.22 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with the Chief of Police on forms provided
by such officer.
(A) Filing period. The application for a parade permit shall be filed with the Chief of Police not less than five
days nor more than 20 days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade.
(B) The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information:
(1) The name, address, and telephone number of the person (or persons) seeking to conduct the parade;
(2) If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address, and
telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and of the authorized and responsible heads of the
organization;
(3) The name, address, and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairperson and who will
be responsible for its conduct;
(4) The date when the parade is to be conducted;
(5) The route to be traveled, the starting point, and the termination point;
1995 S-2 Repl.
12 Elizabethtown - Traffic Code
(6) The approximate number of persons, animals, and vehicles which will constitute the parade, the type of
animals, if any, and the description of the vehicles;
(7) The hours when the parade will start and terminate;
(8) A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets,
sidewalks, parks, or other public places proposed to be traversed;
(9) The location by streets of any assembly area for the parade;
(10) The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any assembly area or areas;
(11) The interval of space to be maintained between units of the parade;
(12) If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for, any person other than the applicant, the
applicant for the permit shall file a communication in writing from the person authorizing the applicant to apply for the
permit on his/her behalf;
(13) Any additional information which the Chief of Police shall find reasonably necessary to a fair
determination as to whether a permit should issue.
('73 Code, § 19-82) (Ord., passed 8-21-67) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.23 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
The Chief of Police or other authorized city official shall issue a parade permit when, from a consideration of the
application and from other information obtained, he/she finds that:
(A) The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic
contiguous to its route;
(B) The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to
properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the city;
(C) The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent
normal ambulance service to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas
contiguous thereto;
(D) The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere
with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to the assembly areas;
(E) The conduct of the parade will not interfere with the movement of fire fighting equipment enroute to a fire;
(F) The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without
unreasonable delays enroute;
Traffic Rules 13
(G) The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product, goods, or event, and is not
designated to be held purely for private profit.
('73 Code, § 19-83) (Ord., passed 8-21-67) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.24 NOTICE OF REJECTION OF PERMIT.
The Chief of Police shall act on the application for a parade permit within three days after the filing thereof. If the
Chief of Police disapproves the application, he/she shall mail to the applicant within three days after the date on which
the application was filed, a notice of his/her action stating the reasons for the denial of the permit.
('73 Code, § 19-84) (Ord., passed 8-21-67)
§ 71.25 APPEAL PROCEDURE WHEN PERMIT DENIED.
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade permit to the City Council. The appeal
shall be taken within ten days after notice of denial. The City Council shall act on the appeal within 20 days after its
receipt.
('73 Code, § 19-85) (Ord., passed 8-21-67)
§ 71.26 ALTERNATIVE PERMIT.
The Chief of Police, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of
the parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different than that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to
accept an alternate permit shall, within three days after notice of the action of the Chief of Police, file a written notice of
the acceptance with the Chief of Police. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall
have the effect of, a parade permit under this subchapter.
('73 Code, § 19-86) (Ord., passed 8-21-67)
§ 71.27 NOTICE TO CITY AND OTHER OFFICIALS WHEN PERMIT ISSUED.
Immediately on the issuance of a parade permit, the Chief of Police shall send a copy thereof to the following:
(A) The Mayor;
(B) The County Attorney;
(C) The Fire Chief.
(D) Department of Transportation.
('73 Code, § 19-87) (Ord., passed 8-21-67)
14 Elizabethtown - Traffic Code
§ 71.28 CONTENTS OF PERMIT.
Each parade permit shall state the following information:
(A) Starting time;
(B) Minimum speed;
(C) Maximum speed;
(D) Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade;
(E) The portions of the streets, sidewalks, parks, or other public places to be traversed that may be occupied by
the parade;
(F) The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof;
(G) Such other information as the Chief of Police shall find necessary to the enforcement of this subchapter.
('73 Code, § 19-88) (Ord., passed 8-21-67) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.29 DUTIES OF PERMITTEE.
A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and
ordinances. The parade chairperson or other person heading or leading the activity shall carry the parade permit on
his/her person during the conduct of the parade.
('73 Code, § 19-89) (Ord., passed 8-21-67) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.30 PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING PARADES.
(A) Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede, or interfere with any parade or parade
assembly or with any person, vehicle, or animal participating or used in a parade.
(B) Driving through parades. No driver of a vehicle except a police car or other emergency vehicle shall drive
between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are
conspicuously designated as a parade.
('73 Code, § 19-90(a), (b)) (Ord., passed 8-21-67)
Cross-reference:
Parking on parade routes, see § 72.07
§ 71.31 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
The Chief of Police shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued hereunder on application of the
standards for issuance as herein set forth.
('73 Code, § 19-91) (Ord., passed 8-21-67)
CHAPTER 72: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
Parking Generally
72.01 Obstructional parking; double parking
72.02 Manner of parking
72.03 Limitations of stopping and parking
72.04 Restrictions and prohibitions on designated streets
72.05 Parking restricted to allow street cleaning
72.06 Parking in excess of certain number of hours prohibited; towing authorized
72.07 Parking on parade route
72.08 Parking on off-street facility
72.09 Owner responsibility
72.10 Parking in parks
72.11 Parking restrictions on Public Square; on long vehicles
72.12 Fire lanes
Snow Emergency
72.25 Announcement of snow emergency
72.26 Termination of emergency
72.27 Snow emergency routes
Metered Parking
72.50 Parking meter zone
72.51 Duty of operator of vehicle to deposit coins in meter; remaining longer than allotted time prohibited
72.52 Deposit of slugs; tampering with meter; hitching animal to meter prohibited
72.53 Hours of operation
72.54 Enforcement; citation
72.55 Reserved
72.56 Parking violations
72.57 Use of funds from parking meters
Parking Prohibited
72.70 Loading and unloading zones
72.71 Parking prohibited
72.99 Penalty
Statutory reference:
Revenues from fees, fines, and forfeitures related to parking,
see KRS 65.120
15
1995 –S-1
16 Elizabethtown - Traffic Code
PARKING GENERALLY
§ 72.01 OBSTRUCTIONAL PARKING; DOUBLE PARKING.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any vehicle or any other thing that may be a nuisance, obstruction,
or hindrance in or on any street, alley, or sidewalk within the city either during the day or night.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to stop or park any vehicle on the roadway side of any other vehicle
stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street.
Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.02 MANNER OF PARKING.
(A) It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop or park the vehicle in a manner other than with its
right-hand side toward and parallel with the curb, except that where parking is permitted on the left side of a one-way
street, the left-hand side shall be so parked, and except for commercial loading and unloading on one-way streets.
(B) No vehicle shall be parked or left standing on any street unless its two right wheels are within six inches of
and parallel with the curb, except that on one-way streets where parking is permitted on the left side the two left wheels
are to be within six inches of and parallel with the curb.
(C) The city may establish diagonal parking at certain places, requiring the parking of vehicles at a certain angle
to the curb and within a certain portion of the roadway adjacent thereto. However, diagonal parking shall not be
established where the roadway space required therefor would be within ten feet of the centerline of any street.
Diagonal parking places shall be designated by suitable signs, and shall indicate by markings on the pavement the
required angle and the width of the roadway space within which the vehicle shall park.
(D) It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to so park the vehicle so that any part thereof shall extend
beyond the lines marking the side or the rear of the space assigned for one vehicle.
Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.03 LIMITATIONS OF STOPPING AND PARKING.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop or park the vehicle except in a case of real emergency or
in compliance with the provisions of this traffic code or when directed by a police officer or traffic sign or signal at any
time in the following places:
(A) On the mainly-traveled portion of any roadway or on any other place in the roadway where vehicles stand in
any manner other than as specified in § 72.02.
(B) On a sidewalk.
(C) In front of sidewalk ramps provided for persons with disabilities.
1995 S-1
Parking Regulations 17
(D) In front of a public or private driveway.
(E) Within an intersection or crosswalk, or within 25 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way line with the
intersection of any other street, road or public way. ('73 Code, § 19-38(a)) (Ord., passed 8-20-79)
(F) At any place where official signs prohibit stopping or parking. This does not apply to police officers when
operating properly identified vehicles during the performance of their official duties.
(G) Within 30 feet of any flashing beacon, traffic sign, or traffic-control device.
(KRS 189.450(5))
(H) On a public street or city-owned lot upon which is placed a parking violation notice bearing the license
number of the vehicle, where the violation notice has been altered or changed or bears a date different from the date the
vehicle is parked.
(I) On the public square or in any city-owned parking lot when the vehicle is backed into the designated space.
(J) On any public street or city-owned parking lot which is so parked as to block a parking space other than that
in which the vehicle is parked.
(K) On a public street or city-owned lot where parking is prohibited and the prohibition is so designated by
appropriate signs or markings.
(L) On the wrong side of a public street.
(M) So as to block any public street, alley, sidewalk or way.
(N) In front of any United States drive-by mail box or depository.
(O) In front of, or so as to block any fire hydrant.
(P) On any public street, way or thoroughfare in a zone where parking is allowed only for an allotted period of
time and so designated, where the vehicle remains parked for more than the allotted time.
(Q) In a private driveway or upon a public street so as to block a private driveway without the consent of the
owner or person in control of the driveway.
(R) In a private lot or space provided by any person for his/her own use or the use of the tenants or customers,
provided the lot or space is property designated by appropriate signs, where the operator of the vehicle is not a customer
or does not have the consent of the owner or person in charge the lot or space, and provided further that in the case of
reserved spaces in private lots that the person so parking does not have the consent of the person for whom the space is
reserved and so marked and designated. The blocking of a private lot or designated space therein shall be deemed
illegal parking.
(S) On a public street or city-owned lot, at a parking space that is reserved for any individual, department, firm or
corporation and so marked and designated by the city.
(T) At any place in violation of any other ordinance of the city which is in effect.
('73 Code, § 19-26) (Ord., passed 3-7-60) (Am. Ord. No. 13-2012, passed 06-16-12)
2013-S-1
18 Elizabethtown - Traffic Code
§ 72.04 RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS ON DESIGNATED STREETS.
(A) The provisions of this section prohibiting the stopping and parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at
those times herein specified or as indicated on official signs except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control devices.
(B) The provisions of this section imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to
observe other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping or parking of vehicles in specific
places or at specified times.
(C) When signs are erected in compliance with the provisions of division (F) below giving notice thereof, no
person shall park a vehicle at any time on any street so marked by official signs.
(D) When a curb has been painted yellow in compliance with the provisions of division (F) below, no person shall
park a vehicle at any time at or adjacent to any curb so marked.
(E) When signs are erected in compliance with the provisions of division (F) below, in each block giving notice
thereof, no person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified by official signs on any day on any street so
marked.
(F) (1) The city shall determine on what streets or portions thereof stopping or parking shall be restricted or
prohibited. Whenever under authority of or by this traffic code as provided in schedule III or any other ordinance any
parking limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets, or parking areas are restricted to handicapped
parking, appropriate signs shall be erected giving notice thereof. However, in lieu of erecting such signs or in
conjunction therewith, the face and top of a curb or curbs at or adjacent to which parking is prohibited at all times may
be painted a solid yellow color.
(2) No regulations or restrictions shall be effective unless the signs have been erected and are in place or the
curbs are painted yellow at the time of any alleged offense, except in the case of those parking restrictions which by
their very nature would not require such signs and markings.
(G) When signs are erected in compliance with division (F) above in each block giving notice thereof, no person
shall park a vehicle for a time longer than specified on official signs any day and on any street so marked.
Penalty, see § 72.99
2013-S-1
Parking Regulations 19
§ 72.05 PARKING RESTRICTED TO ALLOW STREET CLEANING.
The city is authorized to designate street cleaning areas and shall provide suitable signs and markings on the street
to be cleaned, restricting parking on that particular day. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop on
any street so designated.
Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.06 PARKING IN EXCESS OF CERTAIN NUMBER OF HOURS PROHIBITED; TOWING
AUTHORIZED.
Any vehicle left parked and abandoned in any one place on any of the public ways or streets of the city for a period
of 24 hours or longer shall be deemed abandoned, and shall be subject to all existing regulations of the city pertaining
to abandoned motor vehicles.
Penalty, see § 72.99
Cross-reference:
Removal of abandoned vehicles, see § 72.25 et seq.
§ 72.07 PARKING ON PARADE ROUTE.
The Chief of Police shall have the authority, whenever reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of
vehicles along a street, or other public thoroughfare, or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. The
Chief of Police shall post signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any
vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street, or other public thoroughfare unposed in
violation of this section.
Penalty, see § 72.99
Cross-reference:
Parades, see §§ 71.20 through 71.31
§ 72.08 PARKING ON OFF-STREET FACILITY.
(A) It shall be unlawful for the driver of a motor vehicle to park or abandon the vehicle or drive on or otherwise
trespass on another's property, or on an area developed as an off-street parking facility, without the consent of the
owner, lessee, or person in charge of property or facility.
(B) If at any time a vehicle is parked, abandoned, or otherwise trespass in violation of division (A) of this section,
the owner, lessee, or person in charge of the property or facility may have the unauthorized motor vehicle removed in
accordance with the provisions of §§ 72.20 through 72.22.
(C) Every property owner or operator of an off-street parking facility shall post signs stating thereon that the
property or parking lot or facility is privately owned and that unauthorized vehicle will be removed at the owner's
expense before exercising the authority granted in division (B).
Penalty, see § 72.99
Statutory reference:
Removal of vehicles by owners of private parking lots; signs, see KRS 189.725
1995 S-1
20 Elizabethtown - Traffic Code
§ 72.09 OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.
If any vehicle is found illegally parked in violation of any provisions of this subchapter regulating stopping,
standing, or parking of vehicles, and the identity of the driver cannot be determined, the owner or person in whose
name the vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie responsible for the violation.
Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.10 PARKING IN PARKS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle in or on any section of any public park, playground,
play lot, or tot lot within the city not designed as a parking area or designed and regularly maintained as a roadway.
However, nothing contained in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the parking of a motor vehicle parallel to a
designated and regularly maintained roadway in any park or playground where at least two wheels of the motor vehicle
are resting on the roadway.
Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.11 PARKING RESTRICTIONS ON PUBLIC SQUARE; ON LONG VEHICLES.
(A) Motor vehicles not exceeding 18 feet in length may be parked at the outer curb of the Public Square and not
exceeding 18 feet therefrom between lines drawn.
(B) Motor vehicles more than 18 feet in length may be parked on side streets other than federal or state highways.
For unloading only, trucks may be parked between lines designated in division (A) above.
(C) On all other streets and public ways, except as prohibited or limited by this section, any automobile, truck or
other vehicle may be parked parallel with the right curb and not extending more than eight feet therefrom.
('73 Code, § 19-35) (Ord., passed 6-3-46; Am. Ord., passed 6-16-80; Am. Ord., passed 10-19-81)
Cross-reference:
Trucks, see Ch. 74
§ 72.12 FIRE LANES.
(A) Pursuant to the Kentucky Standards of Safety, adopted by the city pursuant to KRS 227.320 and other
applicable statutes, that the Fire Chief, being a Deputy State Fire Marshal is hereby authorized to establish and set up
“fire lanes” within the city. The Fire Chief shall designate the “fire lanes” by an order signed by him, directed to the
owner and/or occupant of any “fire lane” and premises adjacent to the fire lane in the city. The Fire Chief may erect
appropriate signs designating the fire lanes at his/her discretion.
(B) The Fire Chief shall cause the “fire lanes” to be observed and kept open, pursuant to the Kentucky Standards
of Safety and any person, organization, or firm parking any motor or other vehicle or other obstruction in any “fire
lane,” so designated, as set out in division (A) above shall have the motor or other vehicle or other obstruction subject
to immediate removal by any member of the Fire or
1995 S-1 Repl.
Parking Regulations 21
Police Department or any other law enforcement officer of the state. The violator will be responsible for any bill or
expense incurred to remove the obstruction from the “fire lane.”
('73 Code, § 19-36) (Ord., passed 12-3-73) Penalty, see § 72.99
SNOW EMERGENCY
§ 72.25 ANNOUNCEMENT OF SNOW EMERGENCY.
Whenever the Chief of Police or other authorized city official finds that falling snow, sleet, or freezing rain will
create a condition which makes it necessary that the parking of motor vehicles on snow emergency routes be prohibited,
or whenever he/she finds on the basis of a firm forecast of snow, sleet, or freezing rain that the weather conditions so
forecasted may create a condition making it necessary that such parking be prohibited, he/she is authorized to announce
such prohibition, to become effective at a time specified by him. After the effective time of such prohibition no person
shall park any vehicle or permit any vehicle to remain parked on a snow emergency route. However, if a fall of snow,
sleet, or freezing rain occurs after 11:00 p.m. and prior to 6:00 a.m., and the Chief of Police or other authorized city
official has not announced prior to 11:00 p.m. that parking on snow emergency routes is to be prohibited after a
specified time, a vehicle parked on a snow emergency route may remain so parked until 7:00 a.m. following such fall.
The prohibition of parking announced by the Chief of Police or other authorized city official under the authority of this
section shall remain in effect until he/she announces the termination of the snow emergency, in part or in which the
prohibition of parking authorized by this section shall no longer be in effect.
Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.26 TERMINATION OF EMERGENCY.
Whenever the Chief of Police or other authorized city official shall find that some or all of the conditions which
gave rise to the snow emergency prohibition no longer exist, he/she is authorized to declare the termination of the
emergency, in part or in whole, effective immediately on announcement. If such announcement is made other than
between 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., it shall be repeated between those hours.
§ 72.27 SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES.
The term SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTE shall mean any route designated by the Chief of Police or other
authorized city official. On such street or highway designated as a snow emergency route, special signs shall be posted
to this effect.
22 Elizabethtown - Traffic Code
RESTRICTED PARKING
§ 72.50 RESTRICTED PARKING.
(A) For the convenience and welfare of the public and an economical and orderly regulation of parking
automobiles and other vehicles in the city, it is determined and ordained by the city that parking will be restricted as
follows:
(1) For one (1) hour parking:
a. Public Square
b. North side of North Main Street from US Highway 31-W to Plum Alley
c. Both sides of South Main Street from US Highway 31-W to Helm Street and North side of South
Main Street from Helm Street 150 feet West
(2) For two (2) hour parking:
a. South side of West Poplar Street from North Main Street to Cherry Alley
b. South side of East Poplar Street from North Main Street to Central Avenue
(B) The Department of Public Works is authorized and directed to install parking signs on the curbs and medians
of said streets and in parking lots. Motor vehicles may be parked within the lines marking each marked space, but not
across any of said lines.
('73 Code, § 19-46) (Ord., passed 12-2-46; Am. Ord., passed 2-20-56; Am. Ord., passed 6-4-56; Am. Ord 3, passed 1-
3-94) (Am Ord. No. 13-2012, passed 07-16-12)
2013-S-1
Parking Regulations 23
§ 72.51 RESERVED.
('73 Code, § 19-49) (Ord., passed 12-2-46; Am. Ord 3, passed 1-3-94) (Am. Ord. No. 13-2012, passed 07-16-12)
§ 72.52 RESERVED.
('73 Code, § 19-50) (Ord., passed 12-2-46; Am. Ord 3, passed 1-3-94) (Am. Ord. No. 13-2012, passed 07-16-12)
§ 72.53 HOURS OF OPERATION.
Restricted parking for all regularly indicated spaces shall be effective daily from 8:00 a.m. until 4:00 p.m.
Elizabethtown time, except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays (New Year’s Day, Birthday of Martin Luther King, Jr.,
Washington’s Birthday, Memorial Day, 4th of July, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veteran’s Day, Thanksgiving Day and
Christmas Day.
('73 Code, § 19-51) (Ord., passed 3-6-72; Am. Ord., passed 10-1-73; Am. Ord., passed 6-16-80; Am. Ord 3, passed 1-
3-94) (Am. Ord. No. 13-2012, passed 07-16-12)
§ 72.54 ENFORCEMENT; CITATION.
It shall be the duty of the Police Department to make periodic inspections of restricted parking and to give citations
for each violation of parking regulations. The date and hour of the violation, the make and state license number of the
vehicle and other facts necessary to an understanding of the circumstances concerning the violation shall be on the
citation. A copy of the citation shall be attached to the vehicle instructing the owner or operator as to the procedure for
answering the citation.
('73 Code, § 19-52) (Ord., passed 9-20-54; Am. Ord., passed 6-19-67; Am. Ord 3, passed 1-3-94) (Am. Ord. No. 13-
2012, passed 07-16-12)
§ 72.55 RESERVED.
2013-S-1
24 Elizabethtown - Traffic Code
§ 72.56 PARKING VIOLATIONS.
(A) From and after the passage, approval and publication of this ordinance, the city hereby elects to enforce
vehicle parking ordinances and laws as civil violations pursuant to the provisions of KRS 82-600 - 82-640.
(B) Parking spaces maintained by the City both off and on street shall NOT be metered.
(C) There is imposed a 1 hour time limitation for parking on the Public Square and for designated parking on
North Main Street, South Main Street. A 2 hour time limitation for park is imposed for designated parking on East
Poplar Street and West Poplar Street.
(D) In the event there is a violation of the parking time allotted, then the following fines shall be levied for said
violation:
(1) A fine shall be levied for overtime parking on the Public Square, North Main Street and South Main
Street spaces of $10.00 for the initial violation and one dollar per hour thereafter. For every repeat offender, the fine
will be increased by increment of $10.00 per violation.
(2) A fine shall be levied for overtime parking on East and West Poplar Street of $5.00 for the initial
violation and one dollar per hour thereafter. For every repeat offender, the fine will be increased by increment of $5.00
per violation.
Any person, firm or corporation may appeal any fine hereinafter levied to the Elizabethtown Code
Enforcement Board by notification of the Code Enforcement Official in writing of the Appeal, not more than seven (7)
days after the date of the violation. The provisions concerning the hearing process and determination by the Code
Enforcement Board shall be as set out in Ordinance No. 09-2003 as adopted on April 21, 2003.
(E) The parking ordinance shall mean an ordinance regulating vehicles parking, standing, or stopping upon public
streets or ways within the city, including but not limited to all city parking lots.
(1) The Parking Enforcement Hearing Board shall mean the Code Enforcement Board as enacted by
Ordinance No. 09-2003.
(2) Vehicle shall mean motorized, horse-drawn or other means of carrying or transporting something.
(3) All violations shall be classified as either a “Minor Violation” or a “Major Violation”.
(4) Major Violation shall include the blocking of any public street, private lot or space, intersection, public
or private entrance to a parking space or driveway, parking within 25 feet of any corner or intersection and parking in a
fire lane or within 10 feet of any fire hydrant and failure of registered owner to pay a minor or major violation within 20
days after it is issued. It shall include parking on a public sidewalk if the same results in a hazardous condition. Minor
Violation shall include but not be limited to: overtime parking on all restricted spaces, parking in a prohibited or
restricted zone, parking on a public sidewalk, parking on the left hand side of a street on which 2-way traffic is
permitted, parking backed into a space, not parking within designated lines at a parking space and parking within 10
feet of the U.S. Mail Box during pick up and delivery hours.
2013-S-1
Parking Regulations 25
(5) The registered owner shall be liable and responsible for paying all violations for fees, fines, and charges.
(6) Any vehicle found in violation of Major Violation may be towed, pursuant to KRS 82.625.
(7) Fines and punishment for violations under this ordinance and fees for towing, handling, and storage
charges shall be set out in § 72.99.
(8) The impoundment and towing provisions of KRS 82.625 are hereby adopted. The city may in the
enforcement use a wheel immobilizer instead of actually towing the vehicle if available.
(Ord. 34, passed 10-21-91; Am. Ord. 26, passed 11-1-93; Am. Ord 3, passed 1-3-94; Am. Ord. 23-2003, passed 08-18-
03) (Am. Ord. No. 13-2012, passed 07-16-12)
PARKING PROHIBITED
§ 72.70 LOADING AND UNLOADING ZONES.
The following is designated as loading and unloading zones only; parking, except for loading and unloading, is
prohibited.
Street
Location
Ord. No.
Date Passed
Strawberry Alley
From South Main Street to
Quince Alley
—
3-18-74
('73 Code, § 19-15) Penalty, see § 72.99
2013-S-1
26 Elizabethtown - Traffic Code
§ 72.71 PARKING PROHIBITED.
All parking and stopping of any motor vehicle, trailer or any kind of vehicle or structure shall be prohibited on the
following streets.
Street Side Location Ord. No. Date Passed
Alley between 228–212
S. Main
West S. Main St. to Hardin
County Jail
32 12-19-94
Amandajo Drive Both The full length 05-2003 02-18-03
Brighton Court Both The full length 01-2016 01-04-16
Cedar Branch Road Both The full length 05-2012 03-05-12
Central Avenue North From US Highway 31 W
to Poplar St.
2 1-3-94
Charleston Way Both The full length 01-2016 01-04-16
College Street Road South From South Mulberry to
a point perpendicular to
the center line of Terry
Court
2 ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? 4
College Street Road North From South Mulberry to
South Miles St.
2 1-3-94
College Street Road Right-of-way From US Highway 31 W
By-Pass to US Highway
62 West for the entire
length of College Street
Rd
2 1-3-94
Commerce Drive Both From North Mulberry
Street to Executive Drive
32 12-19-94
Cottrell Drive South Entire length 06-2013 04-15-13
Cumberland Court Both Entire length & cul-desac
22-2014 10-20-14
Dixon Avenue South The full length —; 36; 10; 8; 2 7-1-85; 11-7-88; 3-6-
89; 3-5-90; 1-3-94
East Poplar Street (two
hours parking limit)
South Between North Main St.
& Central Ave.
10-2005 04-18-05
Emerson Drive Both The full length 01-2016 01-04-16
Evergreen Garden Both The full length 05-2012 03-05-12
Evergreen Trail Both The full length 36-2007
05-2012
11-5-07; 3-5-12
Executive Drive Both The full length 32 12-19-94
Flora Court The full length 22-2003 08-04-2003
Franklin Avenue South The full length —; 36; 10; 8; 2 7-1-85; 11-7-88; 3-6-
89; 3-5-90; 1-3-94
Gates Road Both From Peters Dr. west
455 feet
—; 36; 10; 8; 2 7-1-85; 11-7-88; 3-6-
89; 3-5-90; 1-3-94
Grapevine Court Both The full length 05-2012 03-05-12
Haycraft Street South From US Highway 31 to
Moon Street
—; 36; 10; 8 7-1-85; 11-7-88; 3-6-
89; 3-5-90
Heartland Drive Both The full length 1 1-6-97
2018-S-1
Parking Regulations 27
Street Side Location Ord. No. Date Passed
Helm Street Both From South Main St. to
South Mulberry
2 1-3-94
Helm Street
North From South Mulberry
500 feet northwestwardly
2 1-3-94
Henry Street North From Poplar St.
eastwardly 300 feet
2 1-3-94
Henry Street North From West Warfield St.
to Beech St.
2 1-3-94
Hickory Lane Both From Gates Road to
Charlamagne
32 12-19-94
Hopewell Court Both The full length 01-2016 01-04-16
Huckaberry Street Both The full length 01-2016 01-04-16
Iqbal Drive Both The full length &
cul-de-sac
08-2017 06-19-17
Ivy Point Drive Both Intersection of
Stoneybrook Drive to culde-
sac
05-2012 03-05-12
Keystone Court Both The full length 05-2012 03-05-12
Lakeview Drive Both The full length 2 1-3-94
Lincoln Avenue Both The full length 01-2016 01-04-16
Low Country Court Both The full length 01-2016 01-04-16
Magnet Drive Right-of-way The full length 2 1-3-94
Mercer Street Both 300 feet from the
intersection with
Woodland Drive
30 09-07-99
Morningside Drive North From 430 west of
Springdale Drive to 340
feet east of Springdale
Drive
—; 36; 10; 8; 2 7-1-85; 11-7-88; 3-6-
89; 3-5-90; 1-3-94
Morningside Drive South
(Mon. – Fri.)
(6 a.m. – 4 p.m.)
From 430 feet west of
Springdale Dr. to Hagan
Ave.
2 1-3-94
Nicholas Street Both US62 Intersection to 951
Nicholas Street
05-2012 03-05-12
North Black Branch
Road
Right-of-way Between Leitchfield Rd.
(US 62) & Ring Rd.
13-2007 04-02-07
North Main Street Southeast From US Highway 31 W
to Williams St.
2 1-3-94
North Main Street North From Plum Alley to
Poplar St.
2 1-3-94
Northcrest Drive Both The full length 05-2012 03-05-12
Peterson Drive Both The full length —; 36; 10; 8; 2 7-1-85; 11-7-88; 3-6-
89; 3-5-90; 1-3-94
Poplar Drive South From US Highway 31 W
eastwardly 130 feet
2 1-3-94
Poplar Drive North From US Highway 31 W
to Poplar St.
2 1-3-94
Poplar Street North From Central Ave. to
North Mantle Ave.
2 1-3-94
Poplar Street Both From North Mantle Ave.
to the Helmwood
Shopping Center property
2 1-3-94
Poplar Street West From N. Miles St to
Poplar Drive
05-2006 02-21-06
2018-S-1
28 Elizabethtown – Traffic Code
Street Side Location Ord. No. Date Passed
Radford Court Both The full length 01-2016 01-04-16
Richmond Court Both The full length 01-2016 01-04-16
Riley Court Both The full length 01-2016 01-04-16
Rippling Brook Ct. Both The full length 05-2012 03-05-12
Robinbrooke Blvd. Both The full length 05-2012 03-05-12
Routt Drive South West of Candice Lane 06-2013 04-15-13
Ruby Drive Both The full length 05-2003 02-18-03
Sandy Circle Both The full length 01-2016 01-04-16
South Mantle Northwest Pennsylvania West to its
terminus
25 9-18-95
Sycamore Street
Both From US Highway 31 W
to Poplar
2 1-3-94
Tallyho Way Both The full length 05-2005 03-05-12
University Drive Right-of-way The full length 2 1-3-94
Veterans Way Both The full length 13-2004 7-19-04
Warfield Street South From North Mulberry to
Churchill Court
2 1-3-94
Waterside Drive Both The full length 01-2016 01-04-16
West Park Road Both The full length 2; 05-2012 1-3-94; 03-05-12
Winding Creek Ct. Both The full length 01-2016 01-04-16
('73 Code, § 19-39) (Ord 2, passed 1-3-94; Am. Ord. 32-1994, passed 12-19-94) (Ord. 13-2004, passed 7-19-04) (Am.
Ord. No. 05-2012, passed 03-05-12) (Am. Ord. 06-2013, passed 04-15-13) (Am. Ord. 22-2014, passed 10-20-14)
(Am. Ord. 01-2016, passed 01-04-16) (Am. Ord. 08-2017, passed 06-19-17)
Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.72 TEMPORARY RESTRICTIONS; DUTIES OF CITY ENGINEER; SPECIAL EVENT
RESTRICTIONS.
(A) It shall be the duty of the City Engineer to from time-to-time check the prohibited or restricted areas and to
promulgate rules of a temporary nature which shall cause restrictions and prohibitions of parking and stopping on
various streets and intersections not inconsistent with the terms of this subchapter.
(B) The order shall be dated and signed by the City Engineer. He/she shall cause traffic signs to be erected in all
such places, if an emergency exists requiring the rules and signs to be erected. The original of these rules shall be kept
in the Office of the City Clerk.
(C) These rules shall have the force and effect of law and violations thereof shall be punished as hereinabove
restricted and prohibited by the City Council. Due considerations shall be given by the City Engineer at intersections
where prohibition or restrictions are appropriate for visibility and safety purposes.
(D) The Police Department shall designate and cause to be properly signed all restricted parking for special
events. These special designated restrictions shall have the force and effect of law and violations thereof shall be
punished as hereinabove restricted and prohibited by the City Council.
(Am. Ord. No. 13-2012, passed 07-16-12)
2018-S-1
Parking Regulations 29
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
(A) There is hereby levied the following fines for the following violations of the provisions of this chapter:
(B)
Type of Violation Penalty
Overtime parking on Public Square, North Main Street or South Main
Street
$ 10
Overtime parking on East & West Poplar Drive 5
Double parking or blocking parking by others 5
Parking within ten feet of any fire hydrant or in the area marked adjacent
to the fire hydrant
5
Parking in a prohibited zone or parking partially in more than one
parking space
5
Parking in a manner so that vehicle is backed into the designated space 5
Parking in parking space reserved and marked for handicapped parking
by persons nonhandicapped
25
All other first offense minor violations 5
Subsequent violations within one year of 1st violation 10
All first offense major violations 10
All subsequent violations within one year of 1st violation 15
All major violations may be impounded and towed or immobilized with
the following towing fees
As set by EPD
Tow Operator
Policy & Contract
Storage charges for each impounded vehicle As set by EPD
Tow Operator
Policy & Contract
('73 Code, § 19-27) (Ord., passed 6-16-80) (Am. Ord. No. 13-2012, passed 07-16-12)
(B) Any person receiving a citation for any parking violation in the city for which no other penalty is specifically
provided shall be deemed guilty of a violation and shall be fined in an amount not less than $20 nor more than $100.
(KRS 189.990(1))
The enforcing agency, department or individual may choose to seek enforcement through the Code Enforcement
Board enacted on the 30th day of April, 2003, by Ordinance No. 09-2003.
All appeals of any citations issued for parking violations under this Section shall be taken before the Code
Enforcement Board.
The Code Enforcement Board is designated as the hearing board required to be established by the City pursuant to
KRS 82.600. The Code Enforcement Board is empowered to conduct hearings pursuant to KRS 82.605 through
82.640. The procedure for the appeal shall be governed by KRS 82.620.
(Ord. 19-2003, passed 06-23-2003)
2018-S-1
30 Elizabethtown - Traffic Code
CHAPTER 73: BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES
Section
73.01 Bicycle facilities plan adopted
73.02 Operation of bicycles, motorcycles, and the like
73.03 Skating and coasting
73.04 Clinging to vehicles
Cross-reference:
Required obedience to traffic directions, see § 70.02(C)
§ 73.01 BICYCLE FACILITIES PLAN ADOPTED.
The “Elizabethtown Bicycle Facilities Plan” dated June, 1980, is approved by the city and adopted by reference as
set out in the document attached to Ord., passed 12-22-80 and designated Exhibit “A”.
('73 Code, § 19-17) (Ord., passed 12-22-80)
§ 73.02 OPERATION OF BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES, AND THE LIKE.
(A) No person shall operate a bicycle on any section of a public park, playground, play lot, or tot lot, except on a
roadway or in a parking area.
(B) No operator of any motorcycle, motorscooter, or power-driven bicycle shall carry another person except on a
seat attached thereto or in a side car attached to the vehicle.
(C) No operator of a motorcycle, motorscooter, or power-driven bicycle shall operate the vehicle in any public
park, except on a roadway or in a parking area.
(D) No operator of a motorcycle, motorscooter, or power-driven bicycle shall operate the vehicle in any play lot or
tot lot.
(E) It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle, motorcycle, motorbike, motor scooter or motor car, on the
sidewalks.
('73 Code, § 19-13) (Ord., passed 8-17-59) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 73.03 SKATING AND COASTING.
Except on streets which may be declared from time to time as “play streets” by the city and protected by barriers or
official signs, it shall be unlawful for any person on skates, blades, boards, or riding on a coaster sled or toy vehicle of
any kind, to go on any roadway except at a crosswalk.
Penalty, see § 10.99
31
32 Elizabethtown - Traffic Code
§ 73.04 CLINGING TO VEHICLES.
(A) No person while riding on a bicycle, coaster sled, roller skates, blades, or boards, or any toy vehicle shall
cling to any moving vehicle on any street, or fasten or attach the vehicle on which he/she is riding thereto.
(B) No person shall ride on the projection, running board, or fenders of any vehicle.
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 74: TRUCKS
Section
74.01 Truck weight limit
74.02 Weighing of vehicle
74.03 Parking of trucks; time limit
74.04 Truck route designations
74.05 Truck traffic prohibited
§ 74.01 TRUCK WEIGHT LIMIT.
It shall be unlawful for any person to require or knowingly permit, the operation upon the streets of any motor
truck, semi-trailer truck, or trailer which exceeds 18,000 pounds gross weight per single axle, or 44,000 pounds for
vehicle and load.
('73 Code, § 19-9) (Ord., passed 4-7-52) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 74.02 WEIGHING OF VEHICLE.
Any peace officer having reason to believe that the weight of any motor truck, semi-trailer truck, or trailer, is in
excess of the maximum weight prescribed herein, or permitted by any special permit issued under the provisions of
KRS 189.270, may weigh it either by portable or stationary scales and may require it to be driven to the nearest scales.
('73 Code, § 19-10) (Ord., passed 4-7-52)
§ 74.03 PARKING OF TRUCKS; TIME LIMIT.
(A) It shall be unlawful for anyone to park trucks, which trucks are longer than 20 feet, on the streets overnight,
except in case of breakdown or other emergency. ('73 Code, § 19-31) (Ord., passed 7-21-52)
(B) No truck, other than a light commercial truck of three-quarters ton capacity, or less, shall be parked more than
two hours continuously on any street in the city which is zoned residential according to the zoning map of record in the
Planning Department. ('73 Code, § 19-32) (Ord., passed 8-20-56)
Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
Parking restrictions in Public Square; on long vehicles, see § 72.11
33
34 Elizabethtown - Traffic Code
§ 74.04 TRUCK ROUTE DESIGNATIONS.
Routes for all trucks traveling through or traversing through the city on U.S. Highway 31 W and U.S. Highway 62
are designated as follows:
(A) For all truck traffic going North on U.S. Highway 31 W, to proceed from the intersection of U.S. Highway 31
W, Kentucky Highway 61, and the Western Kentucky Parkway in a northerly direction, via the Western Kentucky
Parkway and the U.S. Highway 31 Bypass to U.S. Highway 31 W at the intersection of U.S. 31 W and U.S. 31 W
Bypass.
(B) For all truck traffic going south on U.S. Highway 31 W to proceed from the intersection of U.S. Highway 31
W and U.S. Highway 31 W Bypass, by way of U.S. Highway 31 W Bypass in a southerly direction to the Western
Kentucky Parkway and via the Western Kentucky Parkway in a southerly direction to the intersection of the Western
Kentucky Parkway, Kentucky Highway 61 and U.S. Highway 31 W.
(C) For all truck traffic going west on U.S. Highway 62, all truck traffic shall proceed from the intersection of I
65 with U.S. Highway 62 and Kentucky Highway 61, in a westerly direction, via I 65, the Western Kentucky Parkway,
and the U.S. Highway 31 W Bypass to the interchange of U.S. 31 W Bypass and U.S. 62.
(D) For all truck traffic going east on U.S. Highway 62, it shall proceed from the intersection of U.S. Highway 31
W Bypass and U.S. 62, in a southerly or westerly direction onto U.S. Highway 31 W Bypass to the Western Kentucky
Parkway and continuing by way of Western Kentucky Parkway to its intersection with I 65 and continuing on I 65 in a
northerly direction to the intersection of I 65, Kentucky Highway 61 and U.S. Highway 62.
(Ord. 4, passed 1-7-91)
§ 74.05 TRUCK TRAFFIC PROHIBITED.
Through truck traffic of trucks over three-quarters ton is prohibited on the following streets unless as specifically
permitted otherwise by the Police Department, local residential deliveries excepted.
Street
Location
Ord. No.
Date Passed
Brown Lane
22-1977 06-06-1977
Charlemagne Boulevard
-- 10-21-1974
Cherrywood Avenue
22-1977 09-06-1977
Childers Court
36-1981 08-17-1981
Clifford Drive
09-1977 03-21-1977
Deepwood Drive
22-1977 09-06-1977
Edgewood Avenue
22-1977 09-06-1977
2005-S-2
Trucks 35
Street
Location
Ord. No.
Date Passed
El Dorado Drive
09-1977 03-21-1977
French Street
From Mulberry Street
to Miles Street
22-1982 05-17-1982
Greenwood Drive
09-1977 03-21-1977
Hill Street
22-1977 09-06-1977
Long Avenue
22-1977 09-06-1977
Mercer Street
22-1977 09-06-1977
Moon Street (40,000
pounds GVW)
33-1990 11-19-1990
Nalls Court
22-1977 09-06-1977
Nicholas Street (40,000
pounds GVW)
From Sunny Street to
Pierce Street
33-1990 11-19-1990
North Black Branch Road
Between Ring Road &
US 62
24-2004 12-06-2004
North Main Street
23-1990
09-04-1990
Pawnee Drive Between French Street
& Navaho Drive
20-2016 11-11-16
Pierce Street (40,000
pounds GVW)
33-1990 11-19-1990
State Street
22-1977 09-06-1977
Sunny Street (40,000
pounds GVM)
33-1990 11-19-1990
Valley Road
22-1977 09-06-1977
Willow Creek Drive
(12,000 pounds GVW)
15-1990 05-21-1990
('73 Code, § 19-16) Penalty, see § 10.99
2018-S-1
36 Elizabethtown - Traffic Code
CHAPTER 75: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
I. One-way streets
II. Speed limits
III. Stop intersections
IV. Turning restricted
V. No Through Vehicular Traffic
SCHEDULE I. ONE-WAY STREETS.
(A) One-way streets and alleys at all times. The following are streets and alleys are designated one-way in the
directions indicated.
Street
Location
Direction
Ord. No.
Date Passed
Beech Street
East right-of-way line to
Perry Avenue to its
intersection with
Crutcher Lane
Northwesterly
—
Crutcher Lane
From intersection with
Mallory Street to its
intersection with Beech
Street
Southerly
—
E. Dixie Parking
Lot
Traffic may enter lot
from US 31 W on south
side and exit from
Quince Alley on US 31
W Northerly (right turn
only)
—
E. Dixie Parking Lot
From US Hwy. 31W into
parking lot entrance on
south side of lot. Turn
from parking lot onto
31W in Northerly
direction (right turn only)
10
5-18-92
37
2010 S-1
38 Elizabethtown - Traffic Code
Street
Location
Direction
Ord. No.
Date Passed
Plum Alley
From its intersection with
south right-of-way line of
Mulberry Street to its
intersection with the north
right-of-way line of
Cherry Alley
Southerly
—
12-2-68;
9-17-73; 4-2-79
Plum Alley
From Central Avenue to
Quince Alley
Northerly
—
12-2-68;
9-17-73; 4-2-79
Quince Alley
Traffic may enter Quince
Alley from Dixie Avenue,
but shall not enter Dixie
Avenue from Quince
Alley
—
11-6-50
Two unnamed
alleys
Between N. Miles and
Henry Street
—
('73 Code, §§ 19-2,19-4, 19-8)
1995 S-1 Repl.
Traffic Schedules 39
(B) One-way streets during certain hours. The flow of traffic on the streets hereinafter set out shall be one-way
in the direction hereinafter indicated from the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday of each week.
Street
Location
Direction
Ord. No.
Date Passed
Beech Street
From Miles Street to
Elizabethtown
Independent School's
property
West
—
10-1-56
Hardin Street
From Miles Street to
Elizabethtown
Independent School's
property
West
—
10-1-56
Mallory Street
From Miles Street to
Elizabethtown
Independent School's
property
East
—
10-1-56
('73 Code, § 19-3) Penalty, see § 10.99
40 Elizabethtown - Traffic Code
Traffic Schedules 41
SCHEDULE II. SPEED LIMITS.
(A) 25-mile per hour streets. No motor or other vehicle of any nature may travel at a speed greater than 25 miles
per hour on any city streets, except as provided hereafter.
(B) 35-mile per hour streets. The speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour on the following streets. The speed limit
of 35 miles per hour is a reasonable and safe speed under the conditions found to exist on any street listed in this
division. The speed limit is based upon an engineering and traffic investigation as to a reasonable and safe speed.
Street
Location
Ord. No.
Date Passed
Altec Drive
19-2002
09-16-2002
College Street Road
French Street
From its terminus with
North Mulberry to its
terminus at North
Miles/Shepherdsville
Road
5-5-72
North Main Street
Pear Orchard Road
From its terminus with
North Miles to
Edgewater Drive
Peterson Drive
6-15-81
Pine Valley Drive
From US 31W to the
junction of Pine Valley
Drive with St. Andrews
Way
Springfield Road
From Kennedy St. to
I-65 overpass
West Park Road
26-2014
12-15-14
Westport Road
Between St. John Road
& Cardinal Drive
17-2011
6-1-81; 11-01-10
Woodland Drive
N. Black Branch
Road
From Ring Road
westerly to the city
limits
5
3-18-96
(Am. Ord. 26-2024, passed 12-15-2014)
2013-S-1
42 Elizabethtown - Traffic Code
(C) 45-mile per hour streets. The speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour on the following streets. The speed limit of
45 miles per hour is a reasonable and safe speed under the conditions found to exist on any street listed in this division.
This speed limit is based upon an engineering and traffic investigation as to a reasonable and safe speed.
Street
Location
Ord. No.
Date Passed
Pear Orchard Road
From its intersection with
Edgewater Drive to the Ring
Road except between the
intersections of Foxfire Road
and Spruce Lane the speed
limit is 25 mph
—;—
19-2018
12-2-85; 12-16-85
05-21-18
Veterans Way
The Full Length
13-2004
07-19-2004
('73 Code, § 19-1.3)
(C) Penalty. Whoever violates any provision of Schedule II, Speed Limits shall be subject to a fine in
accordance with the schedule of fines established under KRS 189.394.
2018-S-1
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES 43
SCHEDULE III. STOP INTERSECTIONS.
(A) Four-way stop intersections. The following intersections are designed four-way stop intersections. Any and all
motor or other vehicles shall be brought to a stop at the stop signs so erected at the intersection before proceeding
through the intersection. The motor or other vehicles shall then proceed through the intersection after the other
motor or other vehicles previously stopped, have cleared the intersection. When two vehicles approach or enter the
intersection from different roadways at the same time, the operator of the vehicles on the left shall yield the rightof-
way to the vehicles on the right. (‘73 Code, 19-5.1) (Ord. Passed 4-7-86).
INTERSECTION ORDINANCE NO. DATE PASSED
Charlemagne Blvd. and Hickory
Lane
25-1999 09-07-99
Cherrywood Drive and Helmwood
Drive
12-2015 09-21-15
Chestnut Street & Elm Road 01-2005 02-07-05
Churchill Court and W. Warfield
Street
-;- -
Clifford Drive with Greenwood
Drive and El Dorado Drive
-;- 6-16-69; 6-16-80; 8-27-93
Diecks Drive and Village Drive -;- 6-19-69; 6-16-80; 8-27-93
Dolphin Drive and North Ridge
Drive
26-1999 09-07-99
Dolphin Drive and Marty T.
Meagher Drive
28-2012 12-17-12
Peachtree and Pennsylvania Avenue -;- 10-1-73
East Poplar Street and Central
Avenue
-;- 8-27-93
West Poplar and Sunset Road -;- 8-27-93
Hagan Avenue and Perry Avenue -;- -
Hawkins Drive and Steel Drive 40-2003 12-15-03
Helm Street, Pennsylvania Avenue
and South Maple
-;- 9-20-93
Henry Street and Hardin Street -;- 6-16-69; 6-16-80; 8-27-93
Lee Road and Balmoral -;- 6-16-69; 6-16-80; 8-27-93
McCullum Avenue and Dogwood
Drive
-;- 6-16-69; 6-16-80; 8-27-93
Meadow Lane and Mantle Avenue -;- 6-16-69; 6-16-80; 8-27-93
Morningside Drive and Meadow
Lane
-;- -
North Main and East and West
Poplar Street
-;- 8-27-93
2013-S-1
44 Elizabethtown-Traffic Code
INTERSECTION
ORDINANCE NO.
DATE PASSED
North Mantle Avenue and
Springdale Street
-;-
6-19-69; 6-16-80; 8-27-93
Par Lane and Greenway Drive in
Country Club Villa Subdivision
-;-
6-16-69; 6-16-80; 8-27-93
Park Avenue and College Avenue
-;-
6-16-69; 6-16-80; 8-27-93
Park Avenue and Willow Creek
Drive
-;-
-
Peachtree Street and Pennsylvania
Avenue
-;-
6-16-69; 6-16-80; 8-27-93
Pennsylvania Avenue and South
Mantle Avenue
-;-
6-16-69; 6-16-80; 8-27-93
Plum Alley and Wall Street 16-2010 10-12-2010
Quail Run Road and Lakewood
Drive
-;-
8-27-93
Quail Run Road and Oriole Drive
5
1-21-93; 8-27-93
Sunset Drive and West Poplar
Street
-;-
3-15-71
Sycamore Street and W. Poplar
Street
-;-
-
Timber Lane and Briarwood
Circle/Holly Hill Drive
12-2010 10-11-2010
Valley Creek Road and Hawkins
Drive
-;-
-
Wall Street and Plum Alley
-;-
-
W. Poplar and N. Mantle Avenue
-;-
-
W. Poplar and N.Miles Street
-;-
-
White Oak Drive and Elm Road
4
3-4-96
Woodland Drive, Hill Street and
Layman Lane
18-2016
09-21-16
Silk Oak Dr. and Lakewood Dr.
15
8-5-96
Amanda Jo Dr. and Ruby Dr.-
Ruby Court
15
8-5-96
(‘73 Code 19-5)
2018-S-1
Traffic Schedules 45
(B) Three-way stop intersections. Any and all motor vehicles shall be brought to a complete stop at the stop
sign so erected at the intersection before proceeding through the intersection. The motor or other vehicle shall then
proceed through the intersection after the other motor or previously stopped vehicles have cleared the intersection.
When two or more vehicles approach or enter the intersection from different roadways at the same time, the
operator of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right.
Intersection
Ord. No.
Date Passed
College Street and South Miles
Street
9-1989
3-6-89;8-27-93
Concord Court and Fleming Drive 27-1999
09-07-99
Timber Lane and Deerfield Hills
Road
12-2010
10-11-10
('73 Code, § 19-7.1)
(C) Two-way stop streets. Any and all motor or other vehicles shall be brought to a stop at the stop signs so
erected at the intersection before proceeding through the intersection. The motor or other vehicles shall then
proceed through the intersection after the other motor or other vehicles previously stopped, have cleared the
intersection. When two vehicles approach or enter the intersection from different roadways at the same time, the
operator of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right. ('73 Code, § 19-5.1)
(Ord., passed 4-7-86)
Stop Street
Through Street
Ord. No.
Date Passed
Cherry Alley Vega Alley —; —; — 1-16-56; 4-15-74;
5-19-86
Nicholas Street At Railroad Crossing
near 31W By-Pass
13-2010 10-11-10
Railroad Avenue East Crutcher Street 13-2010 10-11-10
('73 Code, § 19-7) Penalty, see § 10.99
2013-S-1
46 Elizabethtown - Traffic Code
SCHEDULE IV. TURNING RESTRICTED.
(A) No-left-turn intersections. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firm or corporation, to cause a
motor vehicle to turn left onto U.S. Highway 31-W from the following streets:
Street
Ord. No.
Date Passed
North Maple
—
5-15-72
South Maple
—
5-15-72
Sunset Drive
—
5-15-72
Sycamore
—
5-15-72
Village Drive
—
5-15-72
Washington Street
—
5-15-72
('73 Code, § 19-14)
(B) No-right-turn intersections for tractor-trailer trucks. No right turn shall be attempted or completed by
the operator of any tractor-trailer truck from Mulberry Street onto the following streets.
Street
Ord. No.
Date Passed
Dixie Avenue
—
9-15-86
Poplar Street
—
9-15-86
('73 Code, § 19-14.1) Penalty, see § 10.99
SCHEDULE V. NO THROUGH VEHICULAR TRAFFIC
Street
Location
Ord. No.
Date Passed
Chestnut Street intersection with Spruce Lane in a
southerly direction approximately
200 feet
09-2013 06-03-2013
Plum Alley North Mulberry Street and Raspberry
Alley
13-2009 09-08-2009
Unnamed Alley Between 309/311 Helm Street from
Helm Street to Strawberry Alley
20-2013 10-14-2013
(Ord. No. 13-2009, passed 09-08-09) (Ord. No. 08-2013, passed 06-03-13) (Ord. No. 20-2013, passed 10-14-13)
2013-S-1
CHAPTER 76: RESCINDED
(ORDINANCE NO. 16-2017)
47
2018-S-1
48 Elizabethtown - Traffic Code
(This page intentionally left blank)
2018-S-1
49
(This page intentionally left blank)
2018-S-1
50 Elizabethtown - Traffic Code
This page intentionally left blank)
2018-S-1
CHAPTER 77: OPERATION OF GOLF CARTS ON PUBLIC ROADWAYS
Section
77.01 Definition
77.02 Identification of Roadways
77.03 Permit Required
77.04 Operators
77.05 Insurance
77.06 Traffic Regulations
77.07 Golf Cart Exemptions
77.08 Prohibitions on certain Public Roadways
77.09 Golf Carts Not Subject to this Section
77.10 PODs
77.11 Permit Fees
77.12 Penalties & Fines
77.13 Other Statutes and Ordinances
§ 77.01 DEFINITION
As used in this section “Golf cart” means any self-propelled vehicle that:
1. Is designed for the transportation of players or maintaining equipment on a golf course, but
which may have been modified for other specific use such as the carrying of materials,
products or supplies;
2. Has a minimum of four (4) wheels;
3. Is designated to operate at a speed of not more than thirty-five (35) miles per hour;
4. Has a maximum gross vehicle weight of two thousand five hundred (2,500) pounds;
5. Has a maximum rated payload capacity of one thousand two hundred (1,200) pounds;
6. Has appropriate signage that indicates the specific use and business entity which has received
approval pursuant to this Ordinance; and
7. Meets the federal motor vehicle safety standards for low-speed vehicles set forth in 49 C.F.R.
sec. 571.500;
(Ord. No. 18-2015, passed 11/02/15)
§ 77.02 IDENTIFICATION OF ROADWAYS
The City Council identifies the roadways subject to the provisions of this section as those portions
of any public road in the City so long as the posted speed limit is 35 (thirty-five) miles per hour or less;
however, the Mayor or the person identified as having the delegation of authority of the Mayor, is hereby
granted authority to determine if a particular road or section of road should be withdrawn from the scope of
this section in the interest of public safety, and, upon such a determination and its publication and passage by
the City Council, pursuant to the requirements of KRS 424, such determination to remove any section of
public roadway in the City of Elizabethtown from the scope of this section shall become administrative
regulation that is enforceable as a provision of law under this section.
(Ord. No. 18-2015, passed 11/02/15)
51
2018-S-1
52 Elizabethtown - Traffic Code
§ 77.03 PERMIT REQUIRED
Pursuant to this section it is lawful to operate a golf cart on a designated public roadway; provided
(a) A permit is issued for the golf cart by the Department of Planning & Development.
(b) The golf cart displays a permit that identifies that the golf cart is within compliance of this
section and is thereby allowed to operate upon those roadways identified herein.
(c) The Police Department and Department of Planning & Development have approved the
specific use allowed and the roadways upon which the golf carts shall operate and have
approved any storage facilities associated with the specific use and the locations thereof by
appropriate permit or other formal documentation.
(d) The golf cart has been inspected by a certified inspector designated by the Hardin County
Sheriff and certified through the Department of Vehicle Regulation to ensure that the golf
cart complies with the requirements of this section. The inspection fee under this paragraph
shall not exceed five dollars ($5) with an additional fee not to exceed ten dollars ($10) per
trip charged if it becomes necessary for the certified inspector to travel to the site of the golf
cart rather than having the golf cart brought to the sheriff’s inspection area.
(Ord. No. 18-2015, passed 11/02/15)
§ 77.04 OPERATORS
A person may operate a golf cart on a public roadway pursuant to sections 77.02 and 77.03 of this
section if:
(a) The golf cart and the specific business use of the golf cart has been approved by the Police
Department and Department of Planning & Development.
(b) The posted speed limit of the designated public roadway is thirty-five (35) miles per hour or
less;
(c) The operator of the golf cart does not cross a roadway at an intersection where the roadway
being crossed has a posted speed limit of more than thirty-five (35) miles per hour;
(d) The operator has a valid operator’s license in his or her possession;
(e) The golf cart is being operated between sunrise and sunset; and
(f) The golf cart displays a slow-moving vehicle emblem in compliance with KRS 189.820.
(Ord. No. 18-2015, passed 11/02/15)
§ 77.05 INSURANCE
A golf cart operating on a public roadway under sections 77.02 and 77.03 of this section shall be
insured in compliance with KRS 304.39-080 by the owner or operator, and the proof of insurance shall be
inside the golf cart at all times of operation on a public roadway.
(Ord. No. 18-2015, passed 11/02/15)
2018-S-1
Operations of Golf Carts on Public Roadways 53
§ 77.06 TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Any person operating a golf cart on a public roadway under the provision of this section shall be
subject to the traffic regulations of KRS Chapter 189.
(Ord. No. 18-2015, passed 11/02/15)
§ 77.07 GOLF CART EXEMPTIONS
A golf cart operating on public roadway designated by a local government under sections 77.02 and
77.03 of this section is not considered to be a motor vehicle and is exempt from:
(a) Title requirement of KRS 186.020;
(b) Vehicle registration requirements of KRS 486.050; and
(c) Emissions compliance certificates pursuant to KRS 224.20-720
(Ord. No. 18-2015, passed 11/02/15)
§ 77.08 PROHIBITION ON CERTAIN PUBLIC ROADWAYS
The Transportation Cabinet may prohibit the operation of a golf cart on a public roadway designated
under sections 77.02 and 77.03 of this section that crosses a state-maintained highway under its jurisdiction
if it determines that such prohibition is necessary in the interest of public safety.
(Ord. No. 18-2015, passed 11//02/15)
§ 77.09 GOLF CARTS NOT SUBJECT TO THIS SECTION
When presently used to play golf, or when being used to maintain a golf course, golf carts that are not
being operated on public roadway, except to cross a roadway while following a golf cart path on a golf
course, are not subject to any requirements or restrictions on use of golf carts that are imposed by this
section.
(Ord. No. 18-2015, passed 11/02/15)
§ 77.10 PODS
PODS: Storage containment units may be utilized in conjunction with the specific use and operation
of golf carts approved under this section provided as follows:
(a) The Director of Planning & Development reviews placement of units and provides written
approval; and
(b) The Chief of the Elizabethtown Police Department reviews placement of the units and
provides written approval.
(Ord. No. 18-2015, passed 11/02/15)
2018-S-1
54 Elizabethtown - Traffic Code
§ 77.11 PERMIT FEES
(a) A fee of $100 is required per each application.
(b) Each location for a pod or pods requires a separate application.
(c) A City Business License is required.
(Ord. No. 18-2015, passed 11/02/15)
§ 77.12 PENALTIES AND FINES
Any person or private entity who fails to comply with the provisions of this section or any order
issued pursuant to this section shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine. The Police Chief or his
designee or the Director of Planning & Development or his designee may issue a citation for any violation of
this Ordinance.
(a) Fines shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense; two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) for the second offense; and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the third offense and
any additional offenses.
(b) Violations of this Ordinance may be abated by the City. The City may recover the reasonable
costs of any abatement action.
(c) Any person or private entity cited under this section may appeal said citation and request a
hearing before the Elizabethtown Code Enforcement Board pursuant to the process and
procedures of Ordinance No. 09-2003, adopted April 2003, as amended.
(Ord. No. 18-2015, passed 11/02/15)
§ 77.13 OTHER STATUTES AND ORDINANCES
Nothing in this section shall be construed to relieve any person of any legal duties or obligation
created by any other statute or ordinance. Promulgation of this section does not preclude legal enforcement
by any peace officer or traffic control officer of any provision in the Kentucky Revised Statutes, including
the prohibition against operating an unlicensed or unregistered motor vehicle on the public roads of the
Commonwealth unless that motor vehicle falls within the exception created by this section or any other
existing law, ordinance or regulation in the Commonwealth of Kentucky.
(Ord. No. 18-2015, passed 11/02/15)
2018-S-1
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Chapter
90. ANIMALS
91. STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
92. NUISANCES
93. FIRE PREVENTION
94. LITTERING
95. CEMETERIES
96. FAIR HOUSING
97. NOISE
98. PARKS AND RECREATION
99. YARD SALES
100. SMOKE DETECTOR INSTALLATION &
MAINTENANCE IN RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY
1
2010 S-1
2 Elizabethtown - General Regulations
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
90.01 Definitions
Dogs
90.15 Alternate Opinion
90.16 Controls of Dogs
90.17 Control of Vicious Dogs
90.18 Enforcement of Restrictions on Vicious Dogs
90.19 Impoundment
90.20 Provision of Necessities
90.21 Restraint by Leash or Chain; Specifications
90.22 Abandonment
90.23 Cruelty to Animals
90.24 Cruelty or Exhibition Fighting Prohibited
90.25 Killing Dogs, Cats for Food or Fur Prohibited
90.26 Mutilation of Animals
90.27 Sexual Acts with Animals
90.28 Removal of Animal in Immediate Danger
90.29 Confiscation of Victimized Animal
90.99 Penalties
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
ABANDON. To forsake entirely, or to neglect or refuse to provide or perform the legal obligations for care
and support of an animal by its owner, or agent. Such abandonment shall constitute the relinquishment of all rights and
claims by the owner to such animal. (KRS 257.100 (4))
AT-LARGE. Not restrained by leash, cord, chain or otherwise confined in an enclosure.
DOG WARDEN. This term shall be interchangeable with Animal Warden and Animal Control Officer.
DOG. This term shall in be intended to mean both male and female.
3
2000-S-3
4 Elizabethtown - General Regulations
ENCLOSURE. An uncovered fence or structure of at least seven feet in height or a covered fence or structure
of sufficient height to allow the dog to stand erect without touching the top or cover, forming or causing an enclosure
suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and suitable to confine a vicious dog in conjunction with other measures
which may be taken by the owner or keeper, such as tethering of the vicious dog. Further said fence or structure shall
be sufficiently embedded in the ground to prevent the dog from digging under said fence or structure. Such enclosure
shall be securely enclosed and locked and designed with secure sides, top and bottom and shall be designed to prevent
the dog from escaping from the enclosure.
KEEPER. Keeper shall mean any person to whom a vicious dog is entrusted.
OWNER. Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation owning, keeping or harboring a dog. Every
person having a right of property to an animal and every person who keeps or harbors an animal, has it in his/her care,
or permits it to remain on or about the premises owned or occupied by him/her.
RESTRAINT. A vicious dog shall be deemed to be under restraint if on the premises of the owner or keeper
and confined in a secure enclosure as previously defined or under the control of the owner or keeper and securely
muzzled and restrained with a chain or braided leather, nylon or manilla lead or leash having a minimum tensile
strength of 300 pounds and not exceeding three feet in length.
VICIOUS DOG. Shall include the following:
(a) Any dog which constitutes a physical threat to human beings or other domestic animals by virtue of a
known propensity to endanger life by an unprovoked assault or bite so as to cause serious bodily harm; or
(b) Any dog which when unprovoked, in a vicious or terrorizing manner approaches any person in an attitude
of attack upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public grounds or places; or
(c) Any dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury to or
otherwise endanger the safety of human beings or domestic animals; or
(d) Any dog which bites (to the extent of puncturing or severely bruising skin), inflicts injury, assaults or
otherwise attacks a human being or domestic animal without provocation on public or private property; or
(e) Any dog owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of dog fighting or any dog trained for dog
fighting; or
(f) Any dog which has previously attacked or bitten a human being other than under the type of
circumstances that would be justifiable hereunder; or
(g) Any dog which has behaved in such a manner that the owner or keeper thereof knows or should
reasonably know that the dog is possessed of tendencies to attach or to bite human beings other than the type which
would be justified hereunder; or
(h) Any dog certified by a doctor of veterinary medicine, after observation thereof, as posing a danger to
human like or property if not kept in the manner required by this article upon the basis of reasonable medical
probability; or
(i) Any dog which has been classified as vicious by the Hardin County Dog Warden or a peace officer; or
(j) Any dog which has been trained as an attack or guard dog, except such dogs which are employed by any
police department within the Commonwealth of Kentucky; or
(k) An animal shall not be deemed vicious solely because: 1) it bites, attacks or menaces (a) anyone assaulting
its owner or keeper, or (b) any person or other animal who has tormented or abused it, or 2) it is otherwise acting in the
defense of any attack from a person or other animal upon its owner or any other person or 3) it is protecting or
defending its young or the young of any other animal, or 4) where a person has broken into or entered, without
permission, the enclosure of such dog.
2000-S-2
Animals 4A
§ 90.15 ALTERNATE OPINION
Should the owner or keeper of any dog which has been classified as vicious by the Hardin County Dog
Warden, a peace officer, or by a doctor of veterinary medicine, and should the said owner desire to challenge this
classification, then said owner/keeper may engage the services of a licensed doctor of veterinary medicine, all costs of
which are to be borne by the owner/keeper of the dog in question. Said alternate opinion must be acquired and
completed within 48 hours of the initial classification of the dog as being vicious. (Ordinance No. 17-2000, passed
Sept. 25, 2000)
§ 90.16 CONTROL OF DOGS
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor within the city any dog that barks or yelps or
otherwise makes such noise as to disturb the peace & quiet of the people in the neighborhood or area where the dog is
kept. Verification of more than one (1) person from at least two different households shall be required, before this
provision takes effect.
(2) It shall be unlawful to entice a dog from a yard or enclosure of its owner or keeper or to bring any dog into
the city for the purpose of impounding or disposing of the same or to remove a muzzle or license tag from any dog
without the consent of the owner, keeper or custodian thereof.
(3) No owner, custodian, possessor or harborer shall permit any dog to run at large other than on its owners
premises at any time unless under the direct control of the owner, custodian, possessor or harborer.
(4) The owner, custodian, possessor or harborer of every dog shall, at all times, keep such dog either (1)
confined on the owner’s premises within an enclosure which it can not escape or (2) firmly secured by means of a collar
or chain or other device so that it can not escape and stray from the premises on which it is secured or (3) under the
immediate control of such person. The term “under immediate control” is defined as the power to manage and direct
said dog and is not limited to physical control of said dog. (Ordinance No. 17-2000, passed Sept. 25, 2000)
§ 90.17 CONTROL OF VICIOUS DOGS
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to keep or harbor within the City, a vicious dog
that shall bite or fiercely attach any person or domestic animal while outside of its owner’s yard or enclosure or real
estate.
The section shall not apply where a person shall break into or enter without the permission the premises or
enclosure of such dog and be pursued therefrom and attacked or bitten by the dog.
(2) All vicious dogs shall be confined in an enclosure. It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper to
maintain a vicious dog upon any premises which does not have a locked enclosure.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper to allow any vicious dog to be outside of the dwelling of the
owner or keeper or outside of the enclosure unless the owner or keeper has the vicious dog under proper restraint, and
under the direct control and supervision of the owner or keeper of the vicious dog.
(4) The owner or keeper of a vicious dog shall display a sign on his or her premises warning that there is a
vicious dog on the premises. Such sign shall be visible and capable of being read from the public street. The sign shall
be a minimum of two square feet in area.
(5) The owner or keeper shall immediately notify the Hardin County Dog Warden and the Police Department
if a vicious dog is on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked another animal or has attached a human being, or has died.
(6) The Hardin County Dog Warden or peace officer is hereby empowered to make whatever inquiry is
deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions hereof, subject to the right of such owner or keeper to
contest the seizure or impoundment, as provided in this article, in Hardin District Court.
(7) In the event that the owner or keeper of the dog refuses to surrender the dog to the Hardin County Dog
Warden, the Hardin County Dog Warden may obtain a search warrant from a judge of the Hardin District Court to seize
the dog upon the execution of the warrant.
2000-S-2
4B Elizabethtown - General Regulations
(8) No person shall walk or exercise a vicious dog within 1,000 feet of a school, day care, day nursery,
playground, hospital or fairground.
(9) No more than two vicious dogs may be kept at a singular site or residence. This section shall not apply to
duly licensed kennels.
(10) No vicious dog may be kept on a chain tied to a fixed point outside an enclosure. (Ordinance No. 17-
2000, passed Sept. 25, 2000)
§ 90.18 ENFORCEMENT OF RESTRICTIONS ON VICIOUS DOGS
In the event that a public law enforcement officer or the Hardin County Dog Warden has probable cause to
believe that a vicious dog is being harbored in the City of Elizabethtown in violation of this article, he or she may:
(1) Order the violation immediately corrected and cite the owner or keeper to appear in court for the violation,
or
(2) If the violation cannot be immediately corrected and the dog is posing an imminent serious threat to
human beings or other domestic animals, the dog may be seized and impounded, in which case the owner or keeper will
be cited to appear in court for the violation. At the owner’s or keeper’s request and expense, such impoundment may
be at a veterinarian or licensed kennel of the owner’s or keeper’s choosing. If the court rules that the dog is not vicious
as defined, it will be released to the owner or keeper upon payment to the Hardin County Dog Warden of the expense of
keeping such dog, pursuant to a schedule of such costs maintained by the Hardin County Dog Warden. If the court
rules that it is vicious as defined, the dog will be released to the owner or keeper only after payment of any fees and
penalties, upon presentation of proof by the owner or keeper that the dog will now be kept restrained or confined as
specified in this article. If, within seven days following such order regarding a vicious dog the owner or keeper of a
vicious dog fails to either provide proof that the dog will be kept restrained or confined in compliance with the
provisions of this article or fails to reclaim it after impoundment and pay the fees and penalties, the dog may be
humanely euthanized. (Ordinance No. 17-2000, passed Sept. 25, 2000)
§ 90.19 IMPOUNDMENT
(1) Any dog found running at large within the city limits, unless under direct control of the owner, custodian,
possessor or harborer shall be taken up by the Hardin County Dog Warden and/or other proper authority, and
impounded in the shelter designated by the Hardin County Animal Shelter and there confined in a humane manner for a
period of not less than five (5) days unless sooner claimed by its owner, custodian or person entitled thereto.
(2) The Hardin County Dog Warden may humanely destroy or transfer title of all animals held after the legal
detention period in the above paragraph has expired and the animal has not been claimed by its owner, custodian or
other person entitled to the possession thereof; provided the person to whom title is being transferred licenses said dog
according to the laws of the Commonwealth of Kentucky and supplies proof of a rabies inoculation for said dog
together with the boarding charges levied by the animal shelter, and in addition thereto the pick-up fee payable to the
city provided below.
(3) Any owner, custodian or other person entitled to the possession of a dog impounded under subsection (1)
hereof may be claimed by such owner, custodian or person entitled to possession thereof upon proof that said dog has
been or is licensed, according to the laws of the Commonwealth of Kentucky; proof that said dog has been inoculated
against rabies; payment of boarding charges levied by the County, and payment to the county of any fine due.
(Ordinance No. 17-2000, passed Sept. 25, 2000)
2000-S-2
Animals 4C
§ 90.20 PROVISION OF NECESSITIES
No owner shall fail to provide his animal with good wholesome food and water, proper shelter and protection
from the weather, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering and humane care and treatment. Any owner of
animals shall maintain a clean and healthful shelter and living area for any animal being kept, which area shall be free
of accumulated waste and debris so that the animal shall be free to walk or lie down without coming in contact with any
such waste or debris. All such shelters or living areas must be cleaned and maintained regularly so as to promote
proper health for the animals being kept. All living areas shall be constructed and maintained to promote proper
drainage of rain water to prevent the accumulation of mud and/or water. Shelters shall be constructed to protect the
animal from precipitation and of a material which provides insulation from temperature extremes. In addition to the
shelter, a shaded area shall also be provided by means of other structures, tree(s) or awning(s). The shelter shall have a
floor augmented with resting boards. Insulating bedding materials shall be provided during inclement weather
extremes. (Ordinance No. 17-2000, passed Sept. 25, 2000)
§ 90.21 RESTAINT BY LEASH OR CHAIN; SPECIFICATIONS
If any animal is restricted by a chain, leash or similar restraint, it shall be designed and placed as defined under
Restraint in this Ordinance. (Ordinance No. 17-2000, passed Sept. 25, 2000)
§ 90.22 ABANDONMENT
No person shall abandon any animal, abandonment consisting of: leaving an animal for a period in excess of
24 hours, without providing for someone to feed, water and check on the animal’s condition, or leaving an animal by
the roadside or other area, or leaving an animal on either public or private property without the property owner’s
consent. In the event that an animal is found so abandoned, such animal may be taken by a Hardin County Dog
Warden or peace officer and impounded in a shelter, and there confined in a humane manner. Such animal, if taken
from private property, shall be kept for not less than the prescribed period in accordance with the procedures set forth in
the Impounding Section. In the event that an animal is so abandoned, the owner or keeper, if any, whom he has
charged with the animal’s care, shall be subject to a citation for violation of this section. KRS 257.100 (4) (Ordinance
No. 17-2000, passed Sept. 25, 2000)
§ 90.23 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS
It shall be unlawful for any person to willingly or maliciously inflict unnecessary or needless cruelty, torture,
abuse or cruelly beat, strike or abuse any animal, or by an act, omission or neglect, cause or inflict any unnecessary or
unjustifiable pain, suffering, injury or death to any animal, except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, whether such
animal belongs to such person or to another, except that reasonable force may be employed to drive away vicious
animals or trespassing animals. KRS 525.130. (Ordinance No. 17-2000, passed Sept. 25, 2000)
§ 90.24 CRUELTY OR EXHIBITION FIGHTING PROHIBITED
(1) No person shall cause or allow cruelty to be inflicted on an animal.
2000-S-2
4D Elizabethtown - General Regulations
(2) No person shall cause or permit any dog fight or other combat between animals. For the purpose of this
paragraph, neglect, cruel, ill treatment and torment of an animal shall be defined as a failure by a person to adhere to the
requirements and provisions of enforcement. In the event there is a reasonable cause to suspect that an animal is being
beaten, cruelly ill-treated, neglected or tormented or involved in dog fight or other combat, custody of such an animal
may be taken by a Hardin County Dog Warden, peace officer or humane officer and impounded in a shelter or other
facility maintained by a humane society. The animal shall be held as evidence, and confined in such facility in a
humane manner. Upon finding by a court that the animal has been neglected, beaten, cruelly ill-treated or tormented or
involved in a dog fight or other combat between animals, the animal shall become the property of Hardin County.
(3) No person shall own, possess, keep or train any dog with the intent that such dog shall be engaged in
exhibition of fighting. In the event that a person shall own, possess, keep or train any animal with the intent that such
animal shall be engaged in an exhibition of fighting, he shall be liable for citation for violation of this ordinance and
subject to the penalties under Enforcement.
(4) No person shall be present at any dog fight or combat between animals. In the event that a person is
present at a dog fight or combat between animals, he shall be liable for citation for violation of this ordinance and
subject to the penalties provided in Enforcement.
(5) Any person who is found present at a dog fight or combat between animals, and who is charged with
being a spectator in violation of this ordinance, and who is in possession of and/or is the owner of an animal of the same
species as that involved in the animal fight, shall be charged with the intent to engage in an exhibition of fighting in
violation of this ordinance. The animal shall be confiscated if found on the premises or in the immediate area of the
dog fight or combat between animals. (Ordinance No. 17-2000, passed Sept. 5, 2000)
§ 90.25 KILLING DOGS, CATS FOR FOOD OR FUR PROHIBITED
No person shall raise or kill a dog or cat for food or the skin or fur. (Ordinance No. 17-2000, passed Sept. 5,
2000)
§ 90.26 MUTILATION OF ANIMALS
No person shall mutilate any animal whether dead or alive. This provision does not apply to accepted livestock
practices concerning humane slaughter. (Ordinance No. 17-2000, passed Sept. 5, 2000)
§ 90.27 SEXUAL ACTS WITH ANIMALS
No person shall engage or cause or allow any other person to engage in a sexual act with any animal.
(Ordinance No. 17-2000, passed Sept. 5, 2000)
§ 90.28 REMOVAL OF ANIMAL IN IMMEDIATE DANGER
Any animal observed by a peace officer or Hardin County Dog Warden to be in immediate danger may be
removed from such situation by the quickest and most reasonable means available. (Ordinance No. 17-2000, passed
Sept. 5, 2000)
2000-S-3
Animals 4E
§ 90.29 CONFISCATION OF VICTIMIZED ANIMAL
Any animal found involved in a violation of any portion of this ordinance may be confiscated by any Hardin
County Dog Warden or peace officer and held in a humane manner. Upon conviction of this charge by a court of law,
all animals so confiscated shall become the property of Hardin County, and the owner of the animals shall pay to or
reimburse Hardin County all veterinary fees associated with medical treatment provided the animals while it was in
custody.
A Hardin County Dog Warden or peace officer shall be allowed reasonable access to inspect the property of
anyone found guilty of violation of any of the provisions under this ordinance. (Ordinance No. 17-2000, passed Sept.
5, 2000)
§ 90.99 PENALTIES
The enforcing agency, department or individual may choose to seek enforcement through the Code
Enforcement Board enacted on the 30th day of April, 2003, by Ordinance No. 09-2003.
Any person violating this ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50) nor more
than two hundred dollars ($200), or be imprisonment in the county jail for not less than ten (10) nor more than sixty
(60) days, or by both fine and imprisonment. Every day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(1) Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this Ordinance concerning owning a vicious dog, in
addition to the penalties imposed, may be required by a District Court Judge to have the dog humanely euthanized if in
the opinion of that Judge that the severity of the attack warrants such action.
(2) Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this Ordinance concerning owning a potentially
vicious dog or vicious dog shall be fined not less than two hundred fifty ($250.00) dollars and shall have the dog
spayed or neutered within seven days of that finding. Proof of the surgery must be provided to the citing agency within
twenty-four hours of its performance.
(3) Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this ordinance concerning owning a potentially
vicious dog or a vicious dog, in addition to any other penalties or stipulations imposed, shall within seven days of that
finding also have the dog implanted with a microchip identification. Within seven days of that implantation the owner
shall present the animal to the Division of scanning and verification of the microchip and identification number.
(4) In addition to any penalties and/or stipulations imposed, anyone convicted of violations of Cruelty to
Animals and/or Harboring a Vicious Animal, may also be required to relinquish ownership of the animal(s) to the
Hardin County Dog Warden immediately upon conviction, and said animal may be humanely euthanized according to
the standard of procedures followed by the Hardin County Dog Warden. (Ordinance No. 17-2000, passed Sept. 5,
2000, Amended Ordinance No. 29-2000, passed Dec. 18, 2000)
Any owner, custodian, possessor or harborer which violates this ordinance shall be fined not less than $25.00
nor more than $500.00 for the first offense and not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 for each subsequent
offense, plus applicable court costs. (Ordinance No. 28, passed December 4, 1995) (Am. Ord. 19-2003, passed 06-23-
2003)
2000-S-4
4F Elizabethtown - General Regulations
CHAPTER 91: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
91.001 Street names
91.002 Street maintenance
Excavations and Construction
91.015 Opening permit required
91.016 Application and cash deposit
91.017 Restoration of pavement
91.018 Barriers around excavations
91.019 Warning lights
Obstructions
91.045 Exhibition of merchandise on street or sidewalks
91.046 Barbed wire fences
91.047 Removal of ice and snow
Entrance and Encroachments
91.060 Purpose
91.061 Authority and Administration standards
91.062 Area of jurisdiction
91.063 Compliance with other codes, statutes and regulations required
91.064 Variances
91.065 Disclaimer of liability
91.066 Complaints regarding violations
91.067 Penalty
91.068 Entrance permits
91.069 Encroachment permits
91.070 General permit standards
91.071 Entrance construction standards
91.072 Encroachment permit construction standards
91.073 Special design standards
Street and House Numbering
91.085 Street numbering system
91.086 Department of Planning and Development to assign street numbers
91.087 Display of street address required
91.088 Specifications for numerals indicating street address
5
2013-S-1
6 Elizabethtown - General Regulations
91.089 Street numbers to be obtained and displayed before issuance of building permit or certificate of
occupancy
91.090 Tampering with; defacing street numbers prohibited
91.091 Noncompliance
Trees on Public Property
91.105 Street tree species to be planted
91.106 Spacing
91.107 Distance from curb to sidewalk
91.108 Distance from street corners and fire hydrant
91.109 Utilities
91.110 Public tree care
91.111 Tree Topping
91.112 Pruning, corner clearance
91.113 Dead or diseased tree removal on private property
91.114 Removal of stumps
91.115 Interference with city tree board
91.116 Arborists license and bond
91.117 Review by city council
Restricting Use of Skateboards, Skates and other Non-Motorized Transportation Devices
91.201 Definitions
91.202 Operation Prohibited
91.203 Penalty
91.204 Confiscation
91.99 Penalty
Cross-reference:
Maintenance of public ways, see §§ 92.090 through 92.097
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.001 STREET NAMES.
(A) The current names indicated on the Elizabethtown Zoning Map are adopted as the official street names for
the streets and public ways shown thereon for the city.
(B) Names for future streets should be chosen that are pleasant sounding, appropriate, easy to read and shall not
be the same nor closely approximate phonetically or in spelling the name of any other street in the county.
(C) Names for future streets shall be deemed to be officially adopted by the city after the subdivision plat creating
the street right-of-way receives approval by the City Planning Commission.
(D) The name of any street can only be changed by action of the City Council.
(Ord. 20, passed 5-20-91)
2004-S-1
Streets and Sidewalks 7
§ 91.002 STREET MAINTENANCE.
(A) Streets that meet minimum standards of the city according to the Elizabethtown Subdivision Design and
Improvement Standards shall be approved by the city upon certification of inspection by the City Engineer to the City
Council with motion and action to approve the same.
(B) A list of those city streets on the Elizabethtown Maintenance System shall be maintained by the Department
of Planning and Development at its office.
(Ord. 23-1994, passed 9-6-94)
Cross-reference:
Private maintenance of public ways, see §§ 92.090 through 92.097
EXCAVATIONS AND CONSTRUCTION
§ 91.015 OPENING PERMIT REQUIRED.
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than an authorized city official, to make any opening in any street, alley, ,
or public way of the city unless a permit to make the opening has been obtained prior to commencement of the work.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.016 APPLICATION AND CASH DEPOSIT.
Each permit for making an opening shall be confined to a single project and shall be issued by the authorized city
official. Application shall be made on a form prescribed by the legislative body, giving the exact location of the
proposed opening, the kind of paving, the area and depth to be excavated, and such other facts as may be provided for.
The permit shall be issued only after a cash deposit sufficient to cover the cost of restoration has been posted with the
authorized city official, conditioned upon prompt and satisfactory refilling of excavations and restoration of all surfaces
disturbed.
§ 91.017 RESTORATION OF PAVEMENT.
(A) The opening and restoration of a pavement or other surface shall be performed under the direction and to the
satisfaction of the authorized city official, and in accordance with rules, regulations, and specifications approved by the
legislative body.
(B) Upon failure or refusal of the permittee satisfactorily to fill the excavation, restore the surface, and remove all
excess materials within the time specified in the permit or where not specified therein, within a reasonable time after
commencement of the work, the city may proceed without notice to make such fill and restoration and the deposit
referred to in § 91.016 shall be forfeited. Thereupon the deposit shall be paid into the appropriate city fund, except such
part demanded and paid to the permittee as the difference between the deposit and the charges of the city for restoration
services performed by it. If the amount of such services performed by the city should exceed the amount of the deposit,
the Clerk or other proper administrative officer shall proceed to collect the remainder due from the permittee.
2004-S-1
8 Elizabethtown - General Regulations
§ 91.018 BARRIERS AROUND EXCAVATIONS.
Any person engaged in or employing others in excavating or opening any street, sidewalk, alley, or other public
way shall have the excavation or opening fully barricaded at all times to prevent injury to persons or animals.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.019 WARNING LIGHTS.
Any person engaged in or employing others in excavating or otherwise in any manner obstructing a portion or all
of any street, sidewalk, alley, or other public way, at all times during the night shall install and maintain at least two
yellow flashing lamps and barricades which shall be securely and conspicuously posted on, at, or near each end of the
obstruction or excavation, and if the space involved exceeds 50 feet in extent, at least one additional lamp for each
added 50 feet or portion thereof excavated or obstructed.
Penalty, see § 10.99
OBSTRUCTIONS
§ 91.045 EXHIBITION OF MERCHANDISE ON STREETS OR SIDEWALKS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit any merchandise, sign, scale or other article for sale or other purpose
on any sidewalk or street of the city, unless the exhibit has been permitted by the Police Department as an annual or
special event.
('73 Code, § 18-6) (Ord., passed 7-7-41) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.046 BARBED WIRE FENCES.
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or construct or cause to be constructed or erected along a sidewalk and
within 15 feet of the curbing of the streets, a fence in whole or in part containing barbed wire or other dangerous
obstruction.
('73 Code, § 18-8) (Ord., passed 9-4-22) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.047 REMOVAL OF ICE AND SNOW.
It shall be the duty of the owner or of the occupant of each and every parcel of real estate in the city adjacent to any
sidewalk to keep the sidewalk adjacent to his/her premises free and clear of snow and ice to the extent feasible under
the prevailing weather conditions, and to remove therefrom all snow and ice, to the extent feasible under the prevailing
weather conditions, a reasonable time which will ordinarily not exceed 12 hours after the abatement of any storm during
which the snow and ice may have accumulated.
Penalty, see § 10.99
2004-S-1
Streets and Sidewalks 9
ENTRANCE AND ENCROACHMENTS
§ 91.060 PURPOSE.
These standards are designed to encourage the development of sound, healthful and economically stable
residential, commercial, industrial, and public areas; to provide for safe, convenient and efficient traffic circulation; to
enhance the unique aesthetics of the community; and to provide for the overall harmonious development of the
community in accordance with the adopted Comprehensive Plan for the City of Elizabethtown, Kentucky.
('73 Code, § 18-51) (Ord., passed 9-3-85) (Ord. No. 06-2012, passed 04-02-12)
§ 91.061 ADMINISTRATION OF STANDARDS.
These standards are adopted by the City of Elizabethtown, Kentucky, and shall be administered jointly by the
Director of the Department of Planning and Development and the City Engineer or their authorized designee.
('73 Code, § 18-52) (Ord., passed 9-3-85) (Ord. No. 06-2012, passed 04-02-12)
§ 91.062 AREA OF JURISDICTION.
The City of Elizabethtown, Kentucky, through these standards, shall have jurisdiction and control over local street
rights-of-way within the corporate boundaries of the City of Elizabethtown, Kentucky, and city property.
('73 Code, § 18-53) (Ord., passed 9-3-85) (Ord. No. 06-2012, passed 04-02-12)
§ 91.063 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER CODES, STATUTES AND REGULATIONS REQUIRED.
Nothing in these standards shall be construed to exempt an applicant for a permit from compliance with all local,
state and federal codes, statutes and regulations.
('73 Code, § 18-54) (Ord., passed 9-3-85) (Ord. No. 06-2012, passed 04-02-12)
§ 91.064 VARIANCES.
(A) These standards are adopted only as minimum requirements, and all applicants should consider developing at
higher standards. The city may require standards above the minimum standards contained herein whenever it finds that
public health, safety or welfare justify such higher standards.
(B) The city may also reduce or otherwise vary the requirements of these standards. Such variances may be
granted if the city finds such to be true without detriment to the public good; without impairing the purposes and basic
objectives of these standards; and with impairing the desirable general development of the neighborhood and the
community as proposed by the Comprehensive Plan. In granting the variances, the city may attach and require
whatever conditions it finds are necessary or reasonable to secure the basic objectives of these standards. Any variance
granted by the city shall be noted on the required permit along with the findings which justify the granting of the
variance.
('73 Code, § 18-55) (Ord., passed 9-3-85) (Ord. No. 06-2012, passed 0402-12)
2013-S-1
10 Elizabethtown - General Regulations
§ 91.065 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
Notwithstanding any provisions of this subchapter, no approval of any entrance or encroachment permit or portion
thereof, by the Department of Planning and Development, the Engineering Department or any other public agency or
official of the City of Elizabethtown, whether employed, elected or appointed, shall operate as warranty or guarantee of
the safety or reasonableness of any entrance or encroachment activity or portion thereof, or act in any way to limit or
alter any common-law duties imposed on the developers or authors of such plans.
('73 Code, § 18-56) (Ord., passed 9-3-85) (Ord. No. 06-2012, passed 04-02-12)
§ 91.066 COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS.
Any person may file a written complaint alleging violation of these standards. Such complaint shall state fully the
cause and base thereof and shall be filed with the City Engineer. The City Engineer or his agent shall properly record
the complaint and investigate and take action thereon as provided by these regulations to cite the violator.
('73 Code, § 18-57) (Ord., passed 9-3-85) (Ord. No. 06-2012, passed 04-02-12)
§ 91.067 COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS.
Any violation of this subchapter is subject to the penalty of §10.99 of the Elizabethtown Code of Ordinances. The
enforcing agency, department or individual may choose to seek enforcement through the code Enforcement Board
enacted the 30th day of April, 2003 by Ordinance No. 09-2003.
(Ord. No. 06-2012, passed 04-02-12)
§ 91.068 ENTRANCE PERMITS.
(A) Entrance permits shall be required as follows:
(1) For new construction of commercial or industrial development.
(2) For existing commercial or industrial development, when entrances in use prior to the adoption of this
subchapter are changed structurally (i.e. widened, shortened, radius changes).
(3) For all vehicular use areas.
(4) For residential development driveways.
(5) For private streets.
(6) For new public streets.
(B) ENTRANCE PERMIT PROCEDURES: To formally request action on the required entrance permit, the
applicant shall file a completed application form to the Engineering Department. The procedure for entrance permits
differs based upon the type of development.
(1) Entrance permits with development plans.
(a) Review. When a development plan is required by the city's zoning ordinance, the applicant may
submit the required information for an entrance permit, to the Engineering Department, concurrently with the
development plan application. The encroachment permit number shall be provided on the development plan prior to
signature of approval.
2013-S-1
Streets and Sidewalks 11
(b) Action. The city shall act within thirty (30) days of submission in the following manner:
1. Approval. The city may approve the entrance as submitted.
2. Conditional approval. The city may approve the entrance conditionally and require
amendment to the application before granting full approval.
3. Disapproval. The city may disapprove the entrance and shall state in writing its reasons for
disapproval.
(2) Entrance permits with building permits.
(a) Review. When an entrance permit is required as part of a residential development, the applicant
must submit the required information for an entrance permit along with the building permit application to the
Engineering Department. The encroachment permit must be obtained prior to applicant receiving construction permit
approval.
(b) Action. The city shall act within thirty (30) days of submission in the following manner:
1. Approval. The city may approve the entrance as submitted.
2. Conditional approval. The city may approve the entrance conditionally and require
amendment to the application before granting full approval.
3. Disapproval. The city may disapprove the entrance and shall state in writing its reasons for
disapproval.
(3) All other entrance permits.
(a) Review. The city shall review entrance permit applications for compliance with the guidelines and
information as required by this subchapter. All permit applications shall be submitted to the Engineering Department.
((b) Action. The city shall act within thirty (30) days of submission in the following manner:
1. Approval. The city may approve the entrance as submitted.
2. Conditional approval. The city may approve the entrance conditionally and require
amendment to the application before granting full approval.
3. Disapproval. The city may disapprove the entrance and shall state in writing its reasons for
disapproval.
(C) CONTENT OF ENTRANCE PERMIT SITE PLAN: Required plan information shall be as follows (unless
certain items are waived by the city):
(1) Title block showing plan name, owner, developer plan and application preparer, firm or company, with
written and graphic scale.
(2) Scale of plan should be one inch equals 20 feet or other approved scale.
(3) North arrow.
2013-S-1
12 Elizabethtown - General Regulations
(4) Location, width and grade of proposed driveways.
(5) Angles of proposed driveways with City right-of-way.
(6) Location and size of any existing or proposed cross drain or side drain pipes or culverts and the direction
of flow within such structures.
(7) Distance between driveways measured along edge of pavement or along curb line in both directions of
travel.
(8) Proposed radii of all curves.
(9) The proposed use of the property.
(10) Any proposed divided highway access.
(11) Frontage roads with length, width, radii and corner clearance.
(12) Sight distance requirements/calculations.
(13) Traffic control device plans – both temporary and permanent.
(14) Anticipated traffic count by an applicant provided traffic study.
(15) Location of utilities (lines, poles, hydrants, manholes, pipes, conduit, both above and below grade).
(16) Location of street trees.
(17) Sidewalks, including accessible connections and crosswalks.
(D) AMENDMENTS TO ENTRANCE PERMITS: Amendments to approved entrance permits can be made only
by the same procedure required for the original submission.
('73 Code, § 18-64)
(Ord., passed 9-3-85) (Ord. No. 06-2012, passed 04-02-12) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.068 ENCROACHMENT PERMITS.
(A) Encroachment permits shall be required for any work performed upon the city's rights-of-way that disturbs
any roadway, sidewalk or any other portion of the right-of-way or requires a shutdown of vehicular or pedestrian travel
way for a period lasting longer than 24 hours or shut down requiring two or more consecutive days.
Encroachment permits are not required for utility companies having franchise agreements with the City when
performing emergency or routine maintenance except that notice of road closures and damage to the roadway and rightof-
way features shall be provided by the utility company.
(B) ENCROACHMENT PERMIT PROCEDURES: To formally request action on the required encroachment
permit, the applicant shall file a completed application form and a site plan.
2013-S-1
Streets and Sidewalks 13
(1) Encroachment permit with Subdivision Application.
(a) Review. When an encroachment permit is required as part of work being performed as part of a
subdivision development, the applicant may indicate all the required information for the encroachment permit on the
improvement plan as required by the Elizabethtown Subdivision Regulations and shall submit an encroachment permit
application. The encroachment permit number shall be provided on the improvement plans.
(b) Action. The city shall act within thirty (30) days of submission in the following manner:
1. Approval. The city may approve the encroachment as submitted.
2. Conditional approval. The city may approve the encroachment conditionally and require
amendment to the application before granting full approval.
3. Disapproval. The city may disapprove the improvement plan and shall state in writing its
reasons for disapproval.
(2) All other encroachment permits.
(a) Review. The city shall review encroachment permit applications for compliance with the guidelines
and information as required by this subchapter.
(b) Action. The city shall act within thirty (30) days of submission in the following manner:
1. Approval. The city may approve the encroachment as submitted.
2. Conditional approval. The city may approve the encroachment conditionally and require
amendment to the application before granting full approval.
3. Disapproval. The city may disapprove the improvement plan and shall state in writing its
reasons for disapproval.
(C) CONTENT OF ENCROACHMENT PERMIT SITE PLAN: Required information shall be as follows (unless
certain items are waived by the city):
(1) Title block showing name, owner, developer, plan and application preparer, firm or company, with
written and graphic scale.
(2) Scale of plan shall be one inch equals 20 feet or other approved scale.
(3) North arrow.
(4) Numbers and/or names of all streets and highways which appear on the plan.
(5) Details of adjacent roadways, including entrances, and all existing median facilities, including crossovers,
openings, storage lanes, tapers within 300 feet of work area in both directions.
(6) Width of existing roadway pavements and shoulders.
(7) Distance from the edge of the pavement to the side ditch and the direction of flow of the ditch and the
direction of flow of the ditch if ditched lined street.
2013-S-1
14 Elizabethtown - General Regulations
(8) Distance from the center line of the highway to the right-of-way line.
(9) Location of property lines along the right-of-way.
(10) Location of all utilities above and below ground line.
(11) The location of all signs, signals or other traffic control devices existing along the right-of-way being
disturbed.
(12) Traffic control device plans – both temporary and permanent.
(13) Type of encroachment.
(14) Limits of disturbance.
(D) AMENDMENTS TO ENCROACHMENT PERMITS: Amendments to approved encroachment permits can
be made only by the same procedure required for the original submission.
(Ord., passed 9-3-85) (Ord. No. 06-2012, passed 04-02-12) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.070 GENERAL PERMIT STANDARDS.
(A) All construction shall be protected from flooding and erosion damage, i.e. open pipes shall be protected from
filling with mud or debris. Erosion and flooding control shall be exercised during construction to prevent damage to
property adjacent to the development. An Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control permit, per Ordinance #01-2007,
shall be obtained prior to work being started.
(B) Any proposal to alter or increase a drainage area or change in any way a drainage structure must be
accompanied by a complete drainage survey (upstream and downstream) based on a 25-year and 100-year storm with
hydraulic analysis of all affected drainage structures in the area. In the event that any permittee's development is to
create sufficient additional surface drainage runoff, so that the existing downstream drainage facilities such as ditches,
paved ditches, special channel or any other drainage facility within city-maintained right-of- way becomes inadequate to
accommodate the increased flow, it is then the sole responsibility of the permittee to:
(1) Modify or replace the downstream highway drainage facility or facilities, in order that the increased flow
is adequately accommodated to the satisfaction of the city;
(2) Provide an on-site detention basin of appropriate capacity and discharge design to enable the existing
downstream drainage facilities to continue to function adequately to the satisfaction of the city, as required by this
subchapter, Zoning Ordinance, the Subdivision Regulations and Property Maintenance Ordinance.
(C) UTILITIES: UTILITIES ARE NOT TO BE PLACED IN OR THROUGH EXISTING DRAINAGE
CONDUITS.
Notification of Utility Companies Before Excavating (Occupational Safety and Health Act Requirements) –
Kentucky Occupational Safety and Health Standards for the construction industry which has the effect of law states in
part (1926.651 Specific Excavation Requirements): “Prior to opening an excavation, effort shall be made to determine
whether underground installation, i.e. sewer, telephone, water, fuel, electrical lines, or other utilities will be
encountered, and if so, where such underground installations are located, when the excavation approaches the estimated
location of such an installation, the exact location shall be determined and when it is uncovered, proper supports shall
be provided for the existing installation. Utility companies shall be contracted and advised of proposed work prior
to the start of actual excavation.” Known location of underground utilities shall be shown on applicant’s plan. The
applicant must contact the Kentucky Underground Protection (811) to help locate underground utilities.
2013-S-1
Streets and Sidewalks 15
(D) RESTORNATION: In areas where turf is present, restoration will consist of dressing, reseeding all affected
areas of the right-of-way. In all cases, a good turf is to be guaranteed by the permittee.
(E) MAINTENANCE: Permittees are responsible for the maintenance of all encroachments and entrances.
Pipelines or other utility crossings beneath the pavement shall have sufficient connections so that repairs may be made
without disturbing the roadway surface. Manholes and other points of access to underground utilities may be permitted
within the right-of-way, if located so as to not interfere with maintenance of the roadway facility or present safety
hazards to the road users.
(F) GRADING: If grading is required on an established right-of-way, the permittee shall provide a grading plan
for review.
(Ord. passed 9-3-85) (Ord. No. 06-2012, passed 04-02-12) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.070 ENTRANCE CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
(A) General entrance standards.
(1) Entrance width, as measured at the property line, shall be as follows:
(a) Residential, Single Family: no minimum; thirty (30) feet maximum.
(b) Residential, Multi Family: Twenty (20) feet minimum; thirty (30) fee maximum.
(c) Commercial: Twenty (20) feet minimum; fifty (50) feet maximum.
(d) Industrial: Twenty-four (24) feet minimum; sixty (60) feet maximum.
(2) Necessary drainage structures for an entrance shall not be connected to an existing drainage structure
unless the necessary junction boxes, manholes and catch basins are installed, as approved by the Engineering
Department and Stormwater Department.
(3) Entrance pipe shall extend at least twenty-four (24) inches beyond the edge of the entrance. Entrance
pipe size shall meet the approval of the City Engineer and the Director of Stormwater Management in accordance with
section 91.070 (B), but in no case shall the diameter be less then twelve (12) inches.
(4) All entrance pipe shall be concrete or bituminous coated corrugated metal and shall meet the approval of
the City Engineer and the Director of Stormwater Management.
(5) Valley gutters constructed of concrete or bituminous material may be used in lieu of entrance pipe where
such pipe cannot be placed. Prior approval of the City Engineer and Director of Stormwater Management for use of
such gutters is required.
(6) Where long lengths of pipe are used, catch basins or clean-out boxes shall be installed at approximate
intervals of 50 feet based on pipe diameter of 12 inches. Special consideration may be given to placement of clean-out
boxes at longer intervals for pipe with larger diameters. Clean-out boxes shall also be constructed at all angles in pipe
alignment.
(7) When necessary, gratings and catch basins must be employed to intercept and prevent water flowing
from the driveway over the sidewalks or roadway.
2013-S-1
16 Elizabethtown - General Regulations
(8) The maximum grade of an entrance to a multi-family, commercial or industrial use shall be no greater
than ten (10) percent. When an entrance grade at its intersection with the public street exceeds three (3) percent, a
leveling area shall be provided with grades no greater than three (3) percent for a distance of 50 feet from the
intersection with the street.
(9) When curbs are used along the roadway and sidewalks are used or contemplated, the gradient of the
driveway shall fit the plane of the sidewalk shall meet the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act. If the
difference in elevation of the gutter and the sidewalk is such that this is not practical, the sidewalk shall be lowered to
provide a suitable gradient for the driveway and the surface of the sidewalk shall be sloped gently away from either side
of the driveway. The flow line of the curb shall not be filled with any material. The curb can be modified only with
permission from the City Engineer. All new or modified curb entrances shall meet the current standards of the City of
Elizabethtown.
('73 Code, § 18-92) (Ord., passed 9-3-85) (Ord. No. 06-2012, passed 04-02-12) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.071 ENCROACHMENT PERMIT CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
(A) Underground utilities.
(1) Underground utilities installed longitudinally within the right-of-way limits of streets shall be buried to a
minimum depth of 30 inches. Exceptions may be made only where the terrain is such that this requirement would
prove impractical and where location of pipelines on the surface would not interfere with roadway maintenance, safety
or aesthetics.
(2) Underground utilities shall be constructed of materials which may be expected to render long troublefree
life and in some cases may be required to be encased to allow removal and replacement without necessity of cutting
the pavement.
(B) Existing longitudinal facilities. Existing longitudinal storm sewers, sanitary sewers, telephone conduits,
power conduits, water lines, oil lines, gas lines or other type utility lines may be permitted to remain under pavement
and shoulder areas, when the facilities will be maintenance-free insofar as the necessity for cutting or disturbing the
pavement and shoulder areas. Distribution and service lines constructed of maintenance-free materials and in good
condition may remain under a proposed pavement provided full provision is made for all future service requirements by
stubbing out service lines on either side of the new construction prior to placing the proposed pavement.
(C) New facilities.
(1) Generally, new facilities are not to be installed longitudinally under proposed pavement and shoulder
areas. Only when there is no other practical location available may any new facility be placed under the pavement or
shoulder area. In the event such an installation is allowed, it must be constructed of long-life materials which are
expected to be maintenance-free with all possible provisions made to minimize the likelihood of having to cut the
pavement or interfere with traffic in the future.
(2) Boring of entrances adjacent to the main line roadway which are paved with concrete or bituminous
surface may be required. The preferred methods to be employed in underground installations are auguring, jacking,
boring, pushing and tunneling.
(3) New or relocated utilities installed longitudinally shall be located where feasible back of the ditch line
and top of slope and as near the right-of-way as practical. Where curb and gutters are provided, underground utilities
should be located back of the curb when possible.
('73 Code, § 18-103) (Ord. passed 9-3-85) (Ord No. 06-2012, passed 04-02-12)
2013-S-1
Streets and Sidewalks 17
(D) Overhead utilities installed longitudinally.
(1) Utility poles or towers having crossarms. Utility poles or towers having crossarms are to be located not
more than five (5) feet inside the right-of-way line except for offsets in the right of way line due to high fills, deep cuts
or other obstructions.
(2) Utility poles or towers having no crossarms. Utility poles or towers having no crossarms are to be
located not more than 18 inches inside the right-of-way line except for offsets in the right-of-way line due to high fills,
deep cuts or other obstructions.
(3) Overhead utility crossings. The vertical clearance of an overhead utility crossing of a city street shall be
a minimum of 18 feet but in no case shall the clearance be less than the requirements of the National Electrical Safety
Code. Minimum allowable clearances are as follows:
Volts
Feet
0 - 750
18
750 - 15,000
20
15,000 - 50,000
22
('73 Code, § 18-104)
(Ord., passed 9-3-85) (Ord. No. 06-2012, passed 04-02-12) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.073 SPECIAL DESIGN STANDARDS.
(A) Turn storage lanes. When congestion is or may be created on the traveled way by vehicles desiring to turn
left into the development or subdivision, the creation of a left turn storage lane may be required. Left turn lanes shall be
constructed as outlined in the Kentucky Transportation Cabinet’s Auxiliary Turn Lane Policy dated July 2009. The
storage lane shall be constructed without expense to the city. The applicant shall pay for a traffic study if required by
the city.
(B) Tapers and increased radii. At some locations, entrance capacity deficiencies may result from restrictions in
the alignment, profile or cross-section of the entrance rather than from interior circulation and parking problems or
larger than anticipated entering traffic volumes. In these instances, improved capacity may be gained by the provisions
of longer entrance radii or by the addition of a taper connecting the entrance radius and the edge of the traveled way.
(C) Limited Access Streets.
(1) The use of limited access streets on private property can be required where deemed applicable by the
City Engineer, in order to minimize the number of access points to the highway from commercial and residential
developments. These limited access streets are to be indicated on the applicant's plans and when applicable, indicated
on the record plats for the development.
(2) Limited access streets shall be constructed to meet city standards based on the functional street
classification.
2013-S-1
18 Elizabethtown - General Regulations
(3) In the layout of limited access streets, the design of the intersection of these roads with other streets is to
receive particular consideration, since special traffic problems occur if small turning radii are created at these
intersections. In order to minimize these turning movements and traffic interference problems, radii of sufficient length
are to be approved by the city to accommodate right turn movement from the street into the frontage road, or vice versa,
as measured along the inside edge of the street and limited access street pavement.
(D) Four-lane divided highways.
(1) Median cuts. Median cuts shall be limited to 600 feet or more. The need for median cuts shall be
considered upon receipt of an application for an entrance permit. Before authorizing new median cuts, consideration
shall be given to aligning access points with existing median cuts through the use of redesigned parking facilities within
the development or the construction of limited access streets.
(2) Residential entrances. Residential access shall be limited to one side of the divided highway unless
aligned with an existing or proposed median cut. The access shall be located so as to conform to appropriate spacing
for the roadway, but entrances should not be any closer than two feet from a property line unless the entrance serves as
a joint access between adjoining properties.
(3) Commercial and industrial entrances. Commercial and industrial entrances shall align with an existing
or proposed median cut unless the entrance is deemed minor in nature whereas access may be permitted to one side of
the divided highway. Such access shall be located so as to conform to appropriate spacing for the roadway, but
entrances should not be any closer than two feet from a property line unless the entrance serves as a joint access
between adjoining properties.
(4) Field entrances. Field entrances for use by farm equipment may be permitted by the city but shall be
limited in access to one side of the highway unless aligned with an existing or proposed median cut. Field entrances
shall be considered temporary in nature and may be allowed at locations not conforming to spacing standards.
(E) Sight distance restrictions. A driveway, entrance or new road connection shall not be allowed at locations
which will prevent a vehicle approaching at legal control speed from having a six-second visibility time to the stopping
position of the driveway, entrance or new road both directions of travel based on standards established by AASHTO.
('73 Code, § 18-115)
(Ord., passed 9-3-85) (Ord. No. 06-2012, passed 04-02-12) Penalty, see § 10.99
2013-S-1
Streets and Sidewalks 19
STREET AND HOUSE NUMBERING
§ 91.085 STREET NUMBERING SYSTEM.
(A) Dixie Avenue, U.S. 31W, shall be made the base line for all streets running east and west and the streets shall
be numbered from the base line consecutively to the corporate limits. The north side of the streets shall bear odd
numbers and the south side of the streets shall bear even numbers.
(B) Mulberry Street, U.S. 62, shall be made the base line for all streets running north and south and the streets
shall be numbered from the baseline consecutively to the corporate limits. The east side of the streets shall bear odd
numbers and the west side of the streets shall bear even numbers.
(C) The numbers from the respective base lines shall begin with 100 and wherever possible, 100 numbers shall be
allowed to each block so that the number of each consecutive block shall commence with consecutive hundreds.
(D) One whole number shall be assigned for every 50 feet of ground, whether improved property or vacant lot, on
every street within the corporate limits.
(E) The Public Square of the city shall be numbered according to the buildings now erected thereon with the
presently assigned numbers.
(F) Cul-de-sacs on dead-end streets shall be numbered from the intersecting street consecutively to its terminus,
without regard to the base line streets.
(Ord. 20, passed 5-20-91)
§ 91.086 DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT TO ASSIGN STREET NUMBERS.
Street numbers for all lots, dwelling units and places of business shall be assigned by the Department of Planning
and Development. The Department shall work with the U.S. Postal Service and other appropriate agencies in
determining the proper street number.
(Ord. 20, passed 5-20-91)
§ 91.087 DISPLAY OF STREET ADDRESS REQUIRED.
Each principal building shall display the number assigned to the lot frontage on which the front entrance is located.
In case a principal building is occupied by more than one business or family dwelling unit, each separate front entrance
may display a separate number.
(Ord. 20, passed 5-20-91)
§ 91.088 SPECIFICATIONS FOR NUMERALS INDICATING STREET ADDRESS.
Numerals indicating the official number for each principal building shall be posted in a manner to be visible,
legible and distinguishable from the street on which the property is located by adhering to the following standards.
(A) Numerals shall be plain block Arabic numbers. No script or written numbers are permitted.
1995 S-1
20 Elizabethtown - General Regulations
(B) For residential buildings, numerals shall be a minimum of three inches in height. For commercial or
industrial buildings, numerals shall be a minimum of six inches in height.
(C) Numbers shall be in contrast to the building wall they are mounted to and shall be in the area of the main
entrance to the building. If the building is located more than 200 feet from the street and the number on the building is
not visible, street numbers should be displayed within 50 feet of the street.
(D) Additional street numbers may be displayed for the property on a business sign, mailbox or other device.
(Ord. 20, passed 5-20-91) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.089 STREET NUMBERS TO BE OBTAINED AND DISPLAYED BEFORE ISSUANCE OF BUILDING
PERMIT OR CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
No building permit shall be issued for any principal building until the owner or developer has procured from the
Department of Planning and Development the official number of the premises. Final approval for a certificate of
occupancy of any principal building erected or repaired after the effective date of this subchapter [May 20, 1991] shall
be withheld until permanent and proper numbers have been displayed in accordance with the requirements of this
subchapter.
(Ord. 20, passed 5-20-91) Penalty, § 10.99
§ 91.090 TAMPERING WITH; DEFACING STREET NUMBERS PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to alter, deface, or take down any number placed on any property in accordance
with this subchapter, except for repair of replacement of the number.
(Ord. 20, passed 5-20-91) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.091 NONCOMPLIANCE.
In the event that the owner or occupant or person in charge of any house or building refuses to comply with the
terms of this subchapter within 60 days after notification, or by failing within the period of 60 days to remove any old
numbers affixed to the house, or house entrance, or elsewhere which may be confused with the number assigned
thereto, they shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject a penalty as set out in § 10.99.
(Ord. 20, passed 5-20-91) Penalty, see § 10.99
TREES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
§ 91.105 STREET TREE SPECIES TO BE PLANTED.
The Tree Board will formulate an official street tree species list for the city. The list of allowable species shall be
broken down into categories of small, medium, and large trees. No species other than those included in this list may be
planted as street trees without permission of the City Tree Board.
(Ord. 24, passed 12-21-92)
Streets and Sidewalks 21
§ 91.106 SPACING.
The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in § 91.105 of this
chapter, and no trees may be planted closer together than the following; small trees, 30 feet; medium trees, 40 feet; and
large trees, 50 feet; except in special plantings approved by the Tree Board.
(Ord. 24, passed 12-21-92)
§ 91.107 DISTANCE FROM CURB AND SIDEWALK.
The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curblines and sidewalks will be in accordance with the three
species size classes listed in § 91.105 Of this chapter and no trees may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than
the following; small trees, 2 feet; medium trees, 3 feet; and large trees, 4 feet.
(Ord. 24, passed 12-21-92)
§ 91.108 DISTANCE FROM STREET CORNERS AND FIRE HYDRANT.
No street tree shall be planted closer than 35 feet of any street corner, measured from the point of nearest
intersecting curbs or curblines. No street tree shall be planted closer than 10 feet of any fire hydrant.
(Ord. 24, passed 12-21-92) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.109 UTILITIES.
All street trees shall be planted according to the current approved and accepted guidelines for utility planting as
developed by Vegetation Management Association. No Street trees shall be planted within five feet of any
underground utility.
(Ord. 24, passed 12-21-92), (Ord. 1, passed 1-2-96 amended), Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.110 PUBLIC TREE CARE.
The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants, and shrubs within the right of way
lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to insure public safety or to
preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. The City Tree Board may remove or cause or
order to be removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition and could cause injury or damage to
persons or property, or which by reason of its nature is damaging to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines,
or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. This section does not
prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property owners providing that all selection and location of the trees is
in accordance with § 91.105 through § 91.109 of this chapter.
(Ord. 24, passed 12-21-92)
22 Elizabethtown - General Regulations
§ 91.111 TREE TOPPING
It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or city department to top any street tree, park tree, or
other tree on public property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in
diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees
severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other
pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this chapter at the determination of the City Tree Board.
(Ord. 24, passed 12-21-92) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.112 PRUNING
Every owner/occupant of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city shall prune the branches
so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection or
sidewalk so as to not interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Said owners/occupants shall remove all dead,
diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The city
shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light
along the street from a street light or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign or intefere with
vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
(Ord. 24, passed 12-21-92). (Ord. 1-96, passed 1-2-96 amended)
91.113 DEAD OR DISEASED TREE REMOVAL ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
The city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead diseased trees on private property within the city,
when such trees constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease which constitute a potential threat
to other trees within the city. The City Arborist will notify in writing the owners of such trees. Removal shall be done
by the owners at their own expense within sixty days after the date of service of notice. In the event of failure of
owners to comply with such provisions, the city shall have the authority to remove such trees and charge the cost of
removal on the owners property tax bill.
(Ord. 24, passed 12-21-92), (Ord. 1-96, passed 1-2-96 amended)
§ 91.114 REMOVAL OF STUMPS.
All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump
shall not project above the surface of the ground.
(Ord. 24, passed 12-21-92)
§ 91.115 INTERFERENCE WITH CITY TREE BOARD.
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay, or interfere with the City Tree Board, or any of its agents,
while engaging in and about planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removal of any street trees, park
trees, or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this chapter.
(Ord. 24, passed 12-21-92), (Ord.1-96 passed 1-2-96 amended) Penalty, see § 10.99
Streets and Sidewalks 23
§ 91.116 LICENSE AND BOND
It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business or occupation or pruning, treating or removing
street or park trees within the city without first applying for and procuring a license pursuant to the Elizabethtown Code
of Ordinances Section 110.. The license fee shall be $25 annually in advance; provided, however, that no license shall
be required of any public service company or city employee doing such work in the pursuit of their public service
endeavors. Before any license shall be issued, each applicant shall first file evidence of possession of liability insurance
in the minimum amounts of $500,000 for bodily injury and $1,000,000 property damage indemnifying the city or any
person injured or damaged resulting from the pursuit of such endeavors as herein described.
(Ord. 24, passed 12-21-92), (Ord. 1-96, passed 1-2-96 amended) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.117 REVIEW BY CITY COUNCIL.
The City Council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and decisions of the City Tree Board. Any
person may appeal from any ruling or order of the City Tree Board first to the City Council who may hear the matter
and make final decision.
(Ord. 24, passed 12-21-92), Ord. 1-96, passed 1-2-96 amended)
RESTRICTING USE OF SKATEBOARDS, SKATES AND
OTHER NON-MOTORIZED TRANSPORTATION DEVICES
§ 91.201 DEFINITIONS.
Skateboard: Any board or platform to which there are attached wheels for movement thereof by either gravity or
the muscular power of someone standing upon the board or platform and which has no mechanism or other device with
which to steer or control the movement or direction of the board of platform.
Roller Skates: Any footwear device including in-line skates known as roller blades which may be attached to the
foot or footwear to which wheels are attached and such wheels may be used by the wearer in moving. The definition of
these terms shall include a single roller skate or parts thereon, used by wearer in moving.
Bicycle: A device upon which any person my ride, propelled exclusively by human power through a belt, chain or
gears, and having one or more wheels.
A non-motorized scooter: Any personal transportation device not otherwise regulated hereunder and the
regulation of which has not been undertaken by Commonwealth of Kentucky.
(Ord. 35-2003, passed 11-17-2003)
§ 91.202 OPERATION PROHIBITED.
(A) Streets: No person shall roller skate or ride a skateboard, or any other non-motorized transportation device on
any street except for the purpose of crossing the street. The rules relating to pedestrians crossing streets shall
apply to persons crossing a street on roller skates or a skateboard, or any other non-motorized transportation
device. No person crossing a street on roller skates or a skateboard, or any other non-motorized transportation
device shall travel too fast for safety under the conditions existing.
(B) Sidewalks: No person shall roller skate or ride a skateboard or any other non-motorized transportation device
in a reckless manner on any public sidewalk. No person shall ride a skateboard or roller skate on a sidewalk
without exercising due care for the safety of other persons using the sidewalk.
(C) Public Property: No person shall operate a skateboard, skates or other non-motorized transportation device
on any public property upon which a sign has been posted prohibiting said activity.
2004-S-1
24 Elizabethtown - General Regulations
(D) Private Property: No person shall operate a skateboard, skates or other non-motorized transportation device
on any private property unless the person has obtained the written consent of the owner or owners.
(E) City Property: No person shall operate a skateboard, skates or other non-motorized transportation device on
or against any city-owned table, bench, structure, tennis court, parking stop, retaining wall, fountain, statue or
other improvement which may suffer damage by such use. No person shall use or place a ramp, jump or any
other device used to force skateboard, skates or other non-motorized transportation device off the pavement on
the grounds of any city-owned parking lot, park or sidewalk.
(F) Bicycles: This Ordinance shall not apply to bicycles used for lawful transportation upon streets and roadways
as provided for and controlled by KRS 189.287 and the Department of Transportation regulations.
(Ord. 35-2003, passed 11-17-2003)
§ 91.203 PENALTY.
(A) Warning: For a first offense, a written warning shall be issued to the offender, and no fine shall be imposed.
If the offender is under the age of 18 years, a parent or guardian of the offender shall be notified and shall be
handed or mailed a copy of the written warning.
(B) Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this Ordinance again after a written warning shall be fined
not less than $20.00 nor more than $250.00 for each offense.
(C) Code Enforcement Board: The City Officer may choose at his discretion to cite the offender to the Code
Enforcement Board. (Ord. 09-2003).
(Ord. 35-2003, passed 11-17-2003)
§ 91.204 CONFISCATION.
(A) Any peace officer who issues a citation for violation of this subchapter shall confiscate the skateboard, skates
or any other non-motorized transportation device used in the violation and place it in the police property room.
(B) The skateboard, skates or any other non-motorized transportation device may be returned to the violator or to a
parent or guardian of the violator, if the violator is a minor, after the following periods of time:
(1) After 30 days for a first violation of this subchapter;
(2) If any person commits a subsequent violation of this subchapter the skateboard, skates or any other
non-motorized transportation device used by such person in the violation shall be forfeited to the City
and disposed of in the manner prescribed by law for forfeited property.
(Ord. 35-2003, passed 11-17-2003)
§ 91.99 PENALTY
Any violation of this section is subject to the penalty of §10.99. The enforcing agency, department or individual
may choose to seek enforcement through the Code Enforcement Board enacted on the 30th day of April, 2003, by
Ordinance No. 09-2003.
(Ord. 13-2003, passed 06-16-2003)
2004-S-1
CHAPTER 92: NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
92.001 Definitions
Animals, Fowl and Reptiles
92.010 Declaration of nuisance
92.011 Keeping of animal, fowl or reptile which becomes a nuisance prohibited
92.012 Certain violations concerning animals, fowl and reptiles
92.013 Slaughtering prohibited
Garbage, Debris and Rubbish
92.025 Declaration of nuisance
92.026 Violations concerning garbage, debris and rubbish
Abandoned; Inoperable Vehicles and Machinery
92.035 Declaration of nuisance
92.036 Parking inoperable vehicle where it can be viewed from public highway, other city streets
92.037 Dismantling or overhauling vehicle on private property prohibited; exceptions
92.038 Parking of vehicle in front yard prohibited; exceptions
92.039 Storing any appliance outside of any building or where accessible to children prohibited
Grass and Weeds
92.050 Declaration of nuisance
92.051 Grass, weeds and vegetation to be trimmed regularly; maximum height
92.052 Exemption for woodlands and trees
Erosion Control
92.065 Declaration of nuisance
92.066 Removal of vegetation; replacement
Sewage Discharge
92.075 Declaration of nuisance
92.076 Discharge to city sewage system required
92.077 Discharge of runoff or groundwater to sanitary public sewer prohibited
25
26 Elizabethtown - General Regulations
Maintenance of Public Ways
92.090 Declaration of nuisance
92.091 Owner to maintain public way; keep compatible with adjacent pavement
92.092 Owner to keep property cleared to traveled portion of street
92.093 Obstructing fire hydrant prohibited
92.094 Obstructing view of motorists prohibited
92.095 Owners to maintain drainageway on private property; obstruction of drainageway prohibited
92.096 Obstructing streets and sidewalks prohibited
92.097 Maintenance; repair of sidewalks
92.098 Inspection and notice
92.099 Failure to comply is a violation
92.100 Performance by city
Administration and Enforcement
92.110 Director of Planning and Development to investigate complaints; notify owner of premises in violation;
exception
92.111 Abatement procedure
92.112 Termination of utilities
92.113 Records of complaints, actions and violations to be available to the public
92.114 Appeal to Code Enforcement Appeals Board
Prohibiting Illicit Discharges and Illicit Connections
to the City’s Stormwater System
92.150 Purpose and Scope
92.151 Definitions
92.152 General Provisions
92.153 Prohibition of Discharges and Illicit Connections; Exceptions
92.154 Illicit Discharges and Illicit Connections are declared to be a Public Nuisance
92.155 Rules and Regulations
92.156 Inspection, Monitoring and Remediation
92.157 Enforcement and Penalties
92.158 Article Supplement to Other Regulations
92.159 Severability
92.99 Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.001 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires
a different meaning.
APPLIANCE. Stoves, refrigerators, freezers, washing machines, dryers, dishwashers, or parts thereof.
CODE OFFICIAL. The Director of the Elizabethtown Department of Planning and Development or his/her
designee or the successor thereto.
2009-S-1
Nuisances 27
DEBRIS. Ruins from construction, including, but not limited to, barrels, metals, metal furniture and appliances,
wood, dirt in piles, rock, pieces of concrete, glass, brick, building materials, and mineral waste.
DEPARTMENT. The Department of Planning and Development for the city.
DISREPAIR. Dangerously rusted, wrecked, or without all properly inflated tires, windshields, window glass,
major chassis components, brake-lights, or without any other vehicle component required by law.
GARBAGE. Animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of
food.
INCINERATOR. Any incinerator shall be constructed to comply with the requirements of the Commonwealth of
Kentucky Air Pollution Requirements and shall be approved by the Kentucky Fire Marshal or a Deputy of said Fire
Marshal or the City Fire Chief.
MOTOR VEHICLES. Every device, including major parts thereof, in, on, or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn on a public highway, except devices moved by human or animal power, devices used
exclusively on stationary rails or tracks and devices designed to be pulled, drawn, or towed by a motor vehicle.
PERSON. Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, or other legal designation, including associations,
boards and other groups.
PUBLIC WAY. Any and all entrances, streets, or thoroughfares leading from a public highway or street to a
business where the public is generally invited, is not prohibited from coming thereon and where vehicular or other
traffic customarily takes place.
RUBBISH. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage, and the term, shall include the
residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood,
excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and
other similar materials.
(Ord. 37, passed 11-4-91)
ANIMALS, FOWL AND REPTILES
§ 92.010 DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.
Violation of this subchapter shall be deemed a public nuisance.
(Ord. 37, passed 11-4-91)
§ 92.011 KEEPING OF ANIMAL, FOWL OR REPTILE WHICH BECOMES A NUISANCE PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, harbor, or possess any domestic or other animal of any nature,
any fowl or reptile which becomes a public nuisance.
(Ord. 37, passed 11-4-91) Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
Animals, see Ch. 90
2009-S-1
28 Elizabethtown - General Regulations
§ 92.012 CERTAIN VIOLATIONS CONCERNING ANIMALS, FOWL AND REPTILES.
The following shall be deemed a violation of this subchapter:
(A) Any dog, cat or other animal, fowl or reptile, running at large, without a license required by state law.
(B) Any dog, cat or other animal, fowl or reptile which has not received a rabies or other inoculation sufficient to
prevent the dog, cat or other animal, fowl or reptile from contacting or spreading hydrophobia or other infectious
disease.
(C) Any dog, cat, animal, fowl or reptile which damages or destroys any public or private, personal or real
property.
(D) Any dog, cat, animal, fowl or reptile which barks, howls, whines, meows, screeches, hisses, or makes any
other unreasonable noise which becomes a disturbance to neighbors of said person.
(Ord. 37, passed 11-4-91) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.013 SLAUGHTERING PROHIBITED.
Conducting or maintaining any slaughter house or other premises or area for the slaughtering of animals, fowl, or
reptiles, or to render the byproducts of same shall be a violation.
(Ord. 37, passed 11-4-91) Penalty, see § 10.99
GARBAGE, DEBRIS AND RUBBISH
§ 92.025 DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.
Violation of this subchapter shall be deemed a public nuisance.
(Ord. 37, passed 11-4-91)
§ 92.026 VIOLATIONS CONCERNING GARBAGE, DEBRIS AND RUBBISH.
The following shall be deemed a violation of this subchapter:
(A) The placing or permitting to remain anywhere in the city any garbage or other material subject to decay for
more than 96 consecutive hours, except in a tightly covered metal or plastic container or as part of a compost operation.
(B) Causing or permitting to accumulate any trash, ashes or dust, or any material that can be blown away by the
wind or other climatic disturbances other than in a covered container.
(C) Depositing or permitting to fall from any vehicle any garbage, rubbish, debris, on any public street or highway
in the city.
(D) The hauling of garbage in any type vehicle other than a packer-type garbage truck approved by the Code
Official or Hardin County Solid Waste Officer.
2009-S-1
Nuisances 29
(E) The disposal of garbage, debris, or rubbish, by the dumping of same on any premises in the city, with or
without the consent of the owner or possessor of the premises, or the permitting by the owner or possessor of any
premises in the city to dump or permit the dumping of garbage, debris and rubbish on their property. The provisions of
this division apply to all garbage, debris or rubbish, except leaves or other appropriate material disposed of in
accordance with accepted practices for composting.
(F) Failure to dispose of all garbage, debris, and rubbish at least one time per week, except for materials in an
acceptable compost operation as stated elsewhere in this chapter.
(G) Failure to dispose of any dead animals, fowl, and reptiles within six hours after discovery of same by the
owner or possessor of the premises.
(H) Failure to dispose of all garbage, debris and rubbish by any of the following methods:
(1) Pickup and collection by sanitation companies, who possess a valid business license;
(2) Dumping in an approved sanitary landfill;
(3) Collection by the city, this method shall apply only to the collection of certain rubbish materials deemed
to be offered as a public service by the city;
(4) Composting; or
(5) Burning as hereinafter set out.
(I) Burning.
(1) It shall be a nuisance to burn garbage anywhere in the city.
(2) It shall be a nuisance to burn debris or rubbish anywhere in the city, except in an approved incinerator.
(3) The burning of wood, tree branches, yard trimmings, leaves and weeds shall be permitted with the
following conditions:
(a) The location must be approved by the Fire Chief or his/her appointee and a permit issued, if
required.
(b) The fire shall not be closer than 50 feet from any structure and shall be monitored by an adult with
adequate extinguishing agent at hand.
(3) The burning materials shall be completely extinguished prior to abandonment.
(D) Fires set for the purpose of bona fide instruction and training of public and industrial employees in the
methods of fighting fires will be allowed provided that prior approval is given by the Fire Chief or his/her designee in
each instance.
(E) The Fire Chief or his/her designee may prohibit any and all burning when atmospheric conditions or local
circumstances make fires hazardous or which are or could be offensive or objectionable due to smoke or odor
emissions. The Fire Chief or his/her designee shall order the
2009-S-1
30 Elizabethtown - General Regulations
extinguishment by the permit holder or the Fire Department of any fire which creates or adds to a hazardous or
objectionable situation.
(Ord. 37, passed 11-4-91) Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
Police and Fire Departments, see Ch. 37,38
ABANDONED; INOPERABLE VEHICLES AND MACHINERY
§ 92.035 DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.
Violation of this subchapter shall be deemed a public nuisance.
(Ord. 37, passed 11-4-91)
§ 92.036 PARKING INOPERABLE VEHICLE WHERE IT CAN BE VIEWED FROM PUBLIC HIGHWAY,
OTHER CITY STREETS.
No motor vehicle shall be parked on any property in the city which can be viewed from a public highway or other
city street, which vehicle remains for the period of one week in the same relative location or which for mechanical or
other reasons cannot be moved or which will not operate properly or which is unsightly.
(Ord. 37, passed 11-4-91) (Ord. 31-2005, passed 10-17-05) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.037 DISMANTLING OR OVERHAULING VEHICLE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY PROHIBITED;
EXCEPTIONS.
No vehicle shall be at any time in a state of major disassembly or disrepair, nor shall it be in the process of being
stripped or dismantled, nor shall it undergo major overhaul, including body work, on any private property within the
city. This section shall not apply to a motor vehicle on the premises of business enterprise involved solely in the repair,
renovation, storage or servicing of motor vehicles, a vehicle in an approved storage place or depository maintained in a
lawful place and manner by the city, or a motor vehicle inside a fully enclosed structure or similarly enclosed area
designed and approved for such purposes.
(Ord. 37, passed 11-4-91) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.038 PARKING OF VEHICLE IN FRONT YARD PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
The parking, locating, or storing of a motor vehicle located on private property in a front yard, other than inside a
fully-enclosed structure or similarly-enclosed area designed and approved for such purposes, or in a safe manner on a
paved or graveled area shall be a violation of this subchapter.
(Ord. 37, passed 11-4-91) Penalty, see § 10.99
2007-S-1
Nuisances 31
§ 92.039 STORING ANY APPLIANCE OUTSIDE OF ANY BUILDING OR WHERE ACCESSIBLE TO
CHILDREN PROHIBITED.
The keeping, placing, or storage outside of any building or dwelling of any appliance or the keeping, placing, or
storage in any other place accessible to children of any appliance shall be a violation of this subchapter.
(Ord. 37, passed 11-4-91) Penalty, see § 10.99
GRASS AND WEEDS
§ 92.050 DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.
Violation of this subchapter shall be deemed a public nuisance.
(Ord. 37, passed 11-4-91)
§ 92.051 GRASS, WEEDS AND VEGETATION TO BE TRIMMED REGULARLY; MAXIMUM HEIGHT.
(A) All grass, weeds, and other vegetation shall be cut and trimmed on a regular basis by the owner and/or
occupant of all property to a height of not more than ten inches at all times, so long as the property is less than two acres
in total area and so long as the property is not agricultural or woodlands.
(B) For property of at least two acres in size, or property that is primarily used for an agricultural use, then the
grass, weeds and vegetation thereon shall be mowed, cut or trimmed to a height commensurate with the customary
practice for agricultural use, but at no time shall the height of any non-harvested crop exceed 36 inches.
(Ord. 37, passed 11-4-91) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.052 EXEMPTION FOR WOODLANDS AND TREES.
In the event property is predominantly woodlands and trees and the same dominates the land and no crop or
agricultural use is made of same, then this subchapter shall not apply.
(Ord. 37, passed 11-4-91) Penalty, see § 10.99
EROSION CONTROL
§ 92.065 DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.
Violation of this subchapter shall be deemed a public nuisance.
(Ord. 37, passed 11-4-91)
32 Elizabethtown - General Regulations
§ 92.066 REMOVAL OF VEGETATION; REPLACEMENT.
Any person removing vegetation from any real estate in the city shall reseed, resod or revegetate the same within
six months from the date of the removal, commensurate with the surrounding real estate, unless a building permit is
received from the appropriate city department. This subchapter shall not apply to the customary use of real estate for
agricultural and/or horticultural use, nor to an area of less than 2,500 square feet.
(Ord. 37, passed 11-4-91) Penalty, see § 10.99
SEWAGE DISCHARGE
§ 92.075 DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.
Violation of this subchapter shall be deemed a public nuisance.
(Ord. 37, passed 11-4-91)
§ 92.076 DISCHARGE TO CITY SEWAGE SYSTEM REQUIRED.
Each owner of property in the city having installed any bath, lavatory, toilet, kitchen or other sink, laundry device,
washing machine or other water discharge or storage shall provide for the discharge of the sewage or drainage into the
city sewage system where available and it shall be unlawful and a public nuisance to permit or cause to be permitted or
discharged, sewage or drainage from any bath, lavatory, toilet, sink or other facility, device or machine or in any other
receptacle, or to any storm drain or in any manner not provided for by law.
(Ord. 37, passed 11-4-91) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.077 DISCHARGE OF RUNOFF OR GROUNDWATER TO SANITARY PUBLIC SEWER
PROHIBITED.
No person shall make connection of roof drains, exterior fountain drains, area-way drains, other sources of runoff
or ground water to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a sanitary
public sewer.
(Ord. 37, passed 11-4-91) Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
Water and sewers, see Title V.
MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC WAYS
§ 92.090 DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.
Violations of this subchapter shall be deemed a public nuisance.
(Ord. 37, passed 11-4-91) Penalty, see § 10.99
Nuisances 33
§ 92.091 OWNER TO MAINTAIN PUBLIC WAY; KEEP COMPATIBLE WITH ADJACENT PAVEMENT.
The owner of any real estate used as a public way is hereby charged with the responsibility of maintaining the
public way by periodically renewing, repaving or otherwise maintaining a smooth surface for motor vehicular and other
traffic in such a way as to be maintained compatible with and as permanent as adjacent pavement and maintenance of
public ways. The same shall be further maintained in a safe manner so as not to damage motor or other vehicles
generally crossing the public way.
(Ord. 37, passed 11-4-91) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.092 OWNER TO KEEP PROPERTY CLEARED TO TRAVELED PORTION OF STREET.
All owners of any real estate shall be required to keep that portion of property located between the traveled portion
of the city street and their property line free of garbage and refuse; and to keep the grass or weeds thereon mowed
consistent with §§ 92.051 and 92.052 of this chapter.
(Ord. 37, passed 11-4-91) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.093 OBSTRUCTING FIRE HYDRANT PROHIBITED.
It shall be a violation for any person to in any way cause to be placed, planted or located any building, structure,
shrubbery, tree, any other planted material, or any ornamental landscaping material, or to change the grade of the land,
adjacent to or in the vicinity of any fire hydrant, so that the fire hydrant is obstructed from view or use or is rendered
inoperable.
(Ord. 37, passed 11-4-91) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.094 OBSTRUCTING VIEW OF MOTORISTS PROHIBITED.
It shall be a violation for any person to in any way cause to be placed, planted or located any man-made material or
shrubbery, tree, or any other planted material, or to change the grade of the land, within or adjacent to any street rightof-
way or on any private property that obstructs the view of any motorist, at a street intersection, from being able to
view oncoming traffic and operate a motor
vehicle in a safe manner.
(Ord. 37, passed 11-4-91) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.095 OWNERS TO MAINTAIN DRAINAGEWAY ON PRIVATE PROPERTY; OBSTRUCTION
OF DRAINAGEWAY PROHIBITED.
It shall be the responsibility of all persons owning property to maintain any drainageway on their private property
in a manner that allows for the proper utilization of the drainageway. It shall be a violation for any person to in any way
cause to be placed in or across any drainageway any obstruction, including grass clippings, tree limbs and debris of any
kind whatsoever that alters, restricts or prohibits the drainageway from functioning in a proper manner, unless prior
approval is given by the city as provided for by ordinance.
(Ord. 37, passed 11-4-91) Penalty, see § 10.99
1995 S-1
34 Elizabethtown - General Regulations
§ 92.096 OBSTRUCTING STREETS AND SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED.
It shall be a violation for any person to in any way cause to be placed across any sidewalk, street, street crossing,
alley, public highway or railroad crossing any blockade or obstruction to remain thereon for a greater length of time
than five minutes, unless prior approval is granted by the appropriate city department. This section shall not apply to
the blocking or obstructing of any sidewalk, street, street crossing, alley, public highway or railroad crossing done by
any public utility or other authorized person in an emergency situation or to repair a public utility service.
(Ord. 37, passed 11-4-91) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.097 MAINTENANCE; REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS.
The owners of property abutting on sidewalks of the city are required, at their own expense, to repair or replace
that part of any sidewalk adjoining or on their property, by filling and repairing any holes, uneven surfaces, and other
defects, by using materials as nearly similar as possible to that of which the sidewalk is constructed.
(Ord. 37, passed 11-4-91) Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
Streets and sidewalks, see Ch. 91
§ 92.098 INSPECTION AND NOTICE.
It shall be the duty of the director of the Department of Planning and Development, or any city employee
designated by him, to ascertain the extent of holes, uneven surfaces, or other defects in the sidewalks in the city, and to
notify the owners of the property directly adjacent to that part of the sidewalk which is found to be defective, to repair
or replace the same at their own expense within a period of 30 days after receiving the notice.
(Ord. passed 12-16-68)
§ 92.099 FAILURE TO COMPLY IS A VIOLATION.
Any owner of property who shall fail to repair the sidewalk as set out above within 30 days after receiving notice,
shall be guilty of a violation of this code for each day that the sidewalk remains unrepaired after the period fixed by the
notice.
(Ord. passed 12-16-18)
§ 92.100 PERFORMANCE BY CITY.
The city may, at its option, after notifying the property owners to repair the sidewalk as set out above, enter upon
the sidewalk and repair or replace it in the same manner as set out above, and shall bill the respective property owners
for the cost of labor and materials for the repair of the sidewalk, and the city shall have a lien against the property for
the payment of such costs. After expiration of 30 days after the work on the repairing of the sidewalk is performed by
the city, the property owners shall be liable for a penalty of 3% per annum of the cost of the labor and materials, and the
same shall be a lien against the property and shall run with the land until paid.
(Ord. passed 12-16-68)
1995 S-1
Nuisances 35
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 92.110 DIRECTOR OF PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT TO INVESTIGATE COMPLAINTS; NOTIFY
OWNER OF PREMISES IN VIOLATION; EXCEPTION.
(A) The Director of the Department of Planning and Development and his/her authorized designee shall
administer and enforce this chapter.
(B) The Director shall investigate complaints of violation and report all findings and action in the official records
of the Department. If the Director finds any of the provisions of this chapter are being violated, he/she shall notify, in
writing, the owner or possessor of the premises of the violation. If the violation is not abated within the time prescribed
by the notice, the Director shall then cause a citation to be issued through the District Court, including the County
Attorney's Office. The citation shall, through the district court system of the state, cause a hearing to be scheduled.
(C) Complaints of violation of the provisions of this chapter governing animals, fowls, and reptiles shall be
investigated by the City Police Department. The Police Department shall follow the same procedures for investigation
and notice as prescribed for other violations under this chapter.
(Ord. 37, passed 11-4-91)
Cross-reference:
Police and Fire Departments, see Ch. 37,38
§ 92.111 ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
(A) In the event that the District Court finds that a nuisance does exist, then the same may be abated by causing
the removal, eradication, termination or possession, or other remedy to take place so the nuisance is abated promptly.
(B) In the event the nuisance is not abated, as ordered by the District Court, then the District Court may order the
city or its Code Official to take the steps necessary to abate the nuisance and assess the cost of same against the violator,
including any necessary attorney's fees, costs, or other penalties and the same may be then levied against the property
and a lien for the necessary amounts to abate said nuisance shall then bear interest at the rate of 12% per annum and
shall be filed in the office of the Clerk of Hardin County Court until the nuisance and fees, costs, and other amounts are
fully paid.
(Ord. 37, passed 11-4-91)
§ 92.112 TERMINATION OF UTILITIES.
(A) The provisions of termination of utilities set out in division (B) below may be enforced by the District Court.
The District Court may maintain control over a continuing nuisance.
(B) In the event a nuisance is found to exist against the owner, possessor or other violator, then the utilities of the
owner or possessor of the property, may be terminated by court order.
(Ord. 37, passed 11-4-91)
Cross-reference:
Water and Sewer, see Ch. 50
1995 S-1
36 Elizabethtown - General Regulations
§ 92.113 RECORDS OF COMPLAINTS, ACTIONS AND VIOLATIONS TO BE AVAILABLE TO THE
PUBLIC.
The Director of the Department of Planning and Development shall make records of all official actions relating to
the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter available to the public, including but not limited to,
written records of all complaints and actions taken with regard thereto, all violations discovered with actions taken
thereto and the final disposition of such matters.
(Ord. 37, passed 11-4-91)
§ 92.114 APPEAL TO CODE ENFORCEMENT APPEALS BOARD.
Any decision of the Code Official of the city in the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter may be appealed
to the Elizabethtown Code Enforcement Appeals Board by filing a written notice in the proper form with the Code
Official at his/her office. The written appeal shall be filed within seven days of the decision, action or determination
made by the Code Official from which the appeal is sought.
(Ord. 37, passed 11-4-91)
PROHIBITING ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND ILLICIT CONNECTIONS
TO THE CITY’S STORMWATER SYSTEM
§ 92.150 PURPOSE AND SCOPE
This Section is intended to protect the general health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of
Elizabethtown by declaring illicit discharges into the storm sewer system to be nuisances, and more specifically;
To protect and enhance the water quality of watercourses and water bodies in a manner pursuant to and consistent
with the Federal Clean Water Act by prohibiting non-stormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer
system (MS4), collectively called Stormwater conveyance system.
To prohibit illicit discharges and connections to the MS4.
To establish legal authority to carry out all inspections, surveillance and monitoring, and enforcement procedures
necessary to ensure compliance with this section.
(Ord. 21-2008, passed 12-22-08)
§ 92.151 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires
a different meaning.
THE DEPARTMENT OF STORMWATER MANAGEMENT. The Enforcement Agency working through the
Director of Stormwater Management and duly authorized staff, representatives, or designees.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any materials, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which
because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, biological or infectious characteristics may cause, or
significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the
environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
2009-S-1
Nuisances 36A
ILLICIT DISCHARGE. Any direct or indirect non-stormwater substance or hazardous materials disposed,
deposited, spilled, poured, injected, seeped, dumped, leaked, or placed by any means, intentionally or unintentionally,
into the MS4 or any area that has been determined to drain directly or indirectly into the MS4, except as exempted in
Section 92.153.
ILLICIT CONNECTION. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an
illicit discharge to enter the MS4. Included are conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including
sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain
system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection has been previously allowed,
permitted or approved.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4). A conveyance, or system of conveyances
including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, and
storm drains designed or used for collecting or conveying Stormwater to the waters of the United States. Sanitary and
combined sewers are not included in the definition of the municipal separate storm sewer system.
NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE. Any discharge to the MS4, that is not composed solely of Stormwater
except as permitted by Section 92.153.
POLLUTANT. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to:
paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, and accumulations, so that same may cause or
contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; wastes and
residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
PREMISES. The area of land, site, grounds or property on which the illegal discharge emanates or the illicit
connection exists.
(Ord. 21-2008, passed 12-22-08)
§ 92.152 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
Except as herein provided or exempted by the Director of Stormwater Management, this section shall apply to all
non-stormwater discharges and connections to the MS4 owned and operated by the City of Elizabethtown.
The Director of Stormwater Management shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this section.
This section shall be construed to insure consistency with requirements of the Clean Water Act, the City of
Elizabethtown KPDES Phase 2 Program, and acts amendatory thereof or any other applicable regulations.
The standards and requirements set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this section are minimum standards.
This section does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person, company, developer, or any other entity will
ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, or unauthorized discharge of pollutants into the MS4.
(Ord. 21-2008, passed 12-22-08)
2009-S-1
36B Elizabethtown - General Regulations
§ 92.153 PROHIBITION OF DISCHARGES AND ILLICIT CONNECTIONS; EXCEPTIONS.
No person, company, developer or any other entity shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the MS4 any
pollutants including but not limited to hazardous materials or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute
to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than Stormwater. The commencement, conduct or
continuance of any illicit discharge is prohibited.
This section does not apply to following categories of non-stormwater discharges or flows, unless the Director of
Stormwater Management and/or Enforcement Agency indentifies them as significant contributors of pollutants to it
MS4: water line flushing, landscaping irrigation, diverted stream flows, rising ground waters, uncontaminated ground
water infiltration, uncontaminated pumped ground water, discharge from potable water sources, foundation drains, air
conditioning condensation, irrigation water, springs, water from crawl space pumps, footing drains, lawn watering,
individual non-polluting residential home and car washing, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, dechlorinated
swimming pool discharges, firefighters activities and street wash water from municipal cleaning operations.
The prohibition of discharges or flows shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharges permitted under a NPDES
permit, waiver, or waste discharges order issued to the discharger and administered by the Kentucky Division of Water
under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance
with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that
written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system.
The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is
prohibited. This prohibition includes without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the
connection was permissible under law or practice applicable at the time of connection.
(Ord. 21-2008, passed 12-22-08)
§ 92.154 ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND ILLICIT CONNECTIONS ARE DECLARED TO BE A PUBLIC
NUISANCE.
Illicit discharges and illicit connections are declared to be a public nuisance, being a threat to the public health,
safety and welfare. The City shall take all necessary steps to abate the nuisance, including all measures cited in section
92.157, Enforcement and Penalties, and/or any other action permitted by State and Federal law.
(Ord. 21-2008, passed 12-22-08)
§ 92.155 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
Compliance by Elimination of Illicit Discharge – The Director of Stormwater Management may require by written
Notice of Violation that the person, property owner, occupant, tenant, lessor, lessee, or entity (hereinafter referred to as
“party”) responsible for an illicit discharge immediately, or by a specified date, discontinue the discharge and, if
necessary, take measures to eliminate the source of the discharge to prevent the occurrence of future illegal discharges.
The elimination of an illicit discharge within seven (7) days after receipt of Notice of Violation from the
Enforcement Agency shall be considered compliance with the provisions of this section and no further action shall be
taken.
2009-S-1
Nuisances 36C
Monitor and Analyze – The Director of Stormwater Management may require by written notice that any party
engaged in any activity and/or owning or operating any property or facility which has been determined to contribute to
stormwater pollution, illicit discharges, and/or non-stormwater discharges to the MS4 to undertake at said party’s
expense such monitoring and analyses and furnish such reports to the Director of Stormwater Management and/or
Enforcement Agency as deemed necessary to determine compliance with this section.
Notification of Spills – Notwithstanding other requirements of local, state and federal law, as soon as any party
responsible for a property, facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a property, facility, or
operation, has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or hazardous materials which are resulting or
may result in illegal discharges to the MS4, said party shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery,
containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said party shall
immediately notify emergency response officials of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services (911). In the event
of a release of non-hazardous materials to the MS4, said party shall notify the Director of Stormwater Management
and/or Enforcement Agency in person, by phone, or facsimile immediately, but no later than 2:00 p.m. of the next
business day. Notification shall be confined by written notice addressed and mailed to the Director of Stormwater
Management within three business days of the original notice.
(Ord. 21-2008, passed 12-22-08)
§ 92.156 INSPECTION, MONITORING AND REMEDIATION.
Right of Entry and Inspection – Whenever the Director of Stormwater Management has cause to believe that there
exists, or potentially exists, any condition which constitutes a violation of this section, the Director of Stormwater
Management shall be permitted to enter the believed violating premises served by the MS4 at all reasonable times to
inspect the same. Refusal to allow entrance to the premises for inspection or monitoring shall constitute a violation for
each day after the Notice of Violation that his refusal continues. If the Director of Stormwater Management has been
refused access to any part of the premises from which Stormwater is discharged and is able to demonstrate probable
cause to believe that there may be a violation of this section, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a
routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this section, or any order issued hereunder
to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, the City may seek all appropriate remedies
from any court of competent jurisdiction, including the issuance of a search warrant.
Urgency Abatement – The Director of Stormwater Management is authorized to require immediate abatement of
any violation of this section that constitutes an immediate threat to the health, safety or well being of the public. If any
such violation is not abated immediately as directed by the Director of Stormwater Management, the City is authorized
to enter into private property and to take any and all measures required to remediate the violation. Any expense related
to such remediation undertaken by the City shall be fully reimbursed by the property owner and/or responsible part.
Sampling Devices and Testing – During any inspection as provided herein, the Director of Stormwater
Management may take any samples and perform any testing deemed necessary to aid in the pursuit of the inquiry or to
record site activities. The costs of all testing may be passed on to the party, owner or operator of the premises where the
illicit discharge emanates
(Ord. 21-2008, passed 12-22-08)
§ 92.157 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
Any of the following enforcement remedies and penalties, to be applied independently or in a sequence as deemed
necessary, shall be available to the City in response to violations of this section.
2009-S-1
36D Elizabethtown - General Regulations
Notice of Violation – Enforcement proceedings for this section shall be initiated by the issuance of a Notice of
Violation (NOV) by the Director of Stormwater Management.
Failure to remedy the violation within seven (7) days of receipt of the Notice of Violation shall result in a citation
for a civil offense. Each day such violation continues after receipt of a citation shall be considered a separate offense.
The civil administrative fine for each citation (violation) of this section shall be not less than $100 and not more than
$500. The civil fine shall be paid directly to the City of Elizabethtown. If the fine is not paid within thirty (30) days
from the date of notification, then the City may recover said fine in a civil action in the court of proper jurisdiction. The
party cited may appeal the citation and request a hearing before the Code Enforcement Board prescribed in Chapter 34
of the Elizabethtown Code of Ordinance.
The City may also obtain injunctions or abatement orders to insure compliance with this section or pursue
administrative remedies.
Legal Proceedings, Notification of Kentucky Division of Water – The Director of Stormwater Management or
designated agent may pursue appropriate legal proceedings for the enforcement of this section, and the City shall be
entitled to recover its costs expended and reasonable attorney’s fees in such proceedings. If a person, property, or
facility has or is required to have a stormwater discharge permit from KYDOW, the City shall notify the appropriate
State authorities of the violation.
Revocation of permit, improvement or development plans – Permits, improvement plans or development plan
approvals may be revoked for any substantial departure from the approved plans thereby resulting in an illicit discharge
as defined herein.
Stop Work Orders – For violations involving active construction sites, the Director of Stormwater Management
may issue a Stop Work Order and require that all activities cease, except those actions that are necessary to eliminate
the illicit discharge.
Suspension of MS4 access due to illicit discharges in emergency situations – The City may, without prior notice,
suspend MS4 discharge access when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge that
presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, to the health or welfare of persons, to the
MS4, or to waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency,
the City may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4, or waters of the United
States, or to minimize danger to persons.
Suspension of MS4 access due to the detection of illicit discharge – Any entity discharging to the MS4 or any
conveyance in violation of this section may have its MS4 access terminated in such termination would abate or reduce
an illicit discharge. The City shall require the violator to disconnect access to the MS4 at their cost or take corrective
action to eliminate the source of the illicit discharge. Reinstatement of MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to
this section without the prior approval of the City constitutes a violation.
Cost of abatement of a violation – Any person causing a violation of this section which requires the City to expend
public funds for the response to the violation, its abatement or the cleanup or removal of any prohibited discharges,
pollutants or hazardous materials shall be liable to the City for all recoverable fees and costs incurred by the City for
such response, cleanup and removal. This shall include but not limited to personnel costs of any City Departments,
replacement costs of supplies and equipment contaminated as a result of the discharge, proper disposal of contaminated
materials, cleanup, evacuation and administrative and other expenses, including legal expenses, incurred in recovering
such costs. Any such illegal discharges shall be considered a public health hazard and the City shall have a lien against
the property for its recoverable costs if these costs are not paid within ninety (90) days of invoice.
(Ord. 21-2008, passed 12-22-08)
2009-S-1
Nuisances 36E
§ 92.158 ARTICLE SUPPLEMENTAL TO OTHER REGULATIONS.
The provisions of this section are supplemental and in addition to all other regulatory codes, statutes and
ordinances heretofore enacted by the City, State or other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction.
The provisions of this section shall be deemed cumulative of the provisions and regulations contained in the Code
of Ordinances of the City of Elizabethtown, Kentucky, save and except that, where the provisions of this section and the
sections hereunder are in conflict with the provisions elsewhere in this Code, then the provisions contained herein shall
prevail.
Any party who violates any provision of this section or any provision of any permit issued by the City of
Elizabethtown may also be in violation of the Federal Clean Water Act and may be subject to the sanctions of that Act
including civil and criminal penalties. Any enforcement action authorized under this section may also include written
notice to the party of such potential liability.
(Ord. 21-2008, passed 12-22-08)
§ 92.159 SEVERABILITY.
If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this section or its application to any person of factual context
shall be held invalid, that invalidity shall not affect the remaining provisions of this section, which may be given effect
independent of the provision or application declared invalid.
(Ord. 21-2008, passed 12-22-08)
§ 92.99 PENALTY
Any violation of this ordinance is subject to the penalty of §10.99. The enforcing agency, department or
individual may choose to seek enforcement through the Code Enforcement Board enacted on the 30th day of April,
2003, by Ordinance No. 09-2003.
(Ord. 13-2003, passed 06-16-2003)
2009-S-1
36F Elizabethtown - General Regulations
CHAPTER 93: FIRE PREVENTION
Section
Fire Prevention
93.01 National fire codes adopted by reference
93.02 Standards of Safety adopted by reference
93.03 Reserved
93.04 Minimum fire protection requirements; water supply and fire hydrants
93.05 Minimum fire protection requirements to be completed prior to issuance of building permits
93.99 Penalty
FIRE PREVENTION
§ 93.01 NATIONAL FIRE CODES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
(A) The City Council hereby adopts all volumes of the current edition of the National Fire Codes, and
supplements thereto, as published by the National Fire Protection Association, except NFPA 1500, and the same are
hereby in full force and effect as to all real and personal property in the city.
(B) The above codes are on file in the office of the City Clerk, Fire Department, and Department of Planning and
Development. Any person violating any provision of such codes shall be punished as provided in § 10.99..
('73 Code, § 10-10) (Ord., passed 4-3-72; Am. Ord., passed 2-18-74; Am. Ord., passed 6-5-78; Am. Ord., passed 1-20-
86, Ord. 08-2002, passed 06-17-2002)
§ 93.02 STANDARDS OF SAFETY ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
(A) The Kentucky Fire Prevention Code (Standards of Safety) as promulgated in 815 KAR 10:060 by the
Commissioner of the Department of Housing, Buildings and Construction on the advice and recommendation of the
State Fire Marshal, is hereby adopted in full as an Ordinance of the City of Elizabethtown of the Commonwealth of
Kentucky. Copies of the code book are available through the Department of Housing, Buildings and Constructions,
1047 U.S. 127, South Frankfort, Kentucky 40601.
(B) The Elizabethtown Fire Chief shall be designated as the local enforcement agent/agency for said Standards of
Safety as appointed by the Fiscal Court or City.
(C) All final decisions of the fire code official of the City of Elizabethtown, shall be appealable to a local appeals
board pursuant to the procedures adopted by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Elizabethtown.
(Ord. Passed 7-21-97, Ord. 08-2002, passed 06-17-2002)
§ 93.03 RESERVED.
37
2003-S4
38 Elizabethtown - General Regulations
§ 93.04 MINIMUM FIRE PROTECTION REQUIREMENTS; WATER SUPPLY AND FIRE HYDRANTS.
The following minimum fire protection requirements shall apply to all future developments and additions in the
city:
(A) Water supply.
(1) For residential subdivision and small commercial districts, water mains shall be not less than six inches
in diameter, including fire hydrant branch connections, and shall be arranged into a gridiron or “looped” system. If
intersecting mains are at a distance in excess of 800 feet, or if dead end or poor circulation is likely to exist for a
considerable period of time, or if other physical characteristics indicate, the developer may be required to install mains
of a large diameter. Fire flows based on the following guidelines shall be the determining factor:
(a) Scattered residential area: 500 g.p.m at flow pressure.
(b) Residential subdivisions: 1,000 g.p.m. at flow pressure.
(c) Minor mercantile districts: 1,500 g.p.m. at flow pressure.
(2) For large commercial and industrial subdivisions, water mains shall be “looped” or interconnected with
existing mains and their diameter shall be equal to or greater than the smallest diameter line to which they are being
connected. In addition to the previous conditions, a fire flow of at least 2,000 gallons per minute at flow pressure must
be expected to be obtained. If a minimum flow of 2,000 gallons per minute can be proven, the conditions for “looping”
and sizing may be waived.
(3) The Engineering Department in conjunction with the Fire Department shall make the final determination
of the minimum size pipe for all systems.
(4) The distribution system shall be equipped with a sufficient number of valves located at all branches and
placed so that no more than 800 feet of a main is shut down at any time.
(5) All water mains shall be installed in conformity with the minimum requirements of the city and the local
water authorities. Fire protection services shall be equipped with a detector check valve and backflow preventer.
Approval shall be obtained for all fire protection systems prior to the issuance of a building permit.
(B) Fire hydrants.
(1) Fire hydrants shall be spaced not further than 500 feet apart as measured over hard surfaced roads. The
distance between a fire hydrant and any portion of a building shall not exceed 400 feet as measured on a hard-surface
access road.
(a) Fire hydrants in single family subdivisions shall be spaced not further than 500 feet apart along City
rights of way or the public travel way. The builder or owner of a single family structure located more than 1200 feet
from a fire hydrant shall provide, at their expense, a fire hydrant within 1200 feet of the structure. The fire hydrant shall
be connected to a public water main and provide adequate flow to meet the requirements of Section 93.04 of this
section.
2013-S-1
Fire Prevention 39
(2) Fire hydrants must be located at least 25 feet away from the exterior wall of any masonry building, and at
least 50 feet away from any exterior wall of frame or equivalent construction, including brick and stone veneer.
(3) Fire hydrants shall meet the minimum specifications and be installed in conformity with the
requirements of the city and the local water authorities. The location of all hydrants must be approved by the Fire Chief
and the City Engineer.
(4) Fire hydrants shall be equipped with not less than two, two and one-half inch outlets and a four and onehalf
inch pumper outlet, and shall have National Standard threads. Each hydrant shall have an inlet gate valve installed
in conjunction with it.
('73 Code, § 10-11) (Ord., passed 5-5-86) (Am. Ord.No. 25-2011, passed 11-21-11) Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
Water and sewers, see Ch. 51
§ 93.05 MINIMUM FIRE PROTECTION REQUIREMENTS TO BE COMPLETED PRIOR TO ISSUANCE
OF BUILDING PERMITS.
It is essential that the foregoing minimum requirements be completed prior to the issuance of building permits for
any construction. The city department responsible for issuing building permits shall not issue building permits until
such time as a certification of completion of fire hydrant installation is received. This can be done at the same time there
is a physical inspection of the other development improvements.
('73 Code, § 10-12) (Ord., passed 6-5-86)
Cross-reference:
Building regulations, see § Ch. 150
§ 93.99 PENALTY
Any violation of this ordinance is subject to the penalty of §10.99. The enforcing agency, department or
individual may choose to seek enforcement through the Code Enforcement Board enacted on the 30th day of April,
2003, by Ordinance No. 09-2003.
(Ord. 13-2003, passed 06-16-2003)
2013-S-1
40 Elizabethtown - General Regulations
CHAPTER 94: LITTERING
Section
94.01 Tracking foreign matter on streets
94.02 Hauling loose material
94.03 Sweeping litter into gutters
94.04 Litter on private property
94.99 Penalty
§ 94.01 TRACKING FOREIGN MATTER ON STREETS.
No person shall drive or move any vehicle or truck within the city, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or
deposit upon any street, alley, or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter, or foreign matter of any kind.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 94.02 HAULING LOOSE MATERIAL.
Every person hauling or causing to be hauled dirt, sand, gravel, cement, fill dirt, or loose material of any kind in or
upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public place shall haul it, or cause it to be hauled in vehicles provided with
tight boxes or beds so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of the contents from falling or being thrown, blown, or
deposited upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public place. Any materials which fall from, or which are thrown,
blown, or deposited from any vehicle upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public place, shall be removed
immediately by the person in charge of the vehicle.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 94.03 SWEEPING LITTER INTO GUTTERS.
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, or other public place within the city the accumulation of
litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying
property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 94.04 LITTER ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
(A) No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property within the city, whether owned by
that person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain
41
42 Elizabethtown - General Regulations
authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or
deposited by the elements upon streets, sidewalks, or other public places, or upon any private property.
(B) No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property within the city whether owned
by that person or not.
§ 94.99 PENALTY
Any violation of this section is subject to the penalty of §10.99. The enforcing agency, department or individual
may choose to seek enforcement through the Code Enforcement Board enacted on the 30th day of April, 2003, by
Ordinance No. 09-2003. (Ord. 19-2003, passed 06-23-2003)
2003-S-4
CHAPTER 95: CEMETERIES
Section
Perpetual Care Trust Fund
95.01 Establishment
95.02 Sources of money
95.03 Use of income only
95.04 Designation; appointment of trustee
95.05 Powers or trustee
95.06 Trustee's compensation
95.07 Term of trustee
95.08 Annual trustee report and audit
95.09 Income payments to city
95.10 Use of funds for upkeep and maintenance expenditures
95.11 Deficiency in operation of cemetery to be met by emergency account
95.12 City to annually report and account with trustee
95.13 Scope and effect of provisions; amendments
PERPETUAL CARE TRUST FUND
§ 95.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
A perpetual trust fund to be used solely for the maintenance and care of the city cemetery is hereby created to be
known as the Elizabethtown City Cemetery Perpetual Care Trust Fund.
('73 Code, § 7-14) (Ord., passed 3-21-60)
§ 95.02 SOURCES OF MONEY.
The Elizabethtown City Cemetery Perpetual Care Trust Fund shall be created from funds donated, given, or
bequeathed to the fund and such other funds from former bequests, gifts, or otherwise as are available.
('73 Code, § 7-15) (Ord., passed 3-21-60)
§ 95.03 USE OF INCOME ONLY.
Only the income from the Perpetual Care Trust fund hereby established shall be used.
('73 Code, § 7-16) (Ord., passed 3-21-60)
43
44 Elizabethtown - General Regulations
§ 95.04 DESIGNATION; APPOINTMENT OF TRUSTEE.
The PNC Bank of Elizabethtown, Kentucky, is hereby designated and appointed trustee for the City Cemetery
Perpetual Care Trust Fund hereby created, and upon acceptance by the bank, the appointment shall be irrevocable,
except as herein provided.
('73 Code, § 7-17) (Ord., passed 3-21-60)
§ 95.05 POWERS OR TRUSTEE.
The trustee of the Fund is hereby given sole power to manage and control the Fund and to direct the investment of
the assets of same.
('73 Code, § 7-18) (Ord., passed 3-21-60)
§ 95.06 TRUSTEE'S COMPENSATION.
The trustee shall receive compensation as is provided by law for the handling and management of the Trust Fund.
('73 Code, § 7-19) (Ord., passed 3-21-60)
§ 95.07 TERM OF TRUSTEE.
The trustee shall serve for the duration of the Trust which is perpetual, or until the trustee shall resign or be
removed for cause by a court of competent jurisdiction after due hearing and adjudication. The trustee shall not be
removable by the governing body of the city.
('73 Code, § 7-20) (Ord., passed 3-21-60)
§ 95.08 ANNUAL TRUSTEE REPORT AND AUDIT.
The trustee shall file an annual report and audit with the governing body of the city, setting forth the assets of the
fund, where and how invested and the income from same, and same shall constitute a public record.
('73 Code, § 7-21) (Ord., passed 3-21-60)
§ 95.09 INCOME PAYMENTS TO CITY.
The trustee shall, after deducting all costs of maintaining, handling and inventing the fund, pay to the city all
income from the fund, the payments to be made quarterly on March 31, June 30, September 30, and December 31 of
each year.
('73 Code, § 7-22) (Ord., passed 3-21-60)
§ 95.10 USE OF FUNDS FOR UPKEEP AND MAINTENANCE EXPENDITURES.
The city shall keep the funds so paid to it by the trustee, together with funds from any other source for maintenance
purposes, separate and apart from all other funds and shall expend same solely for the
Cemeteries 45
upkeep and maintenance of the cemetery. If at the end of any calendar year there should exist any surplus over and
above that required for the upkeep and maintenance, same shall be repaid to the trustee who shall reinvest same or place
same in an emergency account as is deemed best by the trustee.
('73 Code, § 7-23) (Ord., passed 3-21-60)
§ 95.11 DEFICIENCY IN OPERATION OF CEMETERY TO BE MET BY EMERGENCY ACCOUNT.
In the event the surplus mentioned in § 95.10 exists and the emergency account is created, the trustee is empowered
to pay from same such amounts as may be necessary to the city to meet any deficiency in the operation of the
cemetery.
('73 Code, § 7-24) (Ord., passed 3-21-60)
§ 95.12 CITY TO ANNUALLY REPORT AND ACCOUNT WITH TRUSTEE.
The city shall annually report and account with the trustee as to the expenditure of all funds received from the
trustee, and same shall constitute a public record.
('73 Code, § 7-25) (Ord., passed 3-21-60)
§ 95.13 SCOPE AND EFFECT OF PROVISIONS; AMENDMENTS.
This subchapter enacted for the protection nd assurance of all donors to the fund and constitutes a contract with the
donors, the city, and the trustee, and the terms of this subchapter may be amended only as authorized and directed by a
court of competent jurisdiction after joint application thereof by the city and the trustee and proper notice, hearing and
adjudication.
('73 Code, § 7-26) (Ord., passed 3-21-60)
46 Elizabethtown - General Regulations
CHAPTER 96: FAIR HOUSING
Section
General Provisions
96.01 City policy
96.02 Definitions
96.03 Unlawful housing practices
96.04 Unlawful financial practices
96.05 Exemptions
Administration and Enforcement
96.15 Citizens Advisory Committee; duties
96.16 Grievance; enforcement procedures
96.17 Injunctive relief; prosecution
Cross-reference:
Equal employment opportunity, see Ch. 37
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 96.01 CITY POLICY.
It is the policy of the city to safeguard all individuals within the city from discrimination because of race, color,
religion, sex, ethnic group, familial status, disability or national origin. This policy is in conformance with Federal and
State Constitutional rights.
('73 Code, § 15-30) (Ord., passed 7-17-72)
§ 96.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires
a different meaning.
HOUSING ACCOMMODATION. Includes improved and unimproved property and means a building, structure,
lot, or part thereof which is used or occupied, or is intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied as the home
or residence of one or more individuals.
REAL ESTATE BROKER or REAL ESTATE SALESPERSON. An individual, whether licensed or not, who,
for a fee, commission, salary or other valuable consideration, or who with the intention or expectation of receiving or
collecting the same, lists, sells, purchases, exchanges, rents or leases real
47
48 Elizabethtown - General Regulations
estate, or the improvements thereon, including options, or who negotiates or attempts to negotiate such an activity; or
who advertises or holds himself out as engaged in such activities; or who negotiates or attempts to negotiate a loan
secured by mortgage or other encumbrances, upon a transfer of real estate; or who is engaged in the business of
charging an advance fee or contracting for collection of a fee in connection with a contract whereby he/she undertakes
to promote the sale, purchase, exchange, rental or lease of real estate through its listing in a publication issued primarily
for such purpose; or an individual employed by or acting on behalf of any of these.
REAL ESTATE OPERATOR. Any individual or combination of individuals, labor unions, joint apprenticeship
committees, partnership, associations, corporations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint-stock companies,
trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees in bankruptcy, receives or other legal or commercial entity, the county or
any of its agencies, that is engaged in the business of selling, purchasing, exchanging, renting or leasing real estate, or
the improvement thereon, including options, or that derives income, in whole or in part, from the sale, purchase,
exchange, rental or lease of real estate; or an individual employed by or acting on behalf of any of these.
REAL PROPERTY. Includes buildings, structures, real estate, lands, tenements, leaseholds, cooperatives,
condominiums and hereditaments, corporeal and incorporeal, or any interest in the above.
('73 Code, § 15-31) (Ord., passed 7-17-72)
§ 96.03 UNLAWFUL HOUSING PRACTICES.
It is an unlawful practice for a person having the right to sell, exchange, rent or lease any property, or for a real
estate broker, real estate salesperson, or an individual employed by or on behalf of any of these to:
(A) Refuse to sell, exchange, rent or lease or otherwise deny to or withhold real property from an individual
because of race, color, religion, sex, ethnic background, familial status, disability, or national origin;
(B) Discriminate against an individual because of race, color, religion, sex, ethnic background, familial status,
disability or national origin in the terms, conditions or privileges of the sale, exchange, rental or lease of real property or
in the furnishings of facilities or services in connection therewith;
(C) Refuse to receive or transmit a bona fide offer to purchase, rent or lease real property from an individual
because of race, color, religion, sex, ethnic background, familial status, disability, or national origin;
(D) Refuse to negotiate for the sale, rental or lease of real property to an individual because of race, color,
religion, or national origin;
(E) Represent to an individual that real property is not available for inspection, sale, rental, or lease when in fact it
is so available, or to refuse to permit an individual to inspect real property because of race, color, religion, or national
origin;
(F) Print, circulate, post or mail or cause to be printed, circulated, posted or mailed an advertisement or sign, or to
use a form of application for the purchase, rental or lease of real property, or to make a record or inquiry in connection
with the prospective purchase, rental or lease of real property, which indicates directly or indirectly a limitation,
specification, or discrimination as to race,
Fair Housing 49
color, religion, familial status, disability or national origin or an intent to make such a limitation, specification or
discrimination;
(G) Offer, solicit, accept, use or retain a listing of real property for sale, rental or lease with the understanding that
an individual may be discriminated against in the sale, rental or lease of that real property or in the furnishing of
facilities or services in connection therewith because of race, color, religion, familial status, disability, or national
origin; or
(H) Otherwise to deny or withhold real property from an individual because of race, color, religion, sex, ethnic
background, familial status, disability, or national origin.
('73 Code, § 15-32) (Ord., passed 7-17-72) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.04 UNLAWFUL FINANCIAL PRACTICES.
It is an unlawful practice for a person, bank, banking organization, mortgage company, insurance company, or
other financial institution or lender to whom application is made for financial assistance for the purchase, lease,
acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair, maintenance, or improvement of real property, or an individual
employed by or acting on behalf of any of these to:
(A) Discriminate against an individual because of the race, color, religion, sex, ethnic background, familial status,
disability, or national origin of the individual or the present or prospective owner, tenant, or occupant of that real
property or of a member, stockholder, director, officer, employee, or representative of any of these, in the granting,
withholding, extending, modifying or renewing, the rates, terms, conditions, privileges or other provisions of financial
assistance or in the extension of services in connection therewith;
(B) Use a form of application for financial assistance or to make or keep a record or inquiry in connection with
applications for financial assistance which indicate directly or indirectly, a limitation, specification or discrimination as
to race, color, religion, sex, ethnic background, familial status, disability or national origin or an intent to make such a
limitation, specification or discrimination.
('73 Code, § 15-33) (Ord., passed 7-17-72) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.05 EXEMPTIONS.
The provisions of this subchapter do not apply to:
(A) The rental of a housing accommodation in a building which contains housing accommodations for not more
than two families living independently of each other, if the owner or a member of his/her family resides in one of the
housing accommodations;
(B) The rental of a portion of a housing accommodation by the occupant of the housing accommodation, or by the
owner of the housing accommodation if he/she or a member of his/her family resides therein;
(C) A religious institution or to an organization operated for charitable or educational purposes, which is
operated, supervised or controlled by a religious corporation, association or society, to the extent that the religious
corporation, association or society, limits or gives preferences in the sale, lease, rental, assignment or sublease of real
property to individuals of the same religion, or makes a selection
50 Elizabethtown - General Regulations
of buyers, tenants, lessees, assignees or sublessees that is calculated by the religious corporation, association or society
to promote the religious principles for which it is established or maintained.
('73 Code, § 15-34) (Ord., passed 7-17-72)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 96.15 CITIZENS ADVISORY COMMITTEE; DUTIES.
In the enforcement of this chapter, the Citizens Advisory Committee of the city has the following powers and
duties:
(A) To meet and exercise its powers at any place within the city;
(B) To utilize the legal services of the City Attorney concerning violations or alleged violations of this chapter;
(C) To receive, initiate, investigate, seek to conciliate, hold hearings on and pass upon complaints alleging
violations of this chapter;
(D) After notice and hearing, issue recommendations to the City Council for remedial action in affirmed
violations;
(E) To issue such affirmative recommendations to the City Council as in the judgment of the committee will carry
out the purposes of this chapter. Recommendations may include but are not limited to the remedies enumerated in
Section 506 (b) of the Kentucky Civil Rights Act (KRS 344.704).
('73 Code, § 15-35) (Ord., passed 7-17-72)
§ 96.16 GRIEVANCE; ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES.
(A) An individual claiming to be aggrieved by an unlawful practice or a member of the Citizens Advisory
Committee may file with the Committee a written (sworn) complaint stating that an unlawful practice has been
committed, setting forth the facts upon which the complaint is based, and setting forth the facts sufficient to enable the
Committee to identify the persons charged (hereinafter the respondent). The complaint must be filed within six months
after the alleged unlawful practice occurs.
(B) The Committee shall make a prompt and full investigation of each complaint (within 60 days).
(C) If it is determined that there is no probable cause to believe that the respondent has engaged in an unlawful
practice, the Committee shall dismiss the complaint.
(D) If it is determined, after investigation, that there is probable cause to believe that the respondent has engaged
in a unlawful practice, the Committee shall endeavor to eliminate the alleged unlawful practice by conference,
conciliation and persuasion. The terms of a conciliation agreement reached with a respondent may require him/her to
refrain from the Committee of unlawful discriminatory practices in the future and make such further provisions as may
be agreed upon between the Committee and the respondent. Except for the terms of the conciliation agreement, neither
the Committee nor officer or
Fair Housing 51
employee of city shall make public, without the written consent of the complaint and the respondent, information
concerning efforts in a particular case to eliminate an unlawful practice by conference, conciliation or persuasion
whether or not there is a determination of probable cause or a conciliation agreement.
(E) In any case of failure to eliminate the alleged unlawful practice by means of conference, conciliation and
persuasion, the Committee shall hold a public hearing to determine whether or not an unlawful practice has been
committed. The Committee shall serve upon the respondent a statement of the charges made in the complaint and a
notice of the time and place of the hearing by certified or registered letter.
(F) The hearing shall be held not less than ten days after the service of the statement of charges. The respondent
shall have the right to file an answer, to appear at the hearing in person or to be represented by an attorney and to
examine and cross-examine witnesses.
(G) If the Committee determines that the respondent has not engaged in an unlawful practice, the Committee shall
state its findings of fact and shall dismiss the complaint.
(H) If the Committee determines that the respondent has engaged in an unlawful practice, the Committee shall
state its findings of fact and recommendations to the City Council within 30 days of the conclusion of the hearing; that
the City Council take such affirmative action as in the judgment of the Council as will carry out the purpose of this
chapter.
(I) In connection with an investigation of a complaint filed under this chapter, the Committee or its designated
representative at any reasonable time may request access to premises, records, and documents relevant to the complaint
and the right to examine, photograph and copy evidence.
('73 Code, § 15-37) (Ord., passed 7-17-72)
§ 96.17 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF; PROSECUTION.
In the event the respondent fails to comply with any order issued by the City Council, the Council shall either:
(A) File a complaint for enforcement in the county court pursuant to the provisions of Section 704 of the Kentucky
Civil Rights Act, (KRS 344.704); or
(B) Certify the case and the entire record of its proceedings to the City Attorney for prosecution.
('73 Code, § 15-37) (Ord., passed 7-17-72)
52 Elizabethtown - General Regulations
CHAPTER 9 NOISE
Section
97.01 Definitions
97.02 Prohibited Activity
97.03 Exempted Noise
97.99 Penalty
§ 97.01 DEFINITIONS
Excessive loud and/or harsh noise: Any noise which is plainly audible by a person with normal hearing at a
distance of 50 feet from its point of origin or emanation.
Person: Any person, firm, association, partnership, joint venture, corporation or any private entity of any nature.
(Ord. 34-2003, passed 11-17-2003)
§ 97.02 PROHIBITED ACTIVITY
It shall be unlawful for any person within the City to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued, any
unreasonably loud, harsh, excessive or unnecessary or unusual noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures, or
endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others unless the making and continuing of the noise is
necessary for the protection or preservation of property or the life, health or safety of a person or persons.
Said offensive noise activity may include, but is not limited to, sounds from horns, radios, stereos, any
amplification system, musical instrument, or any other device which causes noise of any kind.
Further prohibited is the use or operation of any vehicle on any public or private property in such a manner as to
produce any unreasonably loud, harsh or excessive noise, or to discharge into the open air the exhaust of any vehicle
except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
A person may be cited as violating this ordinance for the production of any noise that is excessively loud or harsh.
(Ord. 34-2003, passed 11-17-2003)
§ 97.03 EXEMPTED NOISE
Specifically exempted from violation of this ordinance are the following noises:
1. Amplified noise for which a permit has been issued by the Elizabethtown Police Department;
2. Noise from safety signals, warning devices and emergency pressure relief valves;
3. Noise resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle or law enforcement activity or training facilities;
4. Noises resulting from construction or demolition activity;
5. Noises from the use of farm machinery, lawn mowers or other machinery properly muffled utilized for
agricultural or landscaping purposes;
53
54 Elizabethtown - General Regulations
6. Noises originating or emanating from religious activities, public recreational facilities such as, but not limited
to, fairgrounds, sport arenas, sports stadiums, amusement parks and other public amusement establishments;
7. The operation of any aircraft in conformity with, or pursuant to, federal law, federal air regulations and/or air
traffic control instructions.
(Ord. 34-2003, passed 11-17-2003)
§ 97.99 PENALTY
Any person violating this section shall be fined in an amount not less than twenty ($20.00) nor more than two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00); each day the violation is continued shall constitute a separate offense. Any person
violating this ordinance may also be found guilty of a civil offense. The civil fine shall be not less than twenty ($20.00)
nor more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). The civil fine shall be paid directly to the City of Elizabethtown. If
the fine is not paid within thirty (30) days from the date of notification, then the City may recover said fine in a civil
action in a Court of proper jurisdiction. The City may also obtain injunctions or abatement orders to insure compliance
with this ordinance or pursue administrative remedies when appropriate, including injunctions and abatement
proceedings.
The citing officer may at his or discretion cite the offender to appear before the Code Enforcement Board.
(Ord. 34-2003, passed 11-17-2003)
CHAPTER 98: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
General Provisions
98.01 Closing hours at Freeman Lake Park; American Legion Field
98.02 Motor vehicle use in recreational areas
98.03 Fishing on Freeman Lake
98.04 Swimming in city-owned or occupied reservoirs
98.05 Use of impoundment or reservoir without permission prohibited
98.06 Fishing in city impoundments and lakes
98.07 Maintenance of certain city-owned property in natural state
98.08 Fees for recreational facility
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 98.01 CLOSING HOURS AT FREEMAN LAKE PARK; AMERICAN LEGION FIELD.
Freeman Lake Park shall be open from sunrise to sunset and American Legion Park shall be open at times posted
and shall be closed at sunset and all persons shall leave these parks before sunset each day unless prior approval is
granted by the city.
('73 Code, § 16-3.1) (Ord., passed 6-6-77) (Ord. 04-2002, passed 02-19-02) Penalty, see, § 10.99
§ 98.02 MOTOR VEHICLE USE IN RECREATIONAL AREAS.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor-powered vehicle in any city recreational area,
including, but not limited to, Freeman Lake Park, University Drive Recreation Park, American Legion Park on N. Miles
Street, Gates Park on College Street Road, Nicholas Street Soccer Fields, Ring Road Softball Fields, Carroll Soccer
Complex on Peterson Drive, Ring Road Softball Fields, Haycraft Park, the Elizabethtown Nature Park and the
Elizabethtown Sports Park, except on roads specifically intended for motor vehicles and the same used as a public road
in said areas.
(B) For the purpose of this section, the term MOTOR POWERED VEHICLES shall include but is not limited to
cars, trucks, buses, motorcycles, motor bikes, mini bikes, golf carts, ATV’s or any other similar motor vehicle with the
following exceptions:
1. A power driven wheelchair or other motorized device that is designed specifically to assist individuals
with disabilities;
2. Golf carts are allowed to be used at Freeman Lake Park on roads specifically intended for motor
vehicles and in the grass and shore areas for individuals with handicap permits;
3. Golf carts are allowed to be used at the Elizabethtown Sports Park with prior approval by the Sports
Park Director for special events only.
55
2013-S-1
56 Elizabethtown - General Regulations
(C) No motor or other vehicle of any nature may travel at a speed greater than ten miles per hour on any of the
public ways, streets or easements of any city recreational area.
(D) No motor or other vehicle of any nature may travel in a direction at any recreational area other than that direction
so marked and designated by appropriate signs.
(E) No person shall operate any of the above-named or other motor vehicles on any path set aside for pedestrians
at any city recreational area.
(F) Other than the exception mentioned in Section (B)(2) above, no person shall operate any of the abovementioned
or other motor vehicles on any grass areas, dams or spillways or parts thereof, or shore areas adjacent to any
city lake or impoundment.
(G) All unmotorized bicycles shall be confined and restricted to vehicular rights-of-way, streets and designed
trails.
('73 Code, § 16-4) (Ord. passed 6-21-71; Am. Ord. passed 6-6-77) (Am. Ord. No. 14.2012, passed 07-16-12) Penalty,
see § 10.99
§ 98.03 FISHING ON FREEMAN LAKE.
It shall be unlawful for any person between the ages of 16 and 65 years to fish at Freeman Lake in the city without
a valid and unexpired permit. Permits may be obtained from the Freeman Lake custodian at Freeman Lake. The
following regulations must be obeyed at all times on Freeman Lake:
(A) Any person under the age of 12 years must be accompanied by a person 16 years of age or older.
(B) No person shall be allowed to have more than two lines or two poles in use at any time. All fishing shall be
confined to hook and line in hand or rod in hand.
(C) Daily Fish Limit and Size
Sports Fish Species Daily Limit Min. Size Limit (Inches)
Largemouth Bass 2 15”
Channel Catfish 4 15”
Crappie 10 10”
Rainbow Trout 5 None
Blue Gill 30 7”
Shell Cracker 5 7”
(D) Boat Rentals – An hourly or rental fee for boats shall be established by municipal order and may be changed
from time to time as necessary
('73 Code, § 16-6) (Ord. passed 3-2-70; Am. Ord. passed 2-1-71; Am. Ord. passed 12-17-84; Ord. 04-2002, passed 02-
19-02) Penalty, see, § 10.99
§ 98.04 SWIMMING IN CITY-OWNED OR OCCUPIED RESERVOIRS.
No person or persons may swim or go into the water at Freeman Lake Reservoir, Valley Creek Reservoir, or at any
other city-owned or occupied reservoir at any time.
('73 Code, § 16-7) (Ord., passed 1-6-69; Am Ord., passed 6-6-77) Penalty, see, § 10.99
§ 98.05 USE OF IMPOUNDMENT OR RESERVOIR WITHOUT PERMISSION PROHIBITED.
No person shall fish in or place or ride in a motorboat in any impoundment or reservoir on any property owned or
leased by the city without the express permission of the city.
('73 Code, § 16-8) (Ord., passed 5-1-67; Am. Ord., passed 6-6-77) Penalty, see, § 10.99
2013-S-1
Parks and Recreation 57
§ 98.06 FISHING IN CITY IMPOUNDMENTS AND LAKES.
(A) Limitations on the size and number of fish and the method of fishing shall be as exists under applicable state
law.
(B) All fishing permitted in any lake belonging to the city shall be confined to either “hook and line in hand” or
“rod in hand.” Any other types of fishing, including but not limited to, trot lining, set lining, throw lining, and jugging
are not permitted in these lakes. Any person fishing in the lakes of the city by any means other than hook and line in
hand and rod in hand in violation of this division (C).
(C) This section shall be enforced by all Fish and Wildlife Conservation Officers of the state and all other peace
officers.
('73 Code, § 16-9) (Ord., passed 12-22-80; Ord., passed 9-2-86) Penalty, see, § 10.99
§ 98.07 MAINTENANCE OF CERTAIN CITY-OWNED PROPERTY IN NATURAL STATE.
(A) The property owned by the city along the east side of Freeman Lake from the dam at Freeman Lake to the
intersection of Freeman Lake extended to Ring Road and running from the water's edge to include the land owned by
the city shall be maintained in a “natural state” and the land shall be allowed to maintain its natural undergrowth.
(B) The surface of the above described land owned by the city shall not be disturbed in any way by any person,
firm or corporation, without prior approval of the Mayor, in writing, at least seven days before any disturbance of said
land is to take place.
(C) It is understood that trails may be maintained through the city land by a group approved by the Mayor.
(D) In the event the terms of this section are violated by any person, firm or corporation, then the city may
immediately request and receive an injunction preventing any further disturbance of the land as set out above.
('73 Code, § 16-10) (Ord. 24-1988, passed 6-6-88) Penalty, see, § 10.99
§ 98.08 FEES FOR RECREATIONAL FACILITY.
Fees for the use of any recreational facility in the city shall be as posted at each facility after approval by the Mayor
and Council.
2013 S-1
58 Elizabethtown - General Regulations
CHAPTER 99: YARD SALES
Section
99.01 Definition
99.02 Restrictions on yard sales
99.03 Placement of merchandise
99.04 Enforcement
§ 99.01 DEFINITION.
For the purpose of this chapter the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning:
YARD SALE. The sale or presentation for sale from a residence or residential property, this includes the use of
the residence, yard, the driveway, garage or other attached buildings, or tangible personal property. Incidental sales of
one or two items of personal property shall not be included when such sale is not a part of the general sale of a number
of items of personal property. Tag sale, special sale or other designations, shall be covered no matter what words are
used.
(Ord. 7-1995, passed 5-1-95)
§ 99.02 RESTRICTIONS ON SALES.
(A) A single yard sale shall not last longer than four consecutive days.
(B) Yard sales may be conducted no more than three times per calendar year from a residence.
(C) The sale may be conducted only during daylight hours.
(D) The sale shall be conducted only by the owner or occupant of the premises.
(Ord. 7-1995, passed 5-1-95)
§ 99.03 PLACEMENT OF MERCHANDISE.
(A) No person conducting the sale shall place the merchandise offered beyond the edge of the sidewalk nearest to
the home or garage, nor shall any merchandise be placed on the property of another party without first obtaining the
permission of the adjoining property owner or occupant.
(B) In the event that no sidewalks exist at the residence, then the merchandise offered for sale shall not be placed
closer than ten feet from the abutting street.
1995-S-2 59
60 Yard Sales
(C) No sale shall be conducted in any way so as to impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic on any sidewalk, street
or public way in the city. All traffic regulations shall apply and will be strictly enforced.
(Ord. 21-1994, passed 7-18-94)
§ 99.04 ENFORCEMENT.
(A) The enforcement of this chapter shall be with the Planning Department. Any complaints shall be made to that
office during regular working hours. The Planning Office shall verify the existence of a yard sale. In the event the sale
is held on a weekend or holiday, then the complaining party shall call the Police Department, who shall verify the
complaint.
(B) When complaints of more than three yard sales have been received against a property owner or resident and
verified, the city will then notify the owner and occupant that any more attempted yard sales will result in court action.
Thereafter, this chapter shall be enforced as a nuisance.
(Ord. 21-1994, passed 7-18-94)
Cross reference:
Nuisance abatement, see §§ 92.110 et seq.
1995 S-2
CHAPTER 100: SMOKE DETECTOR INSTALLATION AND
MAINTENANCE IN RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY
Section
100.01 Installation and Maintenance
100.02 Definitions
100.03 Smoke Detectors Required; Type and Placement
100.04 Enforcement
100.99 Penalty
§ 100.01 INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE
(A) The owner of a dwelling shall be responsible for supplying and installing in an operable condition, the required
detectors and for providing the manufacturer’s maintenance and testing instructions to the tenant.
(B) The owner of a dwelling shall be responsible for maintenance, inspection, and testing of detectors, which are
located in common areas and/or detectors in rooming units where the tenant usually has periods of occupancy less than
30 continuous days, (such as hotels, motels, tourist homes, and boarding houses, identified as use group R-1 in the
International Building Code with Kentucky amendments). This maintenance, inspection and testing shall be performed
in accordance with manufacturer’s instructions, and in accordance with provisions of the most current edition of NFPA
(101) Life Safety Code, and/or NFPA (1), Uniform Fire Code.
(C) The Tenant (in other than R-1 use group) shall be responsible for maintaining and testing the detectors, in
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions, which are within his or her exclusive control during the life of the
tenancy.
(D) At every change of tenancy, in all dwellings, it shall be the duty of the owner to test and ascertain that those
detectors contained in the unit are in operable condition, and if not, the owner shall be responsible for placing them in
operable condition. An affidavit shall be prepared and signed by both tenant and owner attesting that working smoke
detectors are in place. A copy shall be retained by the owner of the property for the length of time that the specific lease
agreement is in effect and shall be made available for review on request of fire or building code officials.
(E) At every change of dwelling ownership it shall be the duty of the seller to test and ascertain that those detectors
contained in the unit are in code compliant locations and in operable condition. A signed affidavit of the property owner
shall be given to purchaser, seller and real estate closer before property transfer.
(Ord. No. 25-2009, passed 12-07-09)
§ 100.02 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires
a different meaning.
Dwelling – Any building which contains one or more dwelling units or any rooming units, rooms, or area
designated or used for sleeping purposes either as a primary use or use on casual occasions. This term shall include
single-family dwellings, duplexes, rooming houses, hotels, motels, tourist homes, school dormitories, apartments and/or
condominium buildings.
61
2010-S-1
62 Elizabethtown – General Regulations
Dwelling Units – Any group of rooms located within a building and forming a single housekeeping unit with
facilities, which are used or designed to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating.
NFPA – National Fire Protection Association
Owner – Any person who alone, jointly, or severally with others:
(1) Shall have all or part of the legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual
possession thereof, or shall have all or part of the beneficial ownership of any dwelling or dwelling unit and a right to
present use and enjoyment thereof, including a mortgage in possession; or
(2) Shall have charge, care, or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit as owner, or as executor, administrator,
trustee, guardian of the estate, or duly authorized agent of the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual
owner shall be bound to comply with the owner’s obligations under this section.
Rooming Unit – Any room, which is designed or used for sleeping purposes. This term may include a room in a
rooming house, a hotel, a motel, a tourist home, a school dormitory, or an apartment building, which may or may not
have some additional facilities for eating or cooking contained therein.
Tenant – Occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit irrespective of existence of written lease
agreement, or lack thereof.
(Ord. No. 25-2009, passed 12-07-09)
§ 100.03 SMOKE DETECTORS REQUIRED; TYPE AND PLACEMENT
(A) In order to comply with this section, only ionization or photoelectric type detectors listed by a nationally
recognized testing laboratory shall be installed.
(B) Smoke detectors shall be installed in accordance with applicable NFPA standards and the manufacturer’s
recommendations. Detectors may be ceiling or wall mounted, provided that they shall be mounted at a minimum of four
inches and a maximum of 12 inches from the ceiling, and not closer than four inches from the point at which the ceiling
and wall meet.
(C) Smoke detectors shall be installed as specified by the International Building Code with Kentucky
Amendments and NFPA 72 National Fire Alarm Code.
(Ord. No. 25-2009, passed 12-07-09)
§ 100.04 ENFORCEMENT
(A) The Chief of the Fire Department, Code Official, or any of their designated representatives, are hereby
authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of this section and the final determination concerning compliance
herewith shall be the sole discretion of the [Authority Having Jurisdiction (AHJ)], as described in 815 KAR 10:060, of
the Fire Department, or Code Official. Upon the presentation of official credentials, an authorized inspector of the Fire
Department, or Code Official, may enter with consent any premises covered by these regulations to perform the duties
imposed upon him or her by these regulations.
(B) The source of authority to issue orders as described in subsection (A) shall include but not be limited to, any
authority granted under KRS Ch. 227 and 815 KAR 10:060.
(Ord. No. 25-2009, passed 12-07-09)
2010-S-1
Smoke Detector Installation and Maintenance 63
§ 100.99 PENALTY
Any person violating this section may be cited for a civil offense pursuant to the Code Enforcement Board
Ordinance and Fine Schedule. Each day of violation may be considered a separate occurrence. The civil fine shall be
paid directly to the City of Elizabethtown. If the fine is not paid within thirty (30) days from the date of notification,
then the City may recover said fine in a civil action in a court of proper jurisdiction. The City may also obtain
injunction or abatement orders to insure compliance with this section.
The citing officer may at his or her discretion cite the offender to appear before the Code Enforcement Board (Ord.
#9-2003).
(Ord. 25-2009, passed 12-07-09)
2010-S-1
64 Elizabethtown – General Regulations
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter
110. OCCUPATIONAL LICENSES
111. PEDDLERS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS, AND SOLICITORS
112. PAWNBROKERS
113. INSURANCE COMPANIES
114. COMMERCIAL BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS; RESTAURANTS
115. DETECTIVE AND SECURITY AGENCIES
116. SCRAP DEALERS
117. TOURIST AND CONVENTION COMMISSION
118. VEHICLES FOR HIRE
119. CABLE TELEVISION
120. SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
121. HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
122. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL
123. RESCINDED (ORDINANCE NO. 21-2015)
123A. RESCINDED (ORDINANCE NO. 22-2015)
124. RESCINDED (ORDINANCE NO. 01-2008)
125. REGULATING SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES & PLACES OF
EMPLOYMENT
126. RESTAURANT TAX
127. OUTDOOR CAFES
2018-S-1
1
2 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
CHAPTER 110: OCCUPATIONAL LICENSES
Section
110.01 Definitions
110.02 Occupational License Application Required
110.03 Occupational License Tax Payment Required
110.04 Apportionment
110.05 Employers to Withhold
110.06 Return Required
110.07 Extensions
110.08 Refunds
110.09 Federal Audit Provisions
110.10 Administrative Provisions
110.11 Information to Remain Confidential
110.12 Penalties
110.13 Duties of Finance Director
110.14 Severability
110.15 Minimum and Maximum Liability
110.16 Effective Date
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
As used in this section, the following terms and their derivatives shall have the following meanings unless the
contest clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended.
(1) Business entity means each separate corporation, limited liability company, business development corporation,
partnership, limited partnership, registered limited liability partnership, sole proprietorship, association, joint stock
company, receivership, trust, professional service organization, or other legal entity through which business is
conducted.
(2) Business means any enterprise, activity, trade, occupation, profession or undertaking of any nature conducted
for gain or profit. “Business” shall not include a board of trade, chambers of commerce, trade associations, or unions, or
other associations performing services usually performed by trade associations or unions as recognized by the Internal
Revenue Service. “Business” shall not include funds, foundations, corporation, or associations organized and operated
for the exclusive and sole purpose of religious, charitable, scientific, literary, educational, civic or fraternal purposes,
where no part of the earnings, incomes or receipts of such unit, group, or association, inures to the benefit of any private
shareholders or other person.
(3) City means City of Elizabethtown, Kentucky.
(4) Compensation means wages, salaries, commissions, or any other form of remuneration paid or payable by an
employer for services performed by an employee, which are required to be reported for federal income tax purposes and
adjusted as follows:
2008-S-1 3
4 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
(a) Include any amounts contributed by an employee to any retirement, profit sharing, or deferred compensation
plan, which are deferred for federal income tax purposes under a salary reduction agreement or similar
arrangement, including but not limited to salary reduction arrangements under Section 401(a), 401 (k),
402(e), 403(a), 403(b), 408, 414(h), or 457 of the Internal Revenue Code; and
(b) Include any amounts contributed by an employee to any welfare benefit, fringe benefit, or other benefit plan
made by salary reduction or other payment method which permits employees to elect to reduce federal
taxable compensation under the Internal Revenue Code, including but not limited to Section 125 and 132 of
the Internal Revenue Code.
(5) Conclusion of the federal audit means the date that the adjustments made by the Internal Revenue Service to
net income as reported on the business entity’s federal income tax return become final and unappealable.
(6) Final determination of the federal audit means the revenue agent’s report or other documents reflecting the
final and unappealable adjustments made by the Internal Revenue Service.
(7) Fiscal Year means fiscal year as defined in Section 7701(a)(24) of the Internal Revenue Code.
(8) Employee means any person who renders services to another person or any business entity for compensation,
including an officer of a corporation and any officer, employee, or elected official of the United States, a state, or any
political subdivision of a state, or any agency of instrumentality of any one (1) or moer of the above. A person classified
as an independent contractor under the Internal Revenue Code shall not be considered an employee.
(9) Internal Revenue Code means the Internal Revenue Code as defined in KRS 67.750 (7).
(10) Net Profit means gross income as defined in Section 61 of the Internal Revenue Code minus all the
deductions from gross income allowed by Chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code, and adjusted as follows:
(a) Include any amount claimed as a deduction for state tax or local tax which is computed, in whole or in part,
by reference to gross or net income and which is paid or accrued to any state of the United States, local taxing
authority in a state, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, any territory or possession
of the United States, or any foreign country or political subdivision thereof;
(b) Include any amount claimed as a deduction that directly or indirectly is allocable to income which is either
exempt from taxation or otherwise not taxed;
(c) Include any amount claimed as a net operating loss carryback or carry forward allowed under Section 172 of
the Internal Revenue Code;
(d) Include any amount of income and expenses passed through separately as required by the Internal Revenue
Code to an owner of a business entity that is a pass-through entity for federal tax purposes; and
(e) Exclude any amount of income that is exempt from state taxation by the Kentucky Constitution, or the
Constitution and statutory laws of the United States.
(11) Person means every natural person, whether a resident or non-resident of the city. Whenever the word
“person” is used in a clause prescribing and imposing a penalty in the nature of a fine or imprisonment, the word, as
applied to a partnership or other form of unincorporated enterprise, shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations, shall mean the officers and directors thereof.
2008-S-1
Occupational Licenses 5
(12) Return or Report means any properly completed and, if required, signed form, statement, certification,
declaration, or any other document permitted or required to be submitted or filed with the City.
(13) Sales Revenue means receipts from the sale, lease, or rental of goods services or property.
(14) Tax District means any county or city with the authority to levy net profits or occupational license taxes.
(15) Taxable Net Profit in case of a business entity having payroll or sales revenue only with the city means net
profit as defined in subsection (10) of this section;
(16) Taxable Net Profit in case of a business entity having payroll or sales revenue both within and without the
city means net profit as defined in subsection (10) of this section, and as apportioned under Section (4) of this section;
and
(17) Taxable Year means the calendar year or fiscal year ending during the calendar year, upon the basis of which
net income is computed.
(Ord. No. 09-2006, passed 05-08-06)
§ 110.02 Occupational License Application Required.
Every Person or business entity engaged in any trader, occupation, or profession, or other activity for profit or
anyone required to file a return under this ordinance in Elizabethtown shall be required to complete and execute the
application prescribed by the Occupational Tax Office. Each person shall be required to complete a separate application
for each separate business before the commencement of business or in the event of a status change, other than change of
address. Licensees are required to notify the Occupational Tax Office of changes of address, or the cessation of
business activity, and of other changes which render inaccurate the information supplied in the completed application.
(Ord. No. 09-2006, passed 05-08-06)
§ 110.03 Occupational License Tax Payment Required.
(1) Except as provided in subsection (2) and subsection (5) of this section, every person or business entity engaged
in any business for profit and any person or business entity that is required to make a filing with the Internal Revenue
Service or the Kentucky Revenue Cabinet shall be required to file and pay to the city an occupational license tax for the
privilege of engaging in such activities with the city. The occupational license tax shall be measured by 1.35% of:
(a) all wages and compensation paid or payable in the city for work done or services performed or rendered in
the city by every resident and nonresident who is an employee;
(b) the net profit from business conducted in the city by a resident or nonresident business entity.
(2) All partnerships, S corporations, and all other entities where income is “passed through” to the owners are
subject to this ordinance. The occupational license tax imposed in this ordinance is assessed against income before it is
“passed through” these entities to the owners.
(3) If any business entity dissolves, ceases to operate, or withdraws from the city during any taxable year, or if any
business entity in any manner surrenders or loses its charter during any taxable year, the dissolution, cessation of
business, withdrawal, or loss or surrender of charter shall not defeat the filing of returns and the assessment and
collection of any occupational license tax for the period of that taxable year during which the business entity had
business activity in the city.
2008-S-1
6 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
(4) If a business entity makes, or required to make, a federal income tax return, the occupational license tax shall
be computed for the purposes of this ordinance on the bases of the same calendar or fiscal year required by the federal
government, and shall employ the same methods of accounting required for federal income tax purposes.
(5) The occupational license tax imposed in this section shall not apply to the following persons or business
entities:
(a) Any bank, trust company, combined bank and trust company, combined trust, banking and title business
organized and doing business in this state, any savings and loan association whether state or federally
chartered pursuant to the provisions of KRS 92.300;
(b) Any compensation received by members of the Kentucky national guard for active duty training, unit
training assemblies and annual field training pursuant to the provisions of KRS 92.300;
(c) Any compensation received by precinct workers for election training or work at election booths in State, city
or local primary, regular, or special elections pursuant to the provisions of KRS 92.300;
(d) Public Service Corporations that pay an ad valorem tax on property valued and assessed by the Kentucky
Department of Revenue pursuant to the provisions of KRS 136.120. Licensees whose businesses are
predominately non-public service who are also engaged in public service activity are required to pay a license
fee on their net profit derived from the non-public service activities apportioned to the city;
(e) Persons or business entities that have been issued a license under KRS Chapter 243 to engage in
manufacturing or trafficking in alcoholic beverages. Persons engaged in the business of manufacturing or
trafficking in alcoholic beverages are required to file a return, but may exclude the portion of their net profits
derived from the manufacturing or trafficking in alcoholic beverages;
(f) Insurance companies incorporated under the laws of and doing business in the Commonwealth of Kentucky
except as provided in KRS 91A080;
(g) Any profits, earnings, distributions of an investment fund which would qualify under KRS 154.20-250 to
154.20-284 to the extent any profit, earnings or distributions would not be taxable to an individual investor;
(h) All rental income of any type or source is fully taxable for all forms of ownership, except for an individual or
single member LLC who owns four (4) or less residential rental housing units; they are exempt from the
requirements of this ordinance. A housing unit is defined as a single living quarters (duplex – 2, apartment
unit = 1). With ownership of five (5) or more residential rental units inside the City limits, an individual or
single member LLC is presumed to be operating a business and is subject to this ordinance and all net profits
are fully taxable;
(i) The sale of agricultural products by the owner of locally homegrown agriculture products. This does not
include the resale of produce from a distributor;
(j) Private domestic labor is excepted, not included are commercially marketed services provided for the
home; and
(k) Vendors who only participate in festivals or fairs sponsored by non-profit organizations where said
events do not exceed three days may be exempt.
(Ord. No. 09-2006, passed 05-08-06) Am. Ord. No. 10-2012, passed 08-20-12)
§ 110.04 Apportionment.
(1) Except as provided in subsection (4) of this section, net profit shall be apportioned as follows:
(a) For business entities with both payroll and sales revenues in more than one (1) tax district, by
multiplying the net profit by a fraction, the numerator of which is the payroll factor, described in
subsection (2) of this section, plus the sales factor, described in subsection (3) of this section, and the
denominator of which is two (2); and
(b) For business entities with sales revenue in more than one (1) tax district, by multiplying the net profit by
the sales factor as set forth in subsection (3) of this section.
(c) For the purposes of subsection (1) thru (4) of this section, the business entity shall file an apportionment
form provided by the Occupational Tax Office.
2013-S-1
Occupational Licenses 7
(2) The payroll factor is a fraction, the numerator of which is the total amount paid or payable in the city during
the tax period by the business entity for compensation, and the denominator of which is the total compensation paid or
payable by the business entity everywhere during the tax period. Compensation is paid or payable in the city based on
the time the individual’s service is performed within the city.
(3) The sales factor is a fraction, the numerator of which is the total sales revenue of the business entity in the city
during the tax period, and the denominator of which is the total sales revenue of the business entity everywhere during
the tax period.
(a) The sales, lease, or rental of tangible personal property is in the city if:
1. The property is delivered or shipped to a purchaser, other than the United States government, or
to the designee of the purchaser within the city regardless of the f.o.b. point or other conditions of the
sale; or
2. The property is shipped from an office, store, warehouse, factory, or other place of storage in
the city and the purchaser is the United States government.
(b) Sales revenues, other than revenue from the sale, lease or rental of tangible personal property or the lease or
rental of real property, are apportioned to the city based upon a fraction, the numerator of which is the time
spent in performing such income-producing activity within the city and the denominator of which is the total
time spent performing that income-producing activity.
(c) Sales revenue from the sale, lease, or rental of real property is allocated to the tax district where the
property is located.
(4) If the apportionment provisions of this section do not fairly represent the extent of the business entity’s
activity in the city, the business entity may petition the city or the city may require, in respect to all or any part of the
business entity’s business activity, if reasonable:
(a) Separate accounting;
(b) The exclusion of any one (1) or more of the factors;
(c) The inclusion of one (1) or more additional factors which will fairly represent the business entity’s
business activity in the city; or
(d) The employment of any other method to effectuate an equitable allocation and apportionment of net
profits.
(5) When compensation is paid or payable for work done or services performed or rendered by an employee, both
within and without the city, the license tax shall be measured by that part of the compensation paid or payable as a
result of work done or service performed or rendered with the city. The license tax shall be computed by obtaining the
percentage which the compensation for work performed or services rendered within the city bears to the total wages and
compensation paid or payable. In order for the city to verify the accuracy of the taxpayer’s reported percentage under
this subsection, the taxpayer shall maintain adequate records.
(Ord. No. 09-2006, passed 05-08-06)
§ 110.05 Employers to Withhold.
(1) Every employer making payment of compensation to an employee shall deduct and withhold upon the
payment of the compensation any tax imposed against the compensation by the city. Amounts withheld shall be paid to
the city in accordance with Section (3) of this ordinance.
(2) Every employer required to deduct and withhold tax under this section shall, for the quarter ending after
January 1 and for each quarter ending thereafter, on or before the end of the month following the close of each quarter,
make a return to the city, and pay to the city, the tax required to be withheld under this section, unless the employer is
permitted or required to report within a reasonable time after some other period as determined by the city.
2008-S-1
8 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
(3) Every employer who fails to withhold or pay to the city any sums required by this ordinance to be withheld
and paid shall be personally and individually liable to the city for any sum or sums withheld or required to be withheld
in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(4) The city shall have a lien upon all the property of any employer who fails to withhold or pay over to the city
sums required to be withheld under this section. If the employer withholds, but fails to pay the amounts withheld to the
city, the lien shall commence as of the date the amounts withheld were required to be paid to the city. If the employer
fails to withhold, the lien shall commence at the time the liability of the employer is assessed by the city.
(5) Every employer required to deduct and withhold tax under this section shall annually on or before February
28 of each year complete and file on a form furnished or approved by the city a reconciliation of the occupational
license tax withheld where compensation is paid or payable to employees. Either copies of federal forms W-2 and W-3,
transmittal of wage and tax statements, or a detailed employee listing with the required equivalent information, as
determined by the city, shall be submitted.
(6) Every employer shall furnish each employee a statement on or before January 31 of each year showing the
amount of compensation and occupational license tax deducted by the employer from the compensation paid to the
employee for payment to the city during the preceding calendar year.
(7) An employer shall be liable for the payment of the tax required to be deducted and withheld under this
section.
(8) The president, vice president, secretary, treasurer or any other person holding an equivalent corporate office
of any business entity subject to this ordinance shall be personally and individually liable, both jointly and severally,
for any tax required to be withheld from compensation paid to one or more employees of any business entity, and
neither the corporate dissolution or withdrawal of the business entity from the city, nor the cessation of holding any
corporate office, shall discharge that liability of any person; provided that the personal and individual liability shall
apply to each or every person holding the corporate office at the time the tax becomes or became obligated. No person
shall be personally and individually liable under this subsection who had no authority to collect, truthfully account for,
or pay over any tax imposed by this ordinance at the time that the taxes imposed by this ordinance become or became
due.
(9) Every employee receiving compensation in the city subject to the tax imposed under Section (3) of this
ordinance shall be personally liable for the tax notwithstanding the provision of subsections (7) and (8) of this section.
In all cases where the employer does not withhold the tax levied under this ordinance from the employee, such
employee or employees shall be responsible for filing with the city each quarter in the same manner as if they were the
employer. If an employer fails to or is not required to withhold, report, or pay the License Fee it shall become the duty
of the employee to file with the city. The only employer that is not required to withhold, report and pay the occupational
license tax is the Federal Government including the United States Postal Service. The payment required to be made by
an employee, can be made quarterly, for the periods ending March 31st, June 30th, September 30th and December 31st of
each year, or at any time the employee wishes to make an estimated payment for the year in which wages are earned.
All license fees must be received by February 28th for the preceding calendar year, together with a copy of the
employee’s W-2 form. Employers not required to withhold, report, or pay the license fee must annually during the
month of January of each year, make a return to the Occupational Tax Administrator, in which is set forth the name and
social security number of each employee of the employer during the preceding calendar year, giving the amount of
salaries, wages, commissions or other compensation earned during such preceding year by each such employee. This
list shall include all current full time employees, part time employees, temporary employees, and terminated employees
whether it be voluntary or involuntary.
(Ord. No. 09-2006, passed 05-08-06)
2008-S-1
Occupational Licenses 9
§ 110.06 Returns Required.
(1) All business entity returns for the preceding taxable year shall be made by April 15 of each year, except
returns made on the basis of a fiscal year, which shall be made by the fifteenth day of the fourth month following the
close of the fiscal year. Blank forms for returns shall be supplied by the city.
(2) Every business entity shall submit a copy of its federal income tax return and all supporting statements and
schedules at the time of filing its occupational license tax return with the city. Whenever, in the opinion of the city, it is
necessary to examine the federal income tax return of any business entity in order to audit the return, the city may
compel the business entity to produce for inspection a copy of any statements and schedules in support thereof that have
not been previously filed. The City may also require copies of reports of adjustments made by the federal government.
(3) Every business entity subject to a occupational license tax governed by the provisions of this ordinance shall
keep records, render under oath statements, make returns, and comply with rules as the city from time to time may
prescribe. Whenever the city deems it necessary, the city may require a business entity, by notice served to the business
entity, to make a return, render statements under oath, or keep records, as the city deems sufficient to determine the tax
liability the business entity.
(4) The city may require, for the purpose of ascertaining the correctness of any return or for the purpose of
making an estimate of the taxable income of any business entity, the attendance of a representative of the business
entity or of any other person having knowledge in the premises.
(5) The full amount of the unpaid tax payable by any business entity, as appears from the face of the return, shall
be paid to the city at the time prescribed for filing the occupational license tax return, determined without regard to any
extension of time for filing the return.
(Ord. No. 09-2006, passed 05-08-06)
§ 110.07 Extensions.
(1) The City may grant any business entity an extension of not more than six (6) months, unless a longer
extension has been granted by the Internal Revenue Service or is agreed to by the city and the business entity, for filing
its return, if the business entity, on or before the date prescribed for payment of the occupational license tax, requests
the extension and pays the amount properly estimated as its tax.
(2) If the time for filing a return is extended, the business entity shall pay, as part of the tax, an amount equal to
twelve percent (12%) per annum simple interest on the tax shown due on the return, but not been previously paid, from
the time the tax was due until the return is actually filed and the tax paid to the city. A fraction of a month is counted as
an entire month.
(Ord. 09-2006, passed 05-08-06)
§ 110.08 Refunds.
(1) Where there has been an overpayment of tax under Section (5) of this ordinance, a refund or credit shall be
made to the employer only to the extent that the amount of the overpayment was not deducted and withheld under
Section (5) by the employer;
(2) Unless written application for refund or credit is received by the city from the employer within two (2) years
from the date the overpayment was made, no refund or credit shall be allowed;
2008-S-1
10 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
(3) An employee who has compensation attributable to activities performed outside the city, based on time spent
outside the city, whose employer has withheld and remitted to this city, the occupational license tax on the
compensation attributable to activities performed outside the city, may file for a refund within two (2) years of the date
prescribed by law for the filing of a return. The employee shall provide a schedule and computation sufficient to verify
the refund claim and the city may confirm with the employer the percentage of time spent outside the city and the
amount of compensation attributable to activities performed outside the city prior to approval of the refund.
(Ord. No. 09-2006, passed 05-08-06)
§ 110.09 Federal Audit Provisions.
(1) As soon as practicable after each return is received, the city may examine and audit the return. If the amount
of tax computed by the city is greater than the amount returned by the business entity, the additional tax shall be
assessed and a notice of assessment mailed to the business entity by the city within five (5) years from the date the
return was filed, except as otherwise provided in this subsection.
(a) In the case of a failure to file a return or of a fraudulent return the additional tax may be assessed at any time.
(b) In the case of a return where a business entity understates net profit, or omits an amount properly includable
in net profits, or both, which understatement or omission, or both, is in excess of twenty-five percent (25%)
of the amount of net profit stated in the return, the additional tax may be assessed at any time within six (6)
years after the return was filed.
(c) In the case of an assessment of additional tax relating directly to adjustments resulting from a final
determination of a federal audit, the additional tax may be assessed before the expiration of the times
provided in the this subsection, or six (6) months from the date the city receives the final determination of
the federal audit form the business entity, whichever is later.
The times provided in this subsection may be extended by agreement between the business entity and the city. For
the purposes of this subsection, a return filed before the last day prescribed by law for filing the return shall be
considered as filed on the last day. Any extensions granted for filing the return shall also be considered as
extending the last day prescribed by law for filing the return.
(2) Every business entity shall submit a copy of the final determination of the federal audit within thirty (30) days
of the conclusion of the federal audit.
(3) The city may initiate a civil action for the collection of any additional tax within the times prescribed in
subsection (1) of this section.
(Ord. 09-2006, passed 05-08-06)
§ 110.10 Administrative Provisions.
(1) No suit shall be maintained in any court to restrain or delay the collection or payment of the tax levied by this
ordinance.
(2) Any tax collected pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance may be refunded or credited within two (2)
years of the date prescribed by law for filing of a return or the date the money was paid to the city, whichever is the
later, except that:
(a) In any case where the assessment period contained in Section (9) of this ordinance has been extended by an
agreement between the business entity and the city, the limitation contained in this subsection shall be extended
accordingly.
2008-S-1
Occupational Licenses 11
(b) If the claim for refund or credit relates directly to adjustments resulting from a federal audit, the business
entity shall file a claim for refund or credit within the time provided for in this subsection or six (6) months
from the conclusion of the federal audit, whichever is later.
For the purpose of this subsection and subsection (3) of this section, a return filed before the last day
prescribed by law for filing the return shall be considered as filed on the last day.
(3) The authority to refund or credit overpayments of taxes collected pursuant to this ordinance is vested
exclusively in the city.
(Ord. No. 09-2006, passed 05-08-06)
§ 110.11 Information to Remain Confidential.
(1) No present or former employee of the city shall intentionally and without authorization inspect or divulge any
information acquired by him or her of the affairs of any person, or information regarding the tax schedules, returns, or
reports required to be filed with the city or other proper officer, or any information produced by a hearing or
investigation, insofar as the information may have to with the affairs of the person’s business. This prohibition does not
extend to information required in prosecutions for making false reports or returns for taxation, or any other infraction of
the tax laws, or in any way made a matter of public record, nor does it preclude furnishing any taxpayer or the
taxpayer’s properly authorized agent with information respecting his or her own return. Further, this prohibition does
not preclude any employee of the city from testifying in any court, or from introducing as evidence returns or reports
filed with the city, in an action for violation of the city tax laws or in any action challenging the city laws.
(2) The city reserves the right to disclose to the Commissioner of Revenue of the Commonwealth of Kentucky or
his or her duly authorized agent all such information and rights to inspect any of the books and records of the city if the
Commissioner of Revenue of the Commonwealth of Kentucky grants to the city the reciprocal right to obtain
information from the files and records of the Kentucky Department of Revenue and maintains the privileged character
of the information so furnished. Provided, further, that the city may publish statistics based on such information in such
a manner as not to reveal data respecting net profits or compensation of any person or business entity.
(3) In addition, the city is empowered to execute similar reciprocity agreements as described in subsection (2) of
this section with any other taxing entity, should there be a need for exchange of information in order to effect diligent
enforcement of this ordinance.
(Ord. No. 09-2006, passed 05-08-06)
§ 110.12 Penalties.
(1) A business entity subject to tax on net profits may be subject to a penalty equal to five percent (5%) of the tax
due for each calendar month or fraction thereof if the business entity:
(a) Fails to file any return or report on or before the due date prescribed for filing or as extended by the city; or
(b) Fails to pay the tax computed on the return or report on or before the due date prescribed for payment.
The total penalty levied pursuant to this subsection shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the total tax due;
however, the penalty shall not be less than twenty-five dollars ($25).
2008-S-1
12 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
(2) Every employer who fails to file a return or pay the tax on or before the date prescribed under Section (5) of
this ordinance may be subject to a penalty in an amount equal to five percent (5%) of the tax due for each calendar
month or fraction thereof. The total penalty levied pursuant to this subsection shall not exceed twenty-five percent
(25%) of the total tax due; however, the penalty shall not be less than twenty-five dollars ($25).
(3) In addition to the penalties prescribed in this section, any business entity or employer shall pay, as part of the
tax, an amount equal to twelve percent (12%) per annum simple interest on the tax shown due, but not previously paid,
from the time the tax was due until the tax is paid to the city. A fraction of a month is counted as an entire month.
(4) Every tax imposed by this ordinance, and all increases, interest, and penalties thereon, shall become, from the
time the tax is due and payable, a personal debt of the taxpayer to the city.
(5) The city may enforce the collection of the occupational tax due under section (3) of this ordinance and any
fees, penalties, and interest as provided in subsections (1), (2), (3), and (4) of this section by civil action in a court of
appropriate jurisdiction. To the extent authorized by law, the city shall be entitled to recover all court costs and
reasonable attorney fees incurred by it in enforcing any provision of this ordinance.
(6) In addition to the penalties prescribed in this section, any person, business entity or employer who willfully
fails to make a return, willfully makes a false return, or who willingly fails to pay taxes owing or collected, with the
intent to evade payment of the tax or amount collected, or any part thereof, shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
(7) Any person who willfully aids or assists in, or procures, counsels, or advises the preparation or presentation
under, or in connection with, any matter arising under this ordinance of a return, affidavit, claim, or other document,
which is fraudulent or is false as to any material matter, whether or not the falsity of fraud is with the knowledge or
consent of the person authorized or required to present the return, affidavit, claim, or document, shall be guilty of a
Class A misdemeanor.
(8) A return for the purpose of this section shall mean and include any return, declaration, or form prescribed by
the city and required to be filed with the city by the provisions of this ordinance, or by the rules of the city or by written
request for information to the business entity by the city.
(9) Any person violating the provisions of section (11) of this ordinance by intentionally inspecting confidential
taxpayer information without authorization, shall be fined no more than five hundred dollars ($500) or imprisoned for
not longer than six (6) months, or both.
(10) Any person violating the provision of section (11) of this ordinance by divulging confidential taxpayer
information shall be fined not more than one thousand ($1000) or imprisoned for not more than one (1) year, or both.
(Ord. No. 09-2006, passed 05-08-06)
§ 110.13 Duties of the Director of Finance.
(1) The Director of Finance is required:
(a) To collect the license fee imposed under this ordinance.
(b) To adopt and promulgate and to enforce rules and regulations relating to any matter of things pertaining to
the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance including provisions for the reexamination
and correction of returns and payments, but not limited thereto. The rules and regulations as
promulgated by him shall be binding upon the licensee and employers.
2008-S-1
Occupational Licenses 13
(c) To receive the license fee imposed under this Ordinance; and
(d) To keep an accurate record showing the amount received by him from each licensee and withholding
employer and the date of such receipts.
(2) Inquisitorial Powers of Director of Finance.
(a) When the Director of Finance questions the accuracy of any return made, he is authorized and empowered to
request from any licensee a certified audit prepared by the licensee’s accountants for the purpose of verifying
the accuracy of any return made, and said licensee shall file said audit with the Director of Finance within
thirty (30) days after such request.
(b) Upon the failure of the licensee to file an audit with the Director of Finance when requested, the Director of
Finance personally, or his agents or employees, is authorized and empowered to examine the books, papers,
and records of any employer, or supposed employer, or of any licensee, or supposed licensee, in order to
verify the accuracy of any return made, or in the event no return was made, to a certain the license fee
imposed by the Ordinance. The Director may enforce this right by application to the appropriate Court having
jurisdiction over these matters.
(c) Every employer or supposed employer, and every licensee or supposed licensee is required to furnish to the
Director of Finance, or his duly authorized agent or employees, the means, facilities and opportunity for such
examinations, investigations and audits as are authorized in and by this Ordinance.
(d) The Director of Finance is further authorized to examine under oath any person concerning any income
which was or should have been reported for license fee and to this end the Director of Finance has the right
and power to compel the production of books, papers, and records, and the attendance of all persons before
him, whether as parties or witnesses, whom he believes to have knowledge of such income.
(e) Refusal of any such examination of any employer or person subject to the license fee or presumed to be such
employer or person so subject, constitutes a misdemeanor punishable by fine.
(f) Agents and employees charged with duty of inspection or auditing of records of employers and licensees will
carry proper identification, which shall be subject to examination by any person whose records are sought to
be examined.
(g) The above powers in paragraph (2), subparagraphs (a) through (g) shall not be exercised unless the Director
of Finance is notified by the Kentucky Department of Revenue or the U.S. Internal Revenue Service, that the
particular taxpayer’s figures should be audited.
(Ord. No. 09-2006, passed 05-08-06)
§ 110.14 Severability.
Each section and each provision of each section of this ordinance are severable, and if any provision, section,
paragraph, sentence or part thereof, or the application thereof to any person licensee, class or group, is held by a court
of law to be unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such holding shall not affect or impair the remainder of this
ordinance, it being the legislative intent to ordain and enact each provision, section, paragraph, sentence and part
thereof, separately and independently of the rest.
(Ord. No. 09-2006, passed 05-08-06)
2008-S-1
14 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
§ 110.15 Minimum and Maximum Liability.
Pursuant to KRS 67.773, a minimum tax of $25 is assessed on all net profits per year and is due annually with the
application. The minimum tax may be taken as a credit against any additional taxes due when the net profits return for
the corresponding year is filed. The credit shall not reduce the amount due below zero dollars ($0).
(Ord. No. 09-2006, passed 05-08-06)
§ 110.16 Effective Date.
This ordinance shall take effect for all tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2007.
(Ord. No. 09-2006, passed 05-08-06)
2008-S-1
Occupational Licenses 15
(This page intentionally left blank)
2008-S-1
16 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
(This page intentionally left blank)
2008-S-1
Occupational Licenses 17
(This page intentionally left blank)
2008-S-1
18 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
(This page intentionally left blank)
2008-S-1
Occupational Licenses 19
(This page intentionally left blank)
2008-S-1
20 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
(This page intentionally left blank)
2008-S-1
Occupational Licenses 21
(This page intentionally left blank)
2008-S-1
22 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
(This page intentionally left blank)
2008-S-1
CHAPTER 111: PEDDLERS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS, AND SOLICITORS
Section
Itinerant Entrepreneurs
111.01 Compliance required
111.02 Solicitor to fill out questionnaire
111.03 List of articles sold to be filed with Director of Finance
111.04 Bond to be posted
111.05 Refund of bond; use to finance unpaid taxes; forfeiture
111.06 Levy of fee; placement in general fund
111.07 Exemptions
111.08 Solicitation on the crosswalks, highways, intersections or roadways
ITINERANT ENTREPRENEURS
§ 111.01 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation itinerant in nature to sell, solicit or canvass, or offer for
sale, or distribute any goods, wares or merchandise or subscriptions for the sale of magazines, periodicals, books or
subscriptions thereto, photographs, coupons, donations or other articles, or any merchandise not delivered when sold,
by telephone or otherwise, within the city without first complying with the provisions of §§ 111.02 through 111.07 of
this subchapter.
('73 Code, § 14-40) (Ord., passed 5-18-59; Am. Ord., passed 12-5-83) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.02 SOLICITOR TO FILL OUT QUESTIONNAIRE.
Each person, firm and corporation itinerant in nature shall first fill out a questionnaire with the Director of Finance
or his/her designee at the city hall. The questionnaire shall give the solicitor's or sales representative's full name, home
address, age, height, weight, race, color of hair and eyes, sex, identifying marks (if any), the company he/she is
representing and its home address, and the make and license number of any automobile used (if any), a sample of the
order sheets to be used, the length of time expected to be in the city, his/her local address while here, and each solicitor
and sales representative shall allow a complete set of fingerprints and photographs of him/her to be made.
('73 Code, § 14-40(a)) (Ord., passed 5-18-59; Am. Ord., passed 12-5-83) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.03 LIST OF ARTICLES SOLD TO BE FILED WITH DIRECTOR OF FINANCE.
In addition to the provisions of § 111.02, each person, firm or corporation, solicitor and sales representative, shall,
after completing work in the city, report to the Director of Finance and file with the
S-2-2000 23
24 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
Director a complete list of merchandise and magazines, books, periodicals, subscriptions, photographs, coupons,
donations or other articles sold, the name and addresses of the individuals to whom sold, the amount paid for same, and
to whom payment was made.
('73 Code, § 14-40(b)) (Ord., passed 5-18-59; Am. Ord., passed 12-5-83) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.04 BOND TO BE POSTED.
After complying with § 111.02 of this subchapter, each person, firm and corporation, sales representative and
solicitor shall post bond in the sum of $75 cash and the bond shall increase $25 per year for the next five years,
beginning annually, automatically on the anniversary date of the passage of this subchapter. the person, firm,
corporation, sales representative and/or solicitor before leaving the city, after completing the work, shall report back to
the Director of Finance and comply with provisions of § 111.03 of this subchapter.
('73 Code, § 14-40(c)) (Ord., passed 5-18-59; Am. Ord., passed 12-5-83) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.05 REFUND OF BOND; USE TO FINANCE UNPAID TAXES; FORFEITURE.
Upon compliance with §§ 111.02 through 111.04 of this section, the Director of Finance and/or his/her designee
shall then refund the bond to the person executing it, so long as the applicable taxes are paid by the person, firm,
corporation, sales representative and solicitor, including, but not limited to the business license tax and/or occupational
tax. In the event any applicable tax is not paid then the sums may be used through the Director of Finance for the
payment of the applicable taxes. Should the person, firm, corporation, solicitor or sales representative fail to report
back to the Director of Finance and/or his/her designee within ten days after the expiration of the time stated in the
questionnaire that he/she expects to be in the city, the bond shall be forfeited and the proceeds of the same shall be
placed in the general fund of the city after payment of necessary and applicable taxes. In the event of forfeit of bond,
then said person, firm, corporation, solicitor or sales representative shall be prohibited from doing like or similar work
within the city for a period of five years.
('73 Code, § 14-40(d)) (Ord., passed 5-18-59; Am. Ord., passed 12-5-83) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.06 LEVY OF FEE; PLACEMENT IN GENERAL FUND.
A fee of $2 to defray the costs of the questionnaire and the enforcement of this subchapter for each person, firm,
corporation, solicitor and sales representative is hereby levied. The fee shall be placed in the general fund of the city
upon collection before the questionnaire is filled out.
('73 Code, § 14-40(e)) (Ord., passed 5-18-59; Am. Ord., passed 12-5-83)
§ 111.07 EXEMPTIONS.
All persons, firms and corporations, not itinerant in nature and who otherwise pay taxes and honor business
obligations to the public, are specifically excluded from the terms of this subchapter.
('73 Code, § 14-40(f)) (Ord., passed 5-18-59; Am. Ord., passed 12-5-83)
§ 111.08 SOLICITATION ON THE CROSSWALKS, HIGHWAYS, INTERSECTIONS OR ROADWAYS
It shall be unlawful for any individual, partnership, trustee or corporation to solicit on the crosswalks, highways,
intersections or roadways within the City limits of Elizabethtown without first complying with the provision of §76.01
through §76.05 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 7, passed – 05/01/2000)
S-2-2000
CHAPTER 112: PAWNBROKERS
Section
112.01 Pawnbrokers
112.02 Effective Date
112.03 Entity Designated
112.04 Information Requirement
112.05 Penalty
112.06 Ordinances in Conflict
112.07 Severability
§ 112.01 PAWNBROKERS.
A pawnbroker shall be considered as any person who loans money on deposit of personal property; deals in the
purchase of personal property on condition of selling the property back again at a stipulated price; makes a public
display at his/her place of business of the sign generally used by pawnbrokers to denote their business; or who publicly
exhibits a sign advertising money to loan on personal property or deposit (KRS 226.010). In addition to complying with
state law including 226.010 to 226.990, pawnbrokers shall keep a record of all purchases including other than pawned
items. Said records shall be transmitted electronically to the Elizabethtown Police Department within twenty-four (24)
hours of receipt of any goods purchased. (Ord. 10-2009, passed 7/20/2009)
§ 112.02 EFFECTIVE DATE.
That each and every owner or operator of a pawn shop or pawnbroker doing business in the City of Elizabethtown,
Kentucky shall within thirty (30) days of July 20, 2009, maintain an electronic inventory tracking system which is
capable of delivery and transmission of all statutorily-required information via computer to the entity designated by the
Elizabethtown Police Department. (Ord. 10-2009, passed 7/20/2009)
§ 112.03 ENTITY DESIGNATED.
The Police Department shall enter into an agreement with Leads on Line which operates an electronic database for
law enforcement agencies for the purpose of identifying stolen merchandise and person suspected of the thefts. (Ord.
10-2009, passed 7/20/2009)
§ 112.04 INFORMATION REQUIREMENT.
That the owner or operator of a pawn shop or pawnbroker will be required to upload the information to the entity
designated by the Elizabethtown Police Department within 24 hours of receipt of the goods purchased (pawned). (Ord.
10-2009, passed 7/20/2009)
25
2009-S-2
26 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
§ 112.05 PENALTY.
That the failure on the part of any owner or operator of a pawn shop or pawnbroker to comply with the provisions
of this section shall be deemed a misdemeanor. Upon conviction, the offender shall be punished by a fine of not more
than twenty-five and 00/100 dollars ($25.00) for each separate offense. Each day of noncompliance with this section
shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 10-2009, passed 7/20/2009)
§ 112.05 ORDINANCES IN CONFLICT.
That all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed to the extent of the conflict.
(Ord. 10-2009, passed 7/20/2009)
§ 112.06 SEVERABILITY.
That the provisions of this section are hereby declared to be severable and if any section, phrase, or provision shall
be declared or held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the remainder of this sections, phrases or provisions. (Ord.
10-2009, passed 7/20/2009)
2009-S-2
CHAPTER 113: INSURANCE COMPANIES
Section
113.01 Imposition of license fee
113.02 Amount of fee for companies issuing policies other than life insurance
113.03 Collection fee
113.04 Due date; interest
113.05 Written breakdown of collections
113.06 Disposition of funds
§ 113.01 IMPOSITION OF LICENSE FEE.
There is hereby imposed on each insurance company a license fee for the privilege of engaging in the business of
insurance within the corporate limits of the city, on a calendar-year basis.
('73 Code, § 14-30) (Ord., passed 4-15-85)
§ 113.02 AMOUNT OF FEE FOR COMPANIES ISSUING POLICIES OTHER THAN LIFE INSURANCE.
The license fee imposed upon each insurance company which issues any insurance policy which is not a life and
health insurance policy shall be 8% of the premiums actually collected within each calendar quarter by reason of the
issuance of such policies on risks located within the corporate limits of the city on those classes of business which such
company is authorized to transact, less all premiums returned to policyholders; however, any license fee or tax imposed
upon premium receipts shall not include premiums received for insuring employers against liability for personal injuries
to their employees, or death caused thereby, under the provisions of the Workers' Compensation Act and shall not
include premiums received on policies of group health insurance provided for state employees under KRS 18A.225(2)
and 18A.228 or premiums received by any state employee benefit fund created pursuant to KRS Chapter 18A for the
purpose of providing health benefits to state employees.
('73 Code, § 14-31) (Ord., passed 4-15-85)
§ 113.03 COLLECTION FEE.
The Department of Insurance shall by regulation provide for a reasonable collection fee to be retained by the
insurance companies or its agent as compensation for collection of the license fee. This collection fee shall be in
addition to the license fee mentioned above and shall not be more than 15% of the license fee collected and remitted to
the city, or 2% of the premiums subject to the tax, whichever is less.
('73 Code, § 14-32) (Ord., passed 4-15-85)
27
28 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
§ 113.04 DUE DATE; INTEREST.
All license fees imposed by this chapter shall be due no later than 30 days after the end of each calendar quarter.
License fees which are not paid on or before the due date shall bear interest at the tax interest rate as defined in KRS
131.010(6).
('73 Code, § 14-33) (Ord., passed 4-15-85)
§ 113.05 WRITTEN BREAKDOWN OF COLLECTIONS.
Every insurance company subject to the license fees imposed by this chapter shall annually, by March 31, furnish
the city a written breakdown of all collections in the preceding calendar year for the following categories of insurance:
(A) Casualty.
(B) Automobile.
(C) Inland marine.
(D) Fire and allied perils.
('73 Code, § 14-34) (Ord., passed 4-15-85)
§ 113.06 DISPOSITION OF FUNDS.
The Finance Director shall deposit all fees or taxes in a sinking fund to be designated “Elizabethtown Fire
Protection Sinking Fund.” All fees or taxes and any interest earned thereon shall be used by the city for fire protection
equipment, maintenance, Fire Department salaries or incidental expenses for maintaining and equipping the Fire
Department.
('73 Code, § 14-35) (Ord., passed 4-15-85)
CHAPTER 114: COMMERCIAL BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS; RESTAURANTS
Section
Commercial Business Establishments
114.01 Definitions
114.02 Causing loud noise prohibited
114.03 Leaving vehicle unoccupied; towing
114.04 Operator of business establishment to post notice of prohibitions
114.05 Cruising through lot prohibited
114.06 Consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages
COMMERCIAL BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 114.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
COMMERCIAL BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT. Any place held out to the general public as offering goods
and/or services for sale to the public and/or for use by the public within the limits of the city.
MOTOR VEHICLE(S). Any and all agencies for the transportation of person(s) or property over or upon a public
or private streets within the city which are propelled otherwise than by muscular power.
('73 Code, § 15-41) (Ord., passed 10-8-79)
§ 114.02 CAUSING LOUD NOISE PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person, while on or adjacent to the premises of a commercial business establishment, to
race the motor of any motor vehicle, or to make or cause to be made any loud noise, including the blowing of horns,
unless the same is directly related to a business purpose or is to prevent collision of the motor vehicle with other
persons or objects.
('73 Code, § 15-42) (Ord., passed 10-8-79) Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
Unnecessary noise declared nuisance, see Ch. 97
29
1995 S-1 Repl.
30 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
§ 114.03 LEAVING VEHICLE UNOCCUPIED; TOWING.
No person shall depart from the commercial business establishment premises after parking any motor vehicle
thereon without the expressed permission of the commercial business establishment. Any such motor vehicle that
remains unoccupied without a specific authorization so indicated in a conspicuous place on the vehicle for more than
five hours may be towed in by the Police Department or any other law enforcement agency of the state, and the owner
thereof shall pay any towing and/or other charges, fines or fees therefor.
('73 Code, § 15-45) (Ord., passed 10-8-79) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 114.04 OPERATOR OF BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT TO POST NOTICE OF PROHIBITIONS.
Prior to enforcement of this subchapter as to a specific commercial business establishment, it shall be the duty of
that commercial business establishment operator who furnishes parking for patrons to post on the premises at least
every 200 feet in a conspicuous location one or more signs bearing the following legend: “Loud noises, possession of
alcoholic beverages and loitering are prohibited. All unoccupied vehicles without consent will be towed away at
owner's expense.”
('73 Code, § 15-46) (Ord., passed 10-8-79)
§ 114.05 CRUISING THROUGH LOT PROHIBITED.
No person shall drive any vehicle onto the premises of a restaurant and then drive out of the premises without
parking the vehicle, unless there is no unoccupied parking space available on the premises, or cruise without parking.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 114.06 CONSUMPTION OR POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
With the exception of a permissible event or private party, or a restaurant or business premises that possesses a
valid A.B.C. license under Ordinance No. 17-2001, Ordinance No 12-2002 or Ordinance No. 22-2011, it shall be
unlawful for any person on the premises of a commercial business establishment or public property to drink any
intoxicating beverages, either in or out of a motor vehicle, or to possess any open bottle or other receptacle containing
any alcoholic beverage.
(Ord. passed 10-8-79) (Ord. 14-2002, passed 08-05-2002) (Am. Ord. No. 04-2012, passed 02-21-12(
2013-S-1
CHAPTER 115: DETECTIVE AND SECURITY AGENCIES
Section
115.01 Permit required; bond
115.02 Proof of good character
115.03 Bond required
115.04 Liability insurance required
115.05 Permit to cover agency and employees
115.06 Permit and requirements in addition to other permits
115.07 Revocation of permits
§ 115.01 PERMIT REQUIRED; BOND.
No person shall carry on the business of doing private detective or security work in the city without first having
secured a permit from the Chief of Police and executing a bond provided for herein.
('73 Code, § 14-51) (Ord., passed 2-23-76) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.02 PROOF OF GOOD CHARACTER.
Before any permit shall be issued by the Chief of Police, he/she shall be furnished with satisfactory proof that the
person or persons applying for the permit or the chief officers or members of a firm if the agency is to be conducted by
a corporation or partnership and all employees are citizens of sobriety and integrity and have been orderly and law
abiding citizens and have never been convicted of a felony, nor engaged in any unlawful calling.
('73 Code, § 14-52) (Ord., passed 2-23-76)
§ 115.03 BOND REQUIRED.
Before the permit provided for herein is issued to any person, a bond with surety to be approved by the City shall
be executed in the sum of $5,000, payable to the city for the use and benefit of any person or persons who have been
injured or damaged by an illegal act of the detective or security agency, or by its owners, operators, employees or agents
in carrying on its or their business.
('73 Code, § 14-53) (Ord., passed 2-23-76)
§ 115.04 LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIRED.
Before the permit provided for herein is issued to any firm, corporation, or individual, he or it must show evidence
that it has obtained personal individual liability insurance which covers it or him and all
31
32 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
employees or agents from acts which may occur as a result of their detective or security agency business in the amount
of at least $100,000 for individual and at least $300,000 per occurrence.
('73 Code, § 14-54) (Ord., passed 2-23-76)
§ 115.05 PERMIT TO COVER AGENCY AND EMPLOYEES.
When a permit is issued to a detective or security agency hereinabove described, and a proper bond has been
executed, employees of the agency shall not be required to secure a permit or execute a bond.
('73 Code, § 14-55) (Ord., passed 2-23-76)
§ 115.06 PERMIT AND REQUIREMENTS IN ADDITION TO OTHER PERMITS.
The requirements of this chapter are in addition to and exclusive of any and all other required occupational license
taxes or other permits required by the city.
('73 Code, § 14-56) (Ord., passed 2-23-76)
§ 115.07 REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
Permits provided for herein may be revoked at any time by the City Council if any person shall be injured or
damaged on account of any illegal act of any detective or security agency or its owners, agents or employees, or any
other act which constitutes conduct detrimental to the community and citizens of the city and for just cause. The
permits shall not be revoked until written charges have been made or proffered against the holder of the permit and
until the charges have been examined, heard and investigated by the City Council after reasonable notice. After the
City Council has received notice of any charges being placed against a detective or security agency, the agency or
owners shall within ten days after the receipt of the complaint be notified by the City Clerk. The owner or agency shall
14 days from the receipt of the notice of the complaint to answer the complaint in writing, and/or to ask that a hearing
be set to determine the validity of the charges. The date of the hearing shall not be less than 14 nor more than 30 days
from the date of the request for hearing is received.
('73 Code, § 14-57) (Ord., passed 2-23-76)
CHAPTER 116: SCRAP DEALERS
Section
116.01 Definition
116.02 Compliance required
116.03 License required
116.04 Dealers to require identification from sellers; records to be kept
116.05 Transaction Record of Purchases
116.06 Transaction Business with Minors
116.07 Examination of Books
116.08 Regulated Property Sale Limitations
116.09 Penalties
§ 116.01 DEFINITION.
For the purpose of this chapter pertaining to junk, secondhand and scrap dealers, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
COMMODITY METALS. Any metal containing primarily brass, copper, copper alloy, aluminum, stainless
steel, or magnesium, or any other metal trading on the commodity markets that trades in pounds, rather than ounces,
except aluminum single serving beverage cans shall not be considered commodity metals.
ELIZABETHTOWN. The corporate limits of the City of Elizabethtown, Kentucky.
FERROUS METALS. Any metal consisting primarily of iron or steel.
INVESTMENT PURPOSES. The purchase of regulated property by persons and the retention of that property
in the same form as purchased, for resale to persons who are purchasing the property primarily as an investment.
MINOR. Any person under the age of 18 years.
MOTOR VEHICLE DEALERS. Any person who exclusively deals in new or used cars.
PERSON. Any individual, owner, agent, partnership, corporation or other business entity.
PRECIOUS METALS. Any metal that is valued for its character, rarity, beauty, quality, or worth, including,
but not limited to gold, silver, platinum or any other such metals, whether as separate items or in combination as a piece
of jewelry.
PURCHASE. To obtain regulated property by paying money or giving other valuable consideration in a
voluntary transaction. However, purchases under this ordinance do not include transactions in which regulated property
is obtained by the loan of money or on condition of selling regulated property back to the individual from whom it came
at a stipulated price.
REGULATED PROPERTY. The following property, which is used or secondhand:
(1) Commodity and precious metals.
(2) Gems, including but not limited to, any gem that is valued for its character, rarity, beauty or quality,
including diamonds, rubies, emeralds, sapphires or pearls, or any other such gems or stones, whether as a separate item
or in combination as a piece of jewelry.
2013-S-1
34 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
(3) Jewelry containing metals or gems, including but not limited to, rings, necklaces, pendants, earrings,
brooches, bracelets, or chains.
(4) Watches, including but not limited to, pocket watches, wrist watches, or stop watches.
(5) Sterling silver, including but not limited to, flatware, candleholders, coffee and tea sets, ornamental
objects, champagne flutes, wineglasses, or serving pieces such as platters, bowls, trays, water pitchers, open bakers, ice
buckets, shell dishes or salt and pepper shakers.
(6) Audio equipment and accessories, including but not limited to, tape players, tape decks or players,
compact/digital disc players and compact discs, sound metering devices, tuners, amplifiers, speakers, transceivers,
equalizers, receivers, phonographs, turntables, stereos, radios, clock radios, satellite radios, car stereos, car speakers,
radar detectors, broadcasting equipment or citizen band radios/transceivers.
(7) Video and digital equipment and accessories, including but not limited to, televisions, videotape or
digital videodisc recorders, videotape or digital videodisc players, video cameras, video monitors, video games, digital
video discs or video game consoles.
(8) Photographic and optical equipment and any accompanying bags, including but not limited to,
cameras, camera lenses, camera filters, camera motor drives, light meters, flash equipment, movie projectors, slide
projectors, photography processing equipment, photography enlarging equipment, binoculars, telescopes, opera glasses,
microscopes, surveying equipment, rifle scopes, spotting scopes, or electronic sighting equipment.
(9) Electrical office equipment, including but not limited to, telefax machines, laser printers, copiers,
duplicators, typewriters, calculators, cash registers, transcribers, dictaphones, computers, modems, monitors, or any
computer equipment or accessories having uniquely identifiable parts.
(10) Power yard and garden tools, including but not limited to, garden tractors, lawn mowers, rototillers,
lawn sweepers, weed or brush cutters, edgers, trimmers, blowers, chippers, shredders, or ladders.
(11) Power equipment and tools, including but not limited to, air hammers, air tools, nail guns, power
staplers, power saws, power sanders, chainsaws, power planers, power drills, routers, lathes, joiners, shop vacuums,
paint sprayers and accessory equipment, generators, air compressors, pressure washers or logging equipment.
(12) Automotive and hand tools, including but not limited to, wrench sets, sockets sets, screw driver sets,
pliers, vise grips, tool boxes, auto body hammers, jacks or timing lights.
(13) Telephones or telephone equipment, including but not limited to, office telephones, portable home
telephones, mobile telephones, cellular telephones or answering machines.
(14) Sporting equipment, including but not limited to, bicycles, golf clubs and bags, pool cues or cases, skis,
ski boots, snowboards, fishing rods or reels, or skates.
(15) Outboard motors and boating accessories, including but not limited to, outdrives, props, inboard
engines, boat covers, tops or unlicensed boat trailers.
(16) Microwave ovens.
(17) Motor vehicles, other than as set forth in subsection (18)(a), below.
2013-S-1
Scrap Dealers 34A
(18) Regulated property does not include any of the following property:
(a) Motor vehicles dealt in by motor vehicle dealers;
(b) Boats;
(c) Books, magazines, beta and VHS video tapes, and comic books;
(d) Glassware, objects d'art, or sports cards and sports memorabilia;
(e) Furniture;
(f) Refrigerators, stoves, washers, dryers and other similar major household appliances;
(g) Property purchased at an auction;
(h) Property purchased from another person, who is in a business, as described in Section 2;
(i) Postage stamps, stamp collections and philatelic items;
(j) Clothing;
(k) Ferrous metals, including items listed in subsections (6) through (16) above, when purchased
by a scrap processor and which items are in such condition that their highest and primary value is either in sale or
transfer as scrap metal.
(l) Commodity or ferrous metals purchased by a scrap processor from a manufacturing, industrial
or other commercial vendor that generates such metals in the ordinary course of business.
(m) A total of 4 or less compact discs, digital video discs, and/or video games purchased in any
combination from a single seller in a 24-hour period.
SCRAP DEALER. Any person, firm or corporation, who purchases or trades resalable scrap materials, including
metal, plastic, chemical, vegetable or animal cooking oil for salvage, excluding auto and truck salvage.
('73 Code, § 14-70) (Ord., passed 6-16-80)
SCRAP PROCESSORS. Any person who utilizes torches, sheers, balers, presses, or shredders to manufacture
scrap metal for remelting purposes only.
(Ord. 03-2011, passed 02-22-11)
§116.02 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
Every person engaged in, conducting or carrying on any business in Elizabethtown, Kentucky wherein he or
she regularly purchases, in the course of his or her business, regulated property from another person shall comply with
all the provisions of this ordinance.
(Ord. 03-2011, passed 02-22-11)
§ 116.03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
All scrap dealers shall be required to purchase business licenses and may only do business where the real estate is
properly zoned according to the zoning code or any other applicable ordinance of the city.
('73 Code, § 14-71) (Ord., passed 6-16-80) Penalty, see § 110.99
2013-S-1
34B Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
§ 116.04 DEALERS TO REQUIRE IDENTIFICATION FROM SELLERS; RECORDS TO BE KEPT.
(A) All scrap dealers shall require identification from all sellers of the goods mentioned in § 117.01 and shall
keep accurate and legible records of the names, addresses and date of birth of the sellers and accurate and legible
descriptions of the property purchased.
(B) The records mentioned in division (A) above shall be kept on file for one year and records shall be made
available to members of all police departments upon request for inspection, along with the items described, unless the
same have been sold.
('73 Code, § 14-72) (Ord., passed 6-16-80) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 116.05 TRANSACTION RECORD OF PURCHASES.
(A) Every person carrying on any business as set forth in Section 2 above, shall keep a transaction record
for each purchase, which shall contain the name of the person on behalf of the business, as set forth in Section 2 above,
who actually made the purchase, the name of the person or persons and his or her signature from whom any regulated
property is purchased, an electronically retained copy of a government-issued photo identification, including the
information obtained from scanning the bar code on the back of a government-issued photo identification of the person
or persons from whom any regulated property is purchased, the date when the property was received and bought, the
residence or place of business of such person or persons from whom the regulated property is purchased, the license
plate number of the motor vehicle in which the regulated property was transported to the business, and a description
which accurately depicts the regulated property purchased. The transaction record shall be in plain, legible
English text. Except for scrap metal processors purchasing commodity and precious metals, if any item of regulated
property purchased has engraved thereon any numbers, words, or initials, other than the name of the manufacturer or
maker of the item, or contains any setting of any kind, the description recorded on the transaction record shall show the
numbers, initials or other unique identifying marks. In the case of a motor vehicle, the vehicle identification number
shall be recorded on the transaction record including license plate number and make, model and description of the
motor vehicle
(B) All transactions which qualify under this ordinance shall be registered with Leads on Line within 24
hours of the receipt of the property. If so registered a hard copy retention shall not be required.
(C) It shall be the duty of any such person to allow any police officer designated by the Elizabethtown
Chief of Police during regular business hours to examine and inspect transaction records, and if sufficient information
cannot be gained from an inspection of transaction records, it shall be the duty of any person to permit and allow the
officer to examine any and all regulated property mentioned herein belonging to or purchased by such person. A
transaction record and digital photograph, in accordance with Section 6, if applicable, for a purchase shall be
maintained together on the premises for at least one year after the date of such purchase.
(D) Every person carrying on business as set forth in Section 2, above, shall give a plain written or printed
receipt of the regulated property purchased.
(E) All described records shall be retained for a minimum of three (3) years.
(Ord. 03-2011, passed 02-22-11) (Am. Ord. 13-2011, passed 06-20-11)
§ 116.06 TRANSACTING BUSINESS WITH MINORS.
No person carrying on any business as set forth in this ordinance shall at any time or under any circumstances purchase
from a minor any regulated property as defined in section 1, above, unless having been presented a certificate of trade
as signed by a parent or legal guardian, provided such parent or legal guardian has been physically present at a prior
transaction.
(Ord 03-2011, Passed 02-22-11)
2013-S-1
Scrap Dealers 34C
§ 116.07 EXAMINATION OF BOOKS.
Any sworn law enforcement officer may examine during regular business hours the books of any person doing
business as set forth in this ordinance, or his or her clerk, if they deem it necessary when in search of stolen property.
Any person who has in his or her possession a receipt from selling regulated property to a person carrying on a business
as described in this ordinance, shall, when accompanied by a sworn law enforcement officer, be permitted to examine
regulated property purporting to be sold by that receipt. No property shall be removed from the possession of any
person doing business as set forth in Section 2, above, without due process of law as required by the existing laws of
the Commonwealth of Kentucky, or the laws and ordinances of the City of Elizabethtown.
(Ord 03-2011, passed 02-22-11)
§ 116.08 REGULATED PROPERTY SALE LIMITATIONS.
No regulated property purchased by a person carrying on a business as described in section 2, above, shall be
sold, altered or destroyed for a period of five (5) full days after the date of purchase or five (5) days after registration of
the property with Leads On Line, whichever occurs later. The regulated property must be kept uncommingled, along
with a copy of the transaction record, as set forth in section 5, on the premises of the business location during the
holding period for purposes of inspection, if necessary, as provided by this section.
This section shall not apply if a digital recording or photograph, which accurately depicts the regulated
property items of the transaction, is taken and retained together with the transaction record, as provided by section 5, for
at least one year from the date of purchase.
(Ord. 03-2011, passed 02-22-11) (Am. Ord. 13-2011, passed 06-20-11)
§ 116.09 PENALTIES.
(1) Any person who shall neglect or refuse to comply with or violates the provisions of Section 3 shall be
fined not less than $100 nor more than $500 for each offense or incarcerated up to 90 days or both. Each day such
person, firm or corporation shall neglect or refuse to comply with or violate any of the provisions of that section shall
constitute a separate offense.
Any person convicted of a second or subsequent offense under Section 3 shall be fined not less than $500 or
more than $1,000 or incarcerated up to 180 days or both.
(2) Any person who shall violate Section 4 shall be fined $100, imprisoned not more than 50 days or both.
For a Second offense any person shall be fined $500 up to $1,000 or incarcerated up to 180 days or subsequent.
(3) Any person who shall violate Section 5 shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100) nor
more than five hundred dollars ($500).
(4) Any person who shall violate Section 6 shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100) nor
more than five hundred dollars ($500).
(5) Any person so convicted shall be subject to any and all other administrative penalties, including and
not limited to revocation of the business license.
(Ord. 03-2011, passed 02-22-11)
2013-S-1
34D Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
CHAPTER 117: TOURIST AND CONVENTION COMMISSION
Section
117.01 Commission established;tax levied
117.02 Payment of tax
117.03 Amount of tax
117.04 Liability for tax
117.05 Scope of tax
117.06 Bonding;reports
117.07 Depository
117.08 Powers of commission;fiscal year;effective date
117.09 Accounting;enforcement of provisions
117.10 Audits;civil actions
117.11 Appointments to bureau
117.12 Costs of litigation and audits
117.13 Confidentiality
Editor's note:
The city has in effect an agreement with the Tourist and Convention Commission concerning the Commission's
acquisition of real estate.
§ 117.01 COMMISSION ESTABLISHED;TAX LEVIED.
The City Council establishes the Elizabethtown Tourist and Convention Bureau and levies a transient room tax per
KRS 91(A).390. The imposition and collection of this transient room tax shall be on March 1, 1993, and each day
thereafter.
(Ord. 4, passed 2-8-93)
§ 117.02 PAYMENT OF TAX.
(A) These revenues shall be due and payable to the City of Elizabethtown director of finance no later than the
thirtieth day following the last day of each month, together with a return on a form furnished by or obtained from the
City Director of Finance. The tax return form shall be accompanied by a check for the total amount of tax and any
penalties then due and owing.
(B) Any tax imposed by this section which shall remain unpaid after it becomes due and payable, as set forth
herein, shall have added to it a penalty of 10% of the tax due, regardless of the period of any delinquency, together with
interest at a rate of two percent for each month of delinquency or fraction thereof, until paid. For example, taxes to be
paid in the sum of $100 for a particular month would then result in a tax bill of $100 principal sum of tax, plus $10 for
the 10% penalty, plus $24 for twelve months
35
36 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
delinquency, totaling $134, if the original $100 tax was not paid for a period of twelve months past its due date. The
tax imposed by this section shall be in addition to other general taxes and the occupational or business license tax
presently in force.
(Ord. 4, passed 2-8-93)
§ 117.03 AMOUNT OF TAX.
The imposition and levy of a transient room tax of three percent of the rent for every occupancy of a suite, room or
rooms, charged by all persons, companies, corporations or other like or similar persons, groups or organizations doing
business as motor courts, motels, hotels, inns or like or similar accommodations businesses, as approved shall apply to
transient guests who occupy a room in motor courts, motels, hotels, inns or like or similar accommodations in
businesses. Transient guests are occupants or users of the rooms, units, or similar accommodations of any of the
subject businesses, regardless of period of stay at the subject establishment.
(Ord. 4, passed 2-8-93)
§ 117.04 LIABILITY FOR TAX.
All persons, companies, corporations or like or similar persons, groups or organizations doing business as motor
courts, motels, hotels, inns or like or similar accommodations businesses shall collect and pay the transient room tax as
stated above.
(Ord. 4, passed 2-8-93)
§ 117.05 SCOPE OF TAX.
The tax shall be for room and/or space charges only.
(Ord. 4, passed 2-8-93)
§ 117.06 BONDING; REPORTS.
The Treasurer of the commission and any other person writing checks or handling funds shall be bonded to the
City in an amount commensurate to the largest amount of money on hand in any given month. The commission
treasurer shall make an itemized quarterly report to the City Council showing expenses and outlays for each month.
(Ord. 4, passed 2-8-93)
§ 117.07 DEPOSITORY.
The City Council will determine the depository of the commission funds.
(Ord. 4, passed 2-8-93)
Tourist and Convention Commission 37
§ 117.08 POWERS OF COMMISSION; FISCAL YEAR; EFFECTIVE DATE.
The city council forbids the commission to issue revenue bonds or to borrow money beyond the fiscal year without
the express approval of the City Council. Effective March 1, 1993, the fiscal year will begin July 1 of each year and
terminate on June 30 following. This section will become effective on March 1, 1993.
(Ord. 4, passed 2-8-93)
§ 117.09 ACCOUNTING; ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS.
The City Council will name a certified public accountant to make an annual or specific audit. The City shall
collect and enforce this chapter through its Director of Finance. In the absence of voluntary compliance, the director of
finance may charge the subject entities reasonable fees for the costs of any audit required by the Director of Finance.
(Ord. 4, passed 2-8-93)
§ 117.10 AUDITS; CIVIL ACTIONS.
The Director of Finance shall have the authority to audit the subject businesses books for enforcement purposes. If
the tax is not paid within 90 days of the due date, the Director of Finance may bring a civil action to enforce this
section.
(Ord. 4, passed 2-8-93)
§ 117.11 APPOINTMENTS TO BUREAU.
All appointments shall be made to the Tourist and Convention Bureau pursuant to KRS 91(a).360 et seq.
(Ord. 4, passed 2-8-93)
§ 117.12 COSTS OF LITIGATION AND AUDITS.
All costs of litigation and audits shall be borne wholly by the Convention and Tourist Bureau.
(Ord. 4, passed 2-8-93)
§ 117.13 CONFIDENTIALITY.
All returns and other information which comes into the hands of the Director of Finance or any of his/her
employees shall be confidential and shall not be revealed to any person or organization without an Order of a Court of
competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 4, passed 2-8-93)
38 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
CHAPTER 118: VEHICLES FOR HIRE
Section
118.01 Permit required for operation of vehicle for hire
§ 118.01 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR OPERATION OF VEHICLE FOR HIRE.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any passenger vehicle for hire and compensation on city streets
without first obtaining a license so to do.
('73 Code, § 21-3) (Ord., passed 2-1-26) Penalty, see § 10.99
39
2002-S-1
40 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
CHAPTER 119: CABLE TELEVISION
Section
119.01 Scope and intent
119.02 Notice of commencement of regulations
119.03 Rate filings by operator
119.04 Support for rate filings; burden of proof
119.05 Approval of city necessary
119.06 Timing of rate filing
119.07 Information to be provided
119.08 Schedule of action by the city; tolling periods
119.09 Rate subject to refunds
119.10 Certification of compliance
119.11 Public hearings
119.12 Inflation and external cost adjustments
119.13 Proprietary information
119.14 Decision
119.99 Penalty
§ 119.01 SCOPE AND INTENT.
(A) This chapter governs the regulation of cable television rates for basic service and equipment for any cable
operator providing service in the city.
(B) This chapter is intended to be consistent with FCC regulations and the city intends to administer these
regulations consistent with those regulations, all as required by the Act, 47 U.S.C. Section 543(b). Likewise, it is the
city's intention that the cable operator be bound by the FCC regulations to the extent allowed by law.
(C) For the purposes of this chapter, “basic service” or “basic cable service” and “cable operator” have the same
meaning as defined by the Act and FCC regulations. “Operator” shall have the same meaning as “cable operator.”
(Ord. 18, passed 5-9-94)
§ 119.02 NOTICE OF COMMENCEMENT OF REGULATIONS.
The city shall notify all cable operators subject to the Act who provide service in the city that the city has
commenced to regulate the basic rates of the operator. Notice shall be given by certified mail, return receipt requested.
(Ord. 18, passed 5-9-94)
41
42 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
§ 119.03 RATE FILINGS BY OPERATOR.
Within 30 days of receiving notice from the city that it has commenced regulation, the operator shall file with the
city a schedule of its current rates for basic service and equipment and justification therefor. The operator may, if it so
chooses, file a proposal with appropriate justification for an increase in its current rates. An “increase” shall mean any
change lessening the number of channels or other service available as well as raising the rate for basic service or
equipment. The operator may at any time thereafter submit a proposal to increase its rate, consistent with FCC
regulations.
(Ord. 18, passed 5-9-94)
§ 119.04 SUPPORT FOR RATE FILINGS; BURDEN OF PROOF.
(A) The rate filing submitted by the operator, either for its current rates or for a change in its current rates must
show that the rates the operator charges or proposes to charge for basic service and equipment are reasonable and in
compliance with all applicable FCC rules and regulations.
(B) The burden of proof is on the operator or show that the rates are reasonable and in compliance with all
applicable FCC rules and regulations.
(1) If the operator asserts that its current rates or its proposed rates are within the “benchmark” or “cap” as
defined by the FCC, it must fully complete applicable FCC forms and otherwise provide material to support its position.
(2) If the operator proposes to increase its rates above that level permitted by the FCC “benchmark” or “cap”
it may seek to make a “cost-of-service” showing in accordance with rules and regulations adopted by the FCC. In
seeking to make a “cost-of-service” showing, the operator must fully complete applicable FCC forms and otherwise
provide material to supplement its position.
(3) If the operator proposes to add or delete channels or service, or to remove certain channels from the basic
services to the cable programming service tier as defined by the FCC or to a non-regulated status, it must explain in
writing the impact of the addition, deletion or removal on its basic service rates and demonstrate why the addition,
deletion or removal complies with FCC rules and regulations.
(4) The operator must show why all rates for all customer classifications are reasonable.
(Ord. 18, passed 5-9-94)
§ 119.05 APPROVAL OF CITY NECESSARY.
Once an operator has been notified that the city has commenced regulation of its rates, the operator may not
therefore increase its rates for basic service or equipment without the prior approval of the city. This requirement
applies in all cases, including increases it has announced but not yet implemented prior to the date it received notice of
rate regulation from the city.
(Ord. 18, passed 5-9-94)
Cable Television 43
§ 119.06 TIMING OF RATE FILING.
Rate filings proposing and supporting rate increases must be filed for review at least 30 days in advance of the
proposed effective date of the increase.
(Ord. 18, passed 5-9-94)
§ 119.07 INFORMATION TO BE PROVIDED.
In addition to any information it provides in support of its current rates or request for increase in rates, the operator
shall provide all other information requested by the city, subject to a request for confidentially pursuant to § 119.13.
(Ord. 18, passed 5-9-94)
§ 119.08 SCHEDULE OF ACTION BY THE CITY: TOLLING PERIODS.
(A) After the operator has submitted a rate filing to justify its current rates, or to seek an increase, the current rates
shall remain in effect subject to further action by the city.
(B) If the city takes no action within 30 days of the submission, to approve, disapprove or toll the period of
reviewing the rates, the current rates or the proposed rates, as the case may be, shall be deemed approved; provided,
however, that the city may toll the 30 day period by issuing a brief written Municipal Order explaining that it needs
additional time to request or review additional information or consider comments from interested parties.
(1) For filings not involved cost-of-service showings, the city may toll the rates for an additional 90 days
after the expiration of the initial 30 days.
(2) For filings seeking a rate increase based upon a cost-of-service showing, the city may toll the rates for an
additional 150 days after the expiration of the initial 30 days. If City Council so desires, within 30 days of receipt of a
cost-of-service showing, it may ask the FCC pursuant to 47 C.F.R. § 76.7 to examine the cable operator's showing. The
city shall issue an order stating that it is seeking Commission assistance and serve a copy of the Order on the cable
operator before the 30 day deadline.
(3) If the rates are tolled with respect to current rates, the rates may remain in effect subject to refund as
specified in § 119.09. If the rates are tolled with the regard to a proposed increase, the increase in rates shall not go into
effect unless the city orders that they shall go into effect subject to refund.
(Ord. 18, passed 5-9-94)
§ 119.09 RATES SUBJECT TO REFUNDS.
(A) If the city chooses to toll the period to review current rates, the current rates will remain in effect subject to
refund. In like manner, if the city chooses to toll the period to review a proposed rate increase, it may permit the
proposed rate increase to go into effect subject to refund if ordered by the City Council.
44 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
(B) If the city has taken no action at the end of the additional 90 or 150 days, the proposed rate increase shall go
into effect subject to refund. In all cases, the city shall issue a brief written Order in accordance with 47 C.F.R.
§ 76.933, that the operator keep an accurate account of all amounts received by reason of the rate of issue and on whose
behalf such amounts are paid. Refunds shall be paid to the full extent allowed by law.
(Ord. 18, passed 5-9-94)
§ 119.10 CERTIFICATION OF COMPLIANCE.
Within 90 days of any Order of the city mandating a reduction in rates, ordering a refund of rates, or prescribing
rates at a level less than the rate increase sought by the operator, the operator shall file with the city a certification,
signed by an authorized representative that it has fully complied with the city's order and describing in detail the steps
taken to implement the order and showing how refunds, including interest, were calculated and distributed.
(Ord. 18, passed 5-9-94)
§ 119.11 PUBLIC HEARINGS.
Prior to taking any action to approve or disapprove rates, or prior to the expiration of any period under this chapter
that would result in rates going into effect subject to refund, the city shall hold a public hearing at which interested
parties may orally express their views or submit written comments. The public hearings shall be held in such a manner
as to convenience the city and its citizens.
(Ord. 18, passed 5-9-94)
§ 119.12 INFLATION AND EXTERNAL COSTS ADJUSTMENTS.
If the operator requests an increase in whole or in part based upon inflation adjustments, programming cost
increases, or other external factors permitted by FCC regulations the operator shall provide a detailed explanation and
documentation in support of the request, including calculations as to how the specific request was derived and a copy of
the contract for each programming service whose costs has increased. In addition, the operator shall submit, through it's
Chief Financial Officer or an independent certified accountant, a sworn statement that it has examined all external costs
and offset any claimed increase by any decrease that has occurred and has otherwise complied with the requirements of
47 C.F.R § 76.922(d)(2).
(Ord. 18, passed 5-9-94)
§ 119.13 PROPRIETARY INFORMATION.
(A) The operator may request that portions of the filings and information it supplies to the city in support of its
current rates or a proposed rate increase be kept confidential. Such request may be made solely as it relates to
proprietary information.
(1) For purposes of this section, PROPRIETARY INFORMATION is information which if openly
disclosed would permit an unfair commercial advantage to competitors of the cable operator.
Cable Television 45
(2) If possible the portions of the filing that are proprietary shall be segregated from the non-proprietary
information. The request that the information be kept confidential must state the reason that the information would
permit an unfair commercial advantage to competitors of the cable operator.
(B) The Mayor, or his/her designee shall grant the request that the information be kept confidential if he/she
determines that the preponderance of evidence shows disclosure would permit an unfair commercial advantage to
competitors of the cable operator. If the operator requests confidentiality and the request is denied, the operator may
withdraw its request for a rate increase and the information it claims to be proprietary will be returned to it.
(C) If the city requires any additional proprietary information other than that provided by the operator in support
of the rate filing, the city shall state a justification for such additional information and where related to an FCC Form
393 (and/or FCC Forms 1200/1205) filing. The city shall indicate the question or section of the form to which the
request specifically relates.
(D) If the cable operator makes no request for confidentiality, the material will be considered public records
available for inspection by any person pursuant to the Kentucky Open Records Act.
(Ord. 18, passed 5-9-94)
§ 119.14 DECISION.
(A) After it completes its review of the rate filing submitted by the operator, the city shall issue an Order
approving or disapproving the current rates sought to be justified or the increased rates sought. If the city had
previously decided pursuant to § 119.08 to allow rates to remain in effect or go into effect subject to refund, and if the
city disapproves the rates in question, it shall issue an appropriate order directing that refunds be made. The city may
order such refunds to the full extent permitted by the FCC regulations.
(B) The city may order a reduction in rates where necessary to bring rates into compliance with FCC regulations.
If the city determines that the current rate or a proposed rate is unreasonable, it may prescribe a reasonable rate.
(C) Before disapproving a rate or prescribing a rate or ordering a refund, the city shall ensure that the operator has
had notice and opportunity to comment on the rate in question or refund. The city shall provide 10 days written notice
and give the operator the opportunity to submit written or oral comments in addition to its rate filing.
(D) If the rates are disapproved in whole or in part, or the city prescribes rates, or orders refunds, the order issued
by the city shall specify the reasons for the decision. The City Clerk shall provide written notice to the operator of the
city's decision by providing a copy of the resolution or order.
(E) The city's decision approving or disapproving the rate in whole or in part, or prescribing rates, may be
appealed to the FCC or as otherwise allowed by law by the operator or by any citizen who submitted oral or written
comment to the city prior to the order rendering the decision.
(Ord. 18, passed 5-9-94)
46 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
§ 119.99 PENALTY.
(A) The operator is required to comply with the terms and provisions of this chapter. If the operator violates any
order of the city with respect to rates, it shall be subject to a fine of $500 a day for each day it fails to comply.
(B) Violation of this chapter or any order with respect to rates may be considered a violation of this Franchise
Agreement between the operator and the city.
(Ord. 18, passed 5-9-94)
CHAPTER 120: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
120.01 Findings, Declarations of Public Policy and Purpose
120.02 Definitions
120.03 Administration
120.04 Effect and Limitation
120.05 Signage
120.06 Material not to be Subject to Public View
120.07 Employee Age Requirements
120.08 Restricted Hours
120.09 Construction Requirements
120.10 Location Restrictions
120.11 Sale of Alcoholic Beverage Prohibited
120.12 Unlawful Activities
120.13 License Application; Contents
120.14 Information to be Current; Director to be Notified of Changes
120.15 Issuance of License
120.16 Inspections
120.17 Prohibited Activities
120.18 License Year; License Fees
120.19 Employee License Required
120.20 License Denial; Suspension, Revocation; Hearing and Appeal
120.21 Scienter Necessary to Prove Liability
120.22 Failure of Official to Meet Time Frame not to Risk Applicant or Licensee Rights
120.23 Penalty
General Provisions
§ 120.01 FINDINGS, DECLARATIONS OF PUBLIC POLICY AND PURPOSE.
(A) The City Council relies on such evidence of the adverse secondary efforts of adult entertainment uses
that is within the common knowledge of municipalities and is widely reported in judicial opinions, media reports, land
use studies, and crime impact reports made available to the Council, several of which are set forth herein. Additionally,
the Council relies on repeated judicial findings validating municipalities’ reasonable reliance on this body of secondary
effects evidence to support time, place, and manner regulations of sexually oriented businesses. The Council relies upon
and incorporates the findings of secondary effects discussed in the following non-exhaustive list of cases: Blue Movies,
Inc., et al v. Louisville/Jefferson County Metro Government, 2007-SC-000812-DG (KY 2010), Pap’s A. M. v. City of
Erie, 529 U.S. 277 (2000); City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc., 535 U.S. 425 (2002); City of Renton v.
Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. American Mini Theatres, 427 U.S. 50 (1976); Barnes b. Glen
Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); FW/PBS, Inc. v. City of Dallas, 493 U.S. 215 (1990); California v. LaRue, 409
U.S. 109 (1972); DLS, Inc. v. City of Chattanooga, 107 F.3d (6th Cir. 1997); Currence v. City of Cincinnati, 2002
U.S. app. LEXIS 1258; Broadway Books v. Roberts, 642 F. Supp. 486 (E.D. Tenn. 1986); Bright Lights, Inc. v. City of
Newport, 830 F. Supp. 379 (E.D. Ky. 1993); Ben’s Bar, Inc. v. Village of Somerset, 316 F.3d 702 (7th Cir. 2003);
Richard Bookmart v. Nichols, 137 F3d 435 (6th Cir. 1998); Center for Fair Public Policy v. Maricopa County, 336
F.3d 1153 (9th Cir. 2003); Déjá vu vs. Metro Government, 1999 U.S. App. LEXIS 535 (6th Cir. 1999); Bamon Corp. v.
City of Dayton, 923 F.2d 470 (6th Cir. 1991); Triplett Grille, Inc. v. City of Akron, 40 F.3d 129 (6th Cir. 1994);
O’Connor v. City and County of Denver, 894 F.2d 1210 (10th Cir. 1990; Déjá vu of Nashville, Inc., et al v.
Metropolitan Government of Nashville and Davidson County, 274 F.3d 377 (6th Cir. 2001); Z. J. Gifts D-2, LLC v. City
of Aurora, 136 F.3d 683 (10th Cir. 1998); ILQ Investments, Inc. v. City of Rochester, 25 F.3d 1413 (8th Cir. 1994);
World Wide Video of Spokane, Inc. v. City of Spokane, 227 F. Supp. 2d 1143 (E.D. Wash 2002); Threesome
Entertainment v. Strittmather, 4F. Supp. 2d 710 (N.D. Ohio 1998); Bigg Wolf Discount Video Sales, Inc. v.
Montgomery County, 256 F. Suppl 2d 385 (D. Md. 2003); Kentucky Restaurant Concepts, Inc. v. City of Louisville and
Jefferson County, 209 F. Supp. 2d 672 (W.D. Ky. 2002); Restaurant Ventures v. Lexington-Fayette Urban County
Gov’t, 60 S.W.3d 572 (Ct. App. Ky. 2001); Mr. B’s Bar & Lounge, Inc. v. Louisville, 630 S.W.2d 564 (Ct. App. Ky.
1981).
2013-S-1
48 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
(B) The Council further relies on reports concerning secondary effects occurring in and around sexually
oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, Phoenix, Arizona – 1979; Houston, Texas – 1997; Indianapolis,
Indiana – 1984; Amarillo, Texas – 1977; Garden Grove, California – 1991; Los Angeles, California – 1977; Whittier,
California – 1978; Austin, Texas – 1986; Seattle, Washington – 1989; Tucson, Arizona – 1990; Testimony, Warner-
Robins, Georgia – 2000; Newport News, Virginia – 1996; St. Cloud, Minnesota – 1994; New York Times Square study
– 1994; Minnesota, State of – 1989; Phoeniz, Arizona – 1995-1998; and also on findings of physical abuse from the
paper entitled “Stripclubs According to Srippers: Exposing Workplace Sexual Violence,” by Kelly Holsopple, Program
Director, Freedom and Justice Center for Prostitution Resources, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Based on cases and reports
such as these, the Council finds:
(1) Sexually oriented adult entertainment businesses, as a category of commercial uses, are
associated with a wide variety of adverse secondary effects including, but not limited to, personal and property crimes,
prostitution, potential spread of disease, lewdness, public indecency, obscenity, illicit drug use and drug trafficking,
negative impacts on property values, urban blight, pornographic litter, and sexual assault and exploitation.
(2) Sexual acts, including masturbation, oral and anal sex, sometimes occur at unregulated adult
entertainment businesses, especially those which provide private or semi-private booths, rooms, or cubicles for view
films, videos, or live sexually explicit shows, which acts constitute a public nuisance and pose a risk to public health
through the spread of sexually transmitted diseases.
(3) Adult entertainment businesses should be separated from sensitive land uses to minimize the
impact of their secondary effects upon such uses, and should be separated from other certain uses, such as other
sexually oriented businesses and establishments licensed to sell alcoholic beverages to minimize the secondary effects
associated with such uses and to prevent a concentration of sexually oriented businesses and such uses.
(4) Each of the foregoing negative secondary effects constitute a harm which the Council has a
substantial government interest in abating and/or preventing in the future.
(C) Adult entertainment activity tends to attract an undesirable clientele which discourages neighboring
residents form undertaking civic improvements, causes residents and businesses to move elsewhere and frustrates
attempts to attract new residences and businesses to come into an area, all of which factors contribute to a diminution of
property values and to a general deterioration of neighborhoods.
(D) The small closet-like rooms or “booths” at adult amusement arcades in other communities have
encouraged person to loiter for the purposes of engaging in unlawful, often anonymous, sexual conduct and have
encouraged lewd conduct in public places, thereby creating public nuisances and generally unsanitary and unhealthful
conditions that create dangers to the public health, welfare and safety.
(E) The concentration of sexually explicit movies and books and sexual paraphernalia in adult
entertainment establishments which also house sexually explicit movies, as well as hotel rooms rented by the hour to
“couples” afforded free sexually explicit movies in the hotel room, have provided prostitutes and appealing and visible
meeting place to ply their trade and have created public nuisances in otherwise respectable neighborhoods.
(F) Children, the family environment and residential neighborhoods suffer injury from the deleterious
effects and harmful consequences resulting from the distribution of, and exposure to, certain sexually explicit items and
devices. This is particularly so when such items and devices are permitted to leave a business’s premises and litter the
immediate family environment, neighborhood and certain areas where children are likely to be.
(G) The noise generated by patrons coming and going from adult entertainment establishments causes a
substantial disruption to nearby residents and modest curtailment of the hours during which entertainment is offered to
patrons of such establishments would afford some relief to person living in those nearby residences without
significantly interfering with the availability of adult entertainment.
2013-S-1
Sexually Oriented Businesses 49
(H) Nationally, there is extensive involvement of organized crime in the business of adult bookstores and
the disclosure of persons who own, as well as the names of those persons who operate adult bookstores and other adult
entertainment establishments will aid law enforcement officials in the enforcement of the federal Racketeer Influences
and Corrupt Organization Act (RICO) and the enforcement of the laws of the Commonwealth of Kentucky, among
others, prohibiting the distribution of obscene matter, the use of minors to distribute obscene matter, the advertising of
obscene material, the distribution of obscene material to minors, promoting the sale of obscenity, the use of a minor in a
sexual performance, the distribution of material portraying a sexual performance by a minor, the promoting of material
portraying a sexual performance by a minor and the advertising of material portraying a sexual performance by a minor
and the use of minors to distribute materials portraying a sexual performance by a minor.
(I) The Council declares as a matter of public policy that in order to preserve surrounding neighborhoods,
to prevent blight and the deterioration of the neighborhoods of the City of Elizabethtown, protect property values,
promote the return of residents and businesses to the neighborhoods, protect children form the deleterious effects of
exposure to sexually explicit material and decrease the incidence of crime and juvenile delinquency, the licensing and
regulation of adult entertainment establishments is a public necessity and is required in the interest of public health,
safety and welfare as well as the economic and aesthetic well-being of the people.
(J) Purposes:
(1) It is the purpose of this section to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the
health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Elizabethtown, Kentucky, and to establish reasonable and uniform
regulations to prevent the deleterious secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses within the City of
Elizabethtown. The provisions of this section have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction
on the content or reasonable access to any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it
is neither the intent nor effect of this section to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected
by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their
intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this section to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene
material:
(2) To prevent the unsanitary conditions which exist at “adult amusement arcades” and to prevent
health risks, including AIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases, caused by illicit and unlawful sexual relations in
such public establishments;
(3) To protect children and the family environment from the deleterious and harmful effects of
exposure to certain sexually explicit items and devices; and
(4) To obtain the identity of person licensed and to be licensed for the operation of establishments
selling, showing, renting or offering certain sexually explicit material or entertainment to insure property identification
of those persons responsible for the operation of such businesses so as to assist in the proper enforcement of this
section.
(K) It is not the purpose of this section to establish community standards on obscenity nor to permit persons
or entities to engage in any activity which is in violation of law, including but not limited to, state laws pertaining to the
advertising, promotion, distribution or sale of obscene matter or matters portraying a sexual performance by a minor, or
state laws pertaining to the use of a minor in a sexual performance or promotion of sexual performance by a minor, or
the use of a minor to distribute material portraying sexual performance by a minor.
(Ord. 23-2011, passed 11-21-11)
§ 120.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
2013-S-1
50 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ACTIVITY or ACTIVITIES or ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
ESTABLISHMENT shall mean regular commercial participation in one or more of the following defined activities:
(1) ADULT AMUSEMENT ARCADE. An establishment having as one of its principal uses one or
more of the following: customer-operated motion picture devices, peep shows, viewing areas and/or similar devices
wither coin, token or slug operated or which, inconsideration of an entrance fee, display matter distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on displays of sexual activities, as hereinafter defined, or which other male or female
persons expose to the view of the customer the bare female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola, human genitals, public region or buttocks, even if partially or completed covered by translucent material, or
human or simulated male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely or opaquely covered.
(2) ADULT BOOK STORE. An establishment having as one of its principal uses the sale, rent or display
of pictures, books, periodicals, magazines, appliances and similar material which are distinguished or characterized by
their emphasis on displays of sexual activities.
(3) ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. An establishment having as one of its principal uses the
presentation of motion pictures, slide projections and other similar material having as a dominant theme or
characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on matter displaying, describing or relating to sexual activities, as
hereinafter defined, for observation by person therein.
(4) ADULT NOVELTY CENTER. A commercial establishment which regularly features for sale
instruments, devices, “adult toys” or paraphernalia which are designed for or marketed primarily for stimulation of
human genital organs or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others. Such instruments and devices shall not
include condoms, contraceptive devices, spermicidal substances and lubricants, or other such products designed to
prevent pregnancy or sexually transmitted diseases.
(5) ADULT STAGE SHOW THEATER. An establishment having as one of its principal uses the regular
presentation of live performances of humans or animals having as a dominant theme or characterized or distinguished
by an emphasis on matter displaying semi-nudity or sexual activities for observation by persons therein.
(6) ADULT VIDEO CASSETTE RENTAL CENTER. A commercial establishment which has as one
of its principal business uses the rental or sale of video cassettes or other video recordings which display material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on displays of sexual activities.
(7) CABARET. An establishment which regularly features as one of its principal uses person who appear
semi-nude before patrons.
(8) COMMERCIAL SEXUAL ENTERTAINMENT CENTER. Any commercial establishment not
otherwise described herein which as one of it principal uses regularly offers matter, services or entertainment appealing
to adult sexual interests if the establishment or its entertainment, services or goods are advertised by or on behalf of the
establishment in a manner patently designed to appeal to such adult sexual interests.
(9) SELF-DESIGNATED ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CENTER. Any establishment which
designates all or a portion of its premises as for adults only and has a policy of excluding minors from is premises or
from a portion of its premises and which advertises so as to convey the impression that the services, entertainment,
matter of goods available at the premises or at the portion of the premises designated for adults only are characterized or
distinguished by displays of human genitals or sexual activities.
DIRECTOR. The Director of the Department Planning & Development or his/her designee.
2013-S-1
Sexually Oriented Businesses 51
EMPLOYEE. Any person hired by or suffered or permitted to work in an establishment engaging in adult
entertainment activities whether that person receives remuneration or compensation directly from the operator or owner
of the establishment, for patrons of the establishment or from any other sources whether by contract of employment or
otherwise, for work or services performed for the benefit of the adult entertainment establishment. EMPLOYEE does
not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods,
such as foods, to the premises.
ESTABLISHMENT. A business entity or endeavor, fixed, mobile or travelling, including its owners,
operators, directors, shareholders, partners, employees and possessions.
HEARING BOARD. The Code Enforcement Board as established pursuant to Ordinance No. 09-2003 of the
City of Elizabethtown, Kentucky.
LICENSEE. A person in whose name a license to operate an adult entertainment establishment has been
issued, as well as the individual or individuals listed as an applicant on the application for an adult entertainment
establishment license. In case of an “employee,” it shall mean the person in whose name the adult entertainment
employee license has been issued.
This license is in addition to the regular business license required by the City of Elizabethtown for any person
or entity desirous of conducting business within its corporate limits.
MATERIALS. Any book, magazine, newspaper, or other printed or written matter, or any picture, drawing,
photograph, motion picture, video cassette film or other pictorial representation or mechanical, chemical, or electrical
reproduction or any other articles, equipment, machines or materials.
NUDITY OR STATE OF NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female genitals, public area, vulva,
anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully
opaque covering of any part of the nipple and areola.
OPERATOR. Any individual, partnership, corporation or business entity who establishes and/or maintains a
business as its owner or manager and may also mean LICENSEE as defined hereabove.
PERSON. Any individual, partnership, corporation or business entity.
PRINCIPAL OWNER. Any person owning, directly or beneficially, 20% of a corporation’s equity securities,
20% or more of the membership interests in a limited liability company, or, in the case of any other legal entity, 20% or
more of the ownership interests in the entity.
PRINCIPAL USE. A substantial or significant use, but not necessarily a majority of the business activity or
stock in trade. The fact that a business may have one or more other principal uses unrelated to adult entertainment shall
not relieve the business from the provisions of this section applicable to adult entertainment establishments. Principal
use shall exist in the following circumstances:
(1) Where a business establishment dedicates, or permits the use of, at least 25% of the utilized square
footage of its premises for adult entertainment activity or activities; or
(2) Where at least 25% of the gross receipts of a business establishment, excluding food and beverage
receipts, result from adult entertainment activity or activities.
2013-S-1
52 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
REAL ESTATE OWNER. Any individual, partnership, corporation or business entity who has legal title to
real estate, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof, or has the beneficial ownership of any real estate
and a right to present use of enjoyment thereof, including a mortgage in possession.
REGULARLY. As used in the phases herein such as “regularly features” and “regularly offers,” the term
“regularly” means a consistent or repeated course of conduct engaged in or permitted by the operator of the business.
SEMI-NUDE OR STATE OF SEMI-NUDITY. A state of dress in which opaque clothing covers no more
than the genitals, anus cleft or cleavage, public area, vulva, and nipple and areola of the female breast, as well as
portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. This definition shall not include any portion of the
cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel
provided that the areola and nipple are not exposed in whole or in part.
SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Partial or complete male and or female nudity in conjunction with:
(1) Displays of human genital in a state of sexual stimulation;
(2) Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; or
(3) Holding or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or breast.
SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITIES. Any of the following offenses:
(1) KRS 510.040, 510.050, or 510.060 (rape in the first, second and third degree); KRS 510.070, 510.080,
or 510.90 (sodomy in the first, second or third degree); KRS 510.110, 510.120, or 510.130 (sexual abuse in the first,
second or third degree); KRS 510.140 (sexual misconduct); 510.150 (indecent exposure); KRS 517.050 (falsifying
business records); KRS 529.020, 529.030, 529.040 or 529.050 (prostitution); KRS 531.020, 531.030, 531.040
(distributing obscene matter, distributing obscene matter to minors, using minors to distribute obscene matter); KRS
218A.140 et seq. (offenses relating to controlled substances); any offense listed in KRS 531.300 through 531.370
(sexual exploitation of minors offenses); engaging in organized crime (KRS 506.120) relating to a sexually oriented
business; criminal attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses or offenses in other
jurisdictions that, if the acts would have constituted any of the foregoing offenses if the acts had been committed in
Kentucky; for which:
(a) less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from
confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;
(b) less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from
confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or
(c) less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from
confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor
offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period.
(2) The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant.
(Ord. 23-2011, passed 11-21-11)
2013-S-1
Sexually Oriented Businesses 53
§ 120.03 ADMINISTRATION
The Director is empowered to enact from time to time such rules and regulations deemed necessary for the
orderly and complete administration of this section. All regulations shall be submitted to the Mayor and shall become
effective within 30 days of submission unless disapproved in writing by the Mayor prior to that date. All licensees and
person with license applications pending shall be mailed copies of all such regulations and they shall be published one
time in the local newspaper as soon as practical after they become effective.
(Ord. 23-2011, passed 11-21-11)
§ 120.04 EFFECT AND LIMITATION.
It is not the purpose of this section to establish community standards on obscenity nor to permit persons to
engage in any activity which is in violation of law, including, but not limited to state laws pertaining to the advertising,
promotion, distribution, or sale of obscene matter or matters portraying a sexual performance by a minor, or state laws
pertaining to use of a minor in a sexual performance or promotion of a sexual performance by a minor, or the use of a
minor to distribute material portraying sexual performance by a minor.
(Ord. 23-2011, passed 11-21-11)
Restrictions and Operating Regulations
§ 120.05 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
An adult entertainment establishment, except as otherwise provided by laws, which may be more restrictive,
may not have more than one sign outside, flush to the wall, facia style, not to exceed in size ten feet in length
(horizontal to the ground) and three feet in width (vertical to the ground) with no flashing lights and with no pictorial
matter which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on displays of sexual activities.
(Ord. 23-2011, passed 11-21-11)
§ 120.06 MATERIAL NOT TO BE SUBJECT TO PUBLIC VIEW.
An adult entertainment establishment may not display pictorial representation of sexual activities in such
manner as to be subject to public view from outside the business premises, including but limited to view from public
sidewalks, streets, arcades, hallways or passageways.
(Ord. 23-2011, passed 11-21-11)
§ 120.07 EMPLOYEE AGE REQUIREMENTS.
(A) An operator or employee of an adult entertainment establishment shall not permit a person under 18
years of age to be employed by or to enter the establishment.
(B) An adult entertainment establishment shall, at all times, cause the entrance of the establishment to be so
attended as to insure compliance with the requirements contained in subsection (A) of this section.
(Ord. 23-2011, passed 11-21-11)
§ 120.08 RESTRICTED HOURS.
No adult entertainment establishment shall be or remain open for business between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and
9:00 a.m. on any day.
(Ord. 23-2011, passed 11-21-11)
2013-S-1
54 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
§ 120.09 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
(A) An adult amusement arcade, except as otherwise provided by laws which may be more restrictive, shall
meet the requirements set forth in this section.
(B) Any wall or partition which is situated so as to create a viewing area in which any amusement device or
viewing screen is located shall be constructed of not less than one hour fire-restrictive material and shall contain no
holes, openings or other perforations. No operator or employee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between
viewing rooms or booths nor shall any person make or attempt to make an opening of any kind between viewing booths
or rooms.
The Elizabethtown Fire Department shall inspect the premises of the licensee for compliance with this section.
(C) A person who operates or causes to be operated an adult amusement arcade which exhibits on the
premises in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette or other video
reproduction which display specified sexual activities as defined in “Findings, Declaration of Public Policy and
Purpose” shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed
view from a manager’s or cashier’s station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any
purpose excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. The view required in this
section must be by direct line of sight from the manager’s or cashier’s station.
(2) It shall be the duty of the operator and any employees present in the premises to ensure that the
view area specified in subsection (C)(1) of this section remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display
racks or other materials at all times. It shall be the duty of the operator to ensure that there is at least one employee on
duty and situated in a public area adjacent to the adult arcades, where the view area specified in subsection (C)(1) is
visible, at all times that any patron is present in the adult arcades.
(3) No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at a time.
(4) All floor coverings in viewing booths shall be non-porous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no
rugs or carpeting. All wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces shall be constructed of, or permanently covered by nonporous,
easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board, other porous material shall be used within 48 inches
of the floor.
(D) The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate
every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five footcandles measured at the
floor level at all times any patron is present in the premises.
(E) All persons regulated pursuant to this section must comply with the terms and conditions hereof within
60 days after the effective date of this section.
(Ord. 23-2011, passed 11-21-11)
§ 120.10 LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.
(A) The public entrance to an establishment engaging in adult entertainment activities shall not be located
within 500 feet of any building containing a public or private elementary, middle or secondary school, institution of
higher education or business college, or any park-mall or park-like area of open space under the control of a
governmental agency, or any building used for a place of religious worship, or any building used for a governmental
function or public library. Such distance shall be measured along a straight line form the nearest property line of the
property on which the building or public park-like area is located to the entrance to such establishment engaging in an
adult entertainment activity.
2013-S-1
Sexually Oriented Businesses 55
(B) The public entrance to an establishment engaging in adult entertainment activities may not be located
within 500 feet of an area zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, WDC-1, WDC-2, PNC, PNR-1 and PNR-2 or from an
area used for residential purposes. Such distance shall be measured along a straight line from the boundary line of the
nearest area zoned or used for residential purposes to the entrance to such establishment engaging in an adult
entertainment activity. All adult entertainment establishments shall comply with all other pertinent zoning regulations of
the City of Elizabethtown, Kentucky and are allowed to be located in areas zoned Industrial (I-1 and I-2).
(C) The public entrance to an establishment engaging in adult entertainment activities shall not located
within 500 feet of the public entrance of another adult entertainment activity establishment.
(D) The public entrance to an establishment engaging in adult entertainment shall not be located within 500
feet of the public entrance of an establishment licensed to serve alcoholic beverages.
(Ord. 23-2011, passed 11-21-11)
§ 120.11 SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED.
An adult entertainment establishment shall not make application for and shall not be granted any license to sell
alcoholic beverages otherwise issued pursuant to Ordinance No. 22 - 2011 and Chapters 122 and 123 of the
Elizabethtown Code of Ordinances. The sale, use or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises of an adult
entertainment establishment is prohibited.
(Ord. 23-2011, passed 11-21-11)
§ 120.12 UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES.
Nothing contained in this section is intended, or shall be construed, to permit or authorize activities which are
unlawful under state law or local ordinance. It is unlawful for the operator to knowingly violate the following
regulations or to allow, either knowingly or recklessly, an employee or a patron to violate the following regulations.
(A) It shall be a violation of this section for a patron, employee, or any other person to knowingly or
intentionally, in an adult entertainment establishment, appear in a state of nudity, regardless of whether such public
nudity is expressive in nature.
(B) It shall be a violation of this section for an employee to knowingly or intentionally, in an adult
entertainment establishment, appear in a semi-nude condition unless the employee, while semi-nude, remains at least
six feet from any patron or customer and on a fixed stage at least 18 inches from the floor. The six foot requirement is
measured from the edge of the stage where the semi-nude employee is located to the patron seating or standing area, or,
if patrons are allowed to sit at the stage, from the edge of the stage to a line or other barrier six feet from the edge
beyond which employees are allowed to appear semi-nude.
(C) It shall be a violation of this section for any employee, while semi-nude in an adult entertainment
establishment, to knowingly or intentionally receive any pay or gratuity directly from any patron or customer or for any
patron or customer to knowingly or intentionally pay or give any gratuity directly to any employee, while said employee
is semi-nude in an adult entertainment establishment.
(Ord. 23-2011, passed 11-21-11)
2013-S-1
56 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
Licensing Provisions
§ 120.13 LICENSE APPLICATION; CONTENTS.
(A) The principal owner(s) or the operator(s) of an establishment intending to engage, or engaging under a
previously issued license in an adult entertainment activity, shall make application for a license with the Director in
accordance with this section.
(B) Such application shall be in writing, notarized, and shall be in the form prescribed by the Director. The
application will be deemed complete when it contains the following information:
(1) The name, business location address, business mailing address and phone number of the
establishment and the name and business address of the prospective licensee.
(2) The applicant’s full true name, mailing address, date of birth, and a copy of a governmentissued
photo identification card or set of fingerprints.
(a) If the applicant is one or more individuals, then all principal owners shall comply.
(b) If the applicant is other than an individual, such as corporation or partnership, each
officer, director, general partner, principal owner and each other person who will participate directly in decisions
relating to management of the business shall sign the application for a license as the applicant and comply with the
requirements of this section.
(3) The name and address of the prospective licensee’s designated agent for service of process.
(4) If the applicant is not the owner of record of the real property on which the licensed
establishment is located or to be located, the application shall include the name and address of the owner of record of
the real property.
(5) A designation of the adult entertainment activities, as defined in the definitions, in which the
applicant seeks to engage at the specified location.
(6) All convictions for specified criminal activities, as defined in this section, of the applicant or
applicants whose names are required pursuant to this section.
(7) The name and mailing address of any person to whom the applicant wants mail notice to be
given in case of violation or other matters affecting any license hereunder.
(8) A drawing or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total
floor space occupied by the business. The drawing or diagram need not be professionally prepared but shall be drawn to
a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six
inches.
(Ord. 23-2011, passed 11-21-11)
§ 120.14 INFORMATION TO BE CURRENT; DIRECTOR TO BE NOTIFIED OF CHANGES.
The information required by “License Application; Contents” shall be kept current by the licensee at all times
even after the granting of a license by the Director. It shall be the responsibility of the operator or other person
designated in the license application to notify the Director no later than the close of the fifth business day after the
effective date of any changes, alterations or modifications in any information contained in the application including, but
not limited to: name of the establishment; any change in the corporate or partnership information submitted as part of
the application; names and mailing addresses of employees; name and address of designated agent for service of
process; designation of the activity or activities to be engaged in at the establishment, as defined in definitions; and the
name and mailing address of any person the applicant wants mail notice to be given in case of violation or other matters
affecting the license.
(Ord. 23-2011, passed 11-21-11)
2013-S-1
Sexually Oriented Businesses 57
§ 120.15 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
The following license(s) is in addition to a regular business license required by the City of Elizabethtown for
any person or entity desirous of undertaking business within it corporate limits.
(A) Upon the filing of a completed application for an adult entertainment establishment license or
employee license under “Employee License Required,” the Director shall issue a temporary license to the applicant,
which temporary license shall expire 15 days after the final decision of the Director to deny or grant the license. Within
20 business days after the receipt of a completed application, the Director shall cause the premises to be inspected for
compliance with City of Elizabethtown zoning, building, safety, health and fire codes. Said inspections shall be
performed at the direction of the Director by whichever department(s) he/she deems is appropriate. If inspections are
not made within the specified 20 days, unless such failure is due to the applicant’s or the real estates owners’
disallowance of said inspections, the property shall be deemed to comply with the codes specified in the previous
sentence. Within 20 business days after the receipt of a completed application, the Director shall direct that a license be
issued, or issue a written notice of intent to deny a license, to the applicant. Said physical license shall be created by the
Elizabethtown Police Department, but issued by the Director. The Director shall approve the issuance of a license
unless one or more of the following is found to be true:
(1) An applicant is less than 18 years of age.
(2) An applicant is delinquent in the payment of City of Elizabethtown of taxes, fees, fines, or
penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant in relation to an adult entertainment establishment.
(3) An applicant has failed to provide information or true and correct information required of the
applicant for issuance of the license.
(4) An applicant, including any principal owner of the adult entertainment establishment, has been
convicted of a specified criminal activity, as defined in this section.
(5) The license fee requirement by “License Year; License fees” has not been paid.
(6) The proposed adult entertainment establishment is located in a zoning district other than a
district in which adult entertainment businesses are allowed to operate under the applicable zoning regulation of the
City of Elizabethtown or is not in compliance with the location restriction established for adult entertainment
establishments under this section.
(7) The applicant’s premises have been found by the Director or his designee to not be in
compliance with City of Elizabethtown zoning, building safety, health or fire codes.
(B) An applicant that is ineligible for a license due to subsection (A)(4) of this section, may qualify for an
adult entertainment establishment license only when the time period required by the applicable subsection in “License
Denial, Suspension, Revocation; Hearing and Appeal” has elapsed.
(C) The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted,
the number of the license issued to that applicant, the expiration date, and the address of the adult entertainment
establishment. An adult entertainment establishment employee license shall contain a photograph of the licensee. The
adult entertainment establishment license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to such business
so that it may be easily read at any time. An adult entertainment establishment employee shall keep the employee’s
license on his or her person or the premises where the licensee is then working or performing, and shall produce such
license for inspection upon request by a law enforcement officer or other authorized City of Elizabethtown enforcement
official. Such officer or official, pursuant to this section, shall request verification of an employee’s license only when
reasonable and necessary to advance the purpose of this section.
(Ord. 23-2011, passed 11-21-11)
2013-S-1
58 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
§ 120.16 INSPECTIONS.
The application for or the grant of a license to operate an adult entertainment establishment is deemed to permit
periodic inspections of the public areas of any such establishment during such establishment’s business hours for the
purpose of verifying compliance with the terms and conditions of this section. This section shall be reasonably
construed and applied by enforcement personnel. Inspections shall be performed by the appropriate City department as
directed and identified by the Director.
(Ord. 23-2011, passed 11-21-11)
§ 120.17 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
(A) Immediately upon the effective date of this section no person shall operate, own or be employed at an
unlicensed adult entertainment establishment. All pending applications at the time of the effective date hereof and new
applications received thereafter shall be subject immediately to the terms of this section.
(B) No owner shall permit adult entertainment activities to operate on his property without such adult
entertainment activities being properly licensed.
(C) No person shall permit himself to be an operator or an employee at an adult entertainment activity
which has not been validly licensed hereunder.
(D) No person shall own, operate or be employed at an establishment engaged in adult entertainment
activities unless all employees of this establishment have obtained the license required by “Employee License
Required” of this section.
(Ord. 23-2011, passed 11-21-11)
§ 120.18 LICENSE YEAR; LICENSE FEES.
All adult entertainment establishment license shall be for the fiscal year, July 1 to June 30, or the remaining
portion of such fiscal year. The annual license free shall be $1,000 and payable to the City of Elizabethtown at the time
of application. For new applications, annual fees shall be prorated at the rate of $100 per month for the remaining full
months of a fiscal year but shall not exceed $1,000. Application for renewal of a license shall be made at least 90 days,
but not more than 120 days, before the expiration of the current license and shall be accompanied by the annual fee of
$1,000. The renewal application shall also contain any changes in the information required by “Licensed Application;
Contents” which have occurred since the previous application. If the renewal application and/or the annual fee are not
tendered in a timely fashion, the Director shall serve notice to the licensee that the failure to submit the renewal
application and/or the annual fee within ten business days will be deemed an abandonment of the license as of the
above-referenced renewal deadline. Service of the notice required by this section shall be deemed complete upon
certified mailing, return receipt requested, or personal delivery.
(Ord. 23-2011, passed 11-21-11)
§ 120.19 EMPLOYEE LICENSE REQUIRED.
(A) Any person intending to be an employee at an adult entertainment establishment shall make application
for an employee license with the Director in accordance with this section. The application shall be in writing, notarized,
and shall be in the form prescribed by the Director and shall be deemed complete when it contains the following items:
(1) The legal name of the applicant;
(2) Any and all aliases or names used or to be used by the applicant in the course of prior, current
or prospective appearances or performances as a dancer, performer or entertainer;
(3) The applicant’s mailing address where the applicant may be contacted by the Director;
2013-S-1
Sexually Oriented Businesses 58A
(4) The applicant’s date of birth;
(5) A set of the applicant’s fingerprints suitable or a copy of a government-issued photo
identification card;
(6) A recent photograph of the applicant; and
(7) Any information required under this section deemed to be private and/or confidential within
the meaning of KRS 61.878, or within the constitutional right to privacy, shall not be disclosed to any person
other than law enforcement agencies or other governmental agencies.
(B) The applicant shall submit an annual license fee of $25 with the application for an employee license
and the Director shall immediately issue a temporary employee license pending a final decision by the Director to grant
or deny the employee license. Within 20 working days of the application, the Director shall determine whether the
applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity, as defined in this section. If no record of such conviction
is found, the Director shall issue an annual employee license. The license so granted shall expire on June 30 of each
year and shall be annually reissued by the Director upon application therefore by the employee unless the Director
confirms a conviction of any of the above-described offenses. In the event the Director confirms a conviction of a
proscribed offense, he/she shall issue the applicant a notice of intent to deny the employee license. Application for a
renewal license shall be made at least 90 days, and not more than 120 days, prior to expiration of the employee’s
current license. Within 30 days after the effective date of this section, no person shall be an employee at an adult
entertainment establishment without having obtained the license required by this section.
(Ord. 23-2011, passed 11-21-11)
§ 120.20 LICENSE DENIAL, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION; HEARING AND APPEAL.
(A) The Director shall issue a written letter of intent to suspend an adult entertainment license or an
employee license, as applicable, for a period not to exceed 30 days if he/she determines that the licensee knowingly or
recklessly violated or is not in compliance with any section of this section.
(B) The Director shall issue a written statement of intent to revoke an adult entertainment establishment
license or an employee license, as applicable, if the licensee knowingly or recklessly commits two or more violations
specified in this section within a 12-month period.
(C) The Director shall issue a written statement of intent to revoke an adult entertainment establishment
license or an employee license, as applicable, if:
(1) The licensee knowingly gave false information in the material submitted during the
application process;
(2) The licensee has knowingly engaged in or allowed possession, use or sale of control substances
on the premises;
(3) The licensee has knowingly engaged in or allowed prostitution on the premises;
(4) The licensee has knowingly operated the adult entertainment establishment during a period of
time when the licensee’s license was suspended;
(5) The licensee has knowingly engaged in or allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral
copulation, or masturbation to occur in or on the licensed premises. This subsection will not apply to an adult motel,
unless the licensee knowingly allowed the foregoing sexual activities to occur either in exchange for money or in a
place within public view.
(D) The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have effect on the revocation of the license, provided
however, that any reversal of a conviction shall automatically eliminate that conviction from consideration in this
chapter.
2013-S-1
58B Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
(E) When, after the notice and hearing procedure described in subsection (F) of this section, the Director
revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued an adult entertainment
establishment license or an employee license for one year from the date revocation becomes effective, provided that, if
the conditions of subdivision (G) of this section are met, a provisional license will be granted pursuant to that
subsection.
(F) If facts exist for denial, suspension, or revocation of an adult entertainment establishment license or an
employee license issued under this section, the Director shall notify the applicant or licensee (respondent) in writing of
the intent to deny, suspend or revoke the license, including the grounds therefore, by personal delivery, or by certified
mail. The notification shall be directed to the most current business address on file with the Director, and will provide
the address of the Hearing Board to which the respondent should direct his or her response. Within five working days of
receipt of such notice, the respondent may provide to the Hearing Board, in writing, a response that shall include a
statement of reasons why the license or permit should not be denied, suspended, or revoked. Within three working days
of the receipt of respondent’s written response, the Hearing Board shall notify respondent in writing of the hearing date
on respondent’s denial, suspension or revocation proceeding.
(1) Within ten working days of the receipt of respondent’s written response, the Hearing Board
shall conduct a hearing at which respondent shall have the opportunity to be represented by counsel, present evidence
and witnesses on his or her behalf, and cross-examine adverse witnesses. Such proceeding shall be transcribed or
recorded. Within ten working days after any hearing, the Hearing Board shall issue a written decision on the matter and
mail such decision to the respondent by certified mail no later than five (5) working days after the date of such decision.
(2) If a response is not received by the Hearing Board in the time stated or, if after hearing, the
Hearing Board finds that grounds as specified in this section exist for denial, suspension, or revocation, then such
denial, suspension or revocation shall become final five working days after the Hearing Board sends, by certified mail,
the written decision and notice that the license has been denied, suspended, or revoked. Such notice shall include a
statement advising the applicant or licensee of the right to appeal such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction.
(G) When a decision to deny, suspend or revoke a license becomes final, the applicant or licensee
(aggrieved party) whose application for a license has been denied, or whose licenses has been suspended or revoked,
shall have the right to appeal such action to a court of competent jurisdiction within 15 working days of the date of the
adverse decision becomes final. Until the time for an appeal has passed, any temporary license issued to the aggrieved
party under this section shall remain in effect throughout the administrative proceedings described in this section. Upon
the filing of any court action to appeal, challenge, restrain or otherwise enjoin the enforcement of the denial, suspension
or revocation, the Director shall immediately issue the aggrieved a provisional license and shall file the record of the
administrative proceeding with the reviewing court within ten business days after he/she receives notice of said action.
The provisional license shall allow the aggrieved party to continue operation of the adult entertainment establishment or
to continue employment as an adult entertainment employee, as the case may be, and will expire upon the court’s entry
of a judgment on the merits of the aggrieved party’s action to appeal, challenge, restrain or otherwise enjoin the
enforcement of the Director’s decision.
(Ord. 23-2011, passed 11-21-11)
§ 120.21 SCIENTER NECESSARY TO PROVE LIABILITY.
This section does not impose strict liability for violations of its provisions. Where any provision or offense
herein fails to state a necessary level of culpability to establish a violation or liability, the offense shall be established
upon a showing that the person acted knowingly or recklessly with regard to the predicate act. Notwithstanding
anything to the contrary, for the purposes of this section, an act by an employee shall be imputed to the adult
entertainment licensee for the purpose of establishing a violation of this section, or for purposes of license denial,
modification, or revocation only if a licensee allowed, either knowingly or by reckless failure to supervise, a violation of
this section to occur. It shall be a defense to liability that the adult entertainment establishment licensee was powerless
to prevent the violation.
(Ord 23-2011, passed 11-21-11)
2013-S-1
Sexually Oriented Businesses 58C
§ 120.22 FAILURE OF OFFICIAL TO MEET TIME FRAME NOT TO RISK APPLICANT OR LICENSEE
RIGHTS.
In the event that a government official is required to take an act or do a thing pursuant to this section within a
prescribed time, and fails to take such act or such thing within the time prescribed, said failure shall not prevent the
exercise of constitutional rights of an applicant or licensee. If the act required of the official under this section, but not
completed in the time prescribed, includes approval of condition(s) necessary for approval by the City of Elizabethtown
of an applicant or licensee’s employee license (including a renewal), the applicant or licensee shall be deemed to have
satisfied the condition(s) for which approval was sought.
(Ord. 23-2011, passed 11-21-11)
§ 120.23 PENALTY.
(A) Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than
$100 nor more than $1,000 as imposed by the Director. Each day that a violation continues after notice has been served
shall be deemed a separate offense. Any person cited pursuant to this subsection (A) and assessed a civil penalty shall
have the right to appeal such penalty to the Hearing Board in accordance with the Code Enforcement Board Ordinance.
The process for said appeal shall be governed by Section 34 of the Elizabethtown Code of Ordinance.
(B) Notwithstanding subsection (A) above, any person who violates any provision of this section or who
knowingly provides false information in an attempt to gain or maintain a license, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not less than $250 nor more than $500 or imprisonment not to exceed 90
days, or both, for each offense. Any person cited hereunder for a failure to meet a requirement hereof may be cited
again for said failure one or more days after a prior citation and in such case each citation shall constitute a separate
offense.
(C) In addition to the penalties provided herein for violations of this section, the Director is authorized to
pursue remedial civil action for violations of this section by civil complaint or petition for injunctive relief, declaration
of rights or other appropriate proceeding filed in the Hardin County, Kentucky Circuit Court.
(Ord. 23-2011, passed 11-21-11)
2013-S-1
58D Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
CHAPTER 121: HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Section
127.01 Purpose
127.02 Applicability
127.03 Definitions
127.04 Determination of Reportable Quantities
127.05 Administering Agency
127.06 Notification to Fire Communications & Dispatch
127.07 Confidential Information and Trade Secrets
127.08 Enforcement; Notice of Violation
127.09 Penalties
127.10 Appeals Board
127.11 Affirmative Defenses
127.12 Disclaimer of Liability
§ 121.01 PURPOSE
The purpose of this ordinance is the protection of public health and safety in Elizabethtown, Kentucky, through
prevention and control of hazardous materials, incidents and releases, to require the timely reporting of releases, and to
provide for the reimbursement to the City of Elizabethtown for legitimate expenses for emergency responses by the
City. (Ordinance No. 13-2000, passed Aug. 21, 2000)
§ 121.02 APPLICABILITY
This Ordinance shall apply to all persons who manufacture, use, handle, or store hazardous materials in quantities
prescribed by this Ordinance and as defined herein, within the City of Elizabethtown. (Ordinance No. 13-2000, passed
Aug. 21, 2000)
§ 121.03 DEFINITIONS Unless the context of usage indicates otherwise, the meaning of specific terms of this
Ordinance shall be as follows:
Consumer Product. Shall have the meaning stated in 15 U.S.C. 2052
Cost Recovery. Cost associated with Hazardous Materials responses include equipment that is disposed of, rather
the re-used, the cost of qualifying the contaminants and securing legal disposal methods, and equipment which must be
replaced to ensure readiness for the next release. In addition, hazardous materials releases involve additional staffing,
either at the scene of the release for control, isolation of the area, or evacuation of citizens or employees; or as long-term
stand-by personnel at department stations to provide the normal coverage for other emergency situations that may arise
in the community during a hazardous materials release.
Affected departments could include Fire, Police, Water/Wastewater, Public Works, Natural Gas and Recreation.
It is the City’s intent that shelter needs be provided by private disaster relief agencies, whenever possible, however,
costs could be incurred for evacuees including food, water, and personal hygiene materials.
59
2000-S-3
60 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
Cost recovery includes those amounts charged to the generator of a spill or release of hazardous materials, by the
City of Elizabethtown or its departments, to replace equipment utilized (that is not reusable) or requires
decontamination (with associated fees). Also, the City will bill total standard overtime salaries for non-“Technician”
employees. “Technician” level city employees (as defined in OSHA 29 CFR 1910.120) shall be billed to the generator
of a spill or release at a rate of $50.00 per hour/per Technician at the scene of a hazardous material incident, provided
they are actively engaged in leak control, monitoring, rescue, “back-up” for leak control or monitoring teams,
decontamination, or are hourly employees serving at management levels or as support personnel with the incident
Command structure. Additional staff, “called-back”, who are standing by at their respective fire stations shall be
considered as normally on-duty until the number exceeds that defined as normal staffing for that shift at the beginning
of that work day. Any excess “called-back” personnel will be billed to the generator of a spill or release at a rate of
$15.00 per hour/per person.
It is not a legal requirement that the City of Elizabethtown provide these emergency technical services to its
citizens and business community, however, it is within the scope of modern community protection to procure
equipment, train personnel, and provide and increased level of response for hazardous materials incidents, where
feasible. This feasibility for the City of Elizabethtown is dependent upon total cost recovery for equipment and supplies
used, and overtime salaries incurred by its departments during a hazardous materials incident.
Employee. Any person who works, with or without compensation, in a workplace.
Employer. Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, government agency or other entity engaged in
a business or in providing services, that has employees.
Environment. Means the atmosphere, the navigable waters of the United States and any other surface water,
drinking water supply, soil surface, subsurface strata, storm sewer or publicly or privately owned treatment works (other
than those handling only wastewater generated at a facility) within the boundaries of the City of Elizabethtown,
Kentucky.
Facility. Shall mean either of the following: 1) Any building, structure, installation, equipment, pipe or pipeline
(including any pipe into a sewer or POTW), well, pit, pond, lagoon, impoundment, ditch, landfill, land-farm, waste,
wastewater, hazardous material, sludge or pollutant, management, treatment, storage, disposal recycling or reclamation
site or location, storage container, junkyard, factory, airport, manufacturing or business site, lot, motor vehicle, rolling
stock or aircraft, or 2) Any site, premises, facility, real estate or location where waste, wastewater pollutants or
hazardous material has been released, discharged, deposited, treated, stored, disposed of, placed or otherwise come to
be located. However, it shall not include a site solely because of the presence of a consumer product which is in
consumer use or is in its original container.
Hazardous Materials. Shall mean any of the following: 1) any substance designated pursuant to Section
311(b)(2)(A) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 2)any element, compound, mixture, solution, or substance
designated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pursuant to the Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980, Section 102 (CERCLA), 3) any hazardous waste having the
characteristics identified under or listed pursuant to Section 3001 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (commonly known as
the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, “RCRA”), but not including any waste the regulation of which under the
Solid Waste Disposal Act has been suspended by Act of Congress, 4) any toxic pollutant listed under section 307(a) of
the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 5) Any hazardous air pollutant listed under Section 112 of the Clean Air Act,
6) any imminently hazardous chemical substance or mixture with respect to which the Administrator of the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency has taken action pursuant to Section 7 of the Toxic Substances Control Act, 7) any
material included in the “Title III List of Lists – Consolidated List of Chemicals Subject to the Emergency Planning and
Community Right-to-Know Act (EPCRA) and Section 112 (r) of the Clean Air Act, as Amended”, 8) petroleum
products, including crude oil or fractions thereof, which is not otherwise specifically listed or designated as a hazardous
substance under subparagraphs 1) through 7) of this paragraph; natural gas, or synthetic gas usable for fuel (or mixture
of natural gas and such synthetic gas), 9) radioactive materials and isotopes, and 10) explosives. Hazardous Materials
shall not include household wastes and other materials excluded by 40 CFR 261.4.
2000-S-3
Hazardous Materials 61
Normal Application of Pesticides. Means application pursuant to the label directions for application of a
pesticide product registered under section 30 or section 24 of the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide and Rodenticide Act as
amended (7 U.S.C. 135 et seq.) (FIFRA), or pursuant to the terms and conditions of an experimental use permit issued
under section 5 of FIFRA, or pursuant to an exemption granted under section 18 of FIFRA.
Normal Response. Means those duties consistent with the normal work routine and staffing levels for the City of
Elizabethtown and its departments.
Oil. Means oil of any kind or in any form including but not limited to petroleum, fuel oil, sludge, oil refuse, and
oil mixed with wastes other than dredged spoil.
Person. Means any individual, trust, firm, company, society, corporation, joint stock company, partnership,
consortium, association, cooperative, joint venture, city, county, city and county special district, the state or any
department or agency or political subdivision thereof, United States Government, or other commercial or legal entities.
Release. Means any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping,
leaching, dumping or disposing of pollutants, hazardous material, wastewater or wastes into the environment, but
excludes: 1) any release which results in exposure to employees solely within a workplace, and is recovered by
workplace employees under the auspices of an approved workplace “Spill Prevention Control and Countermeasures
Plan” (or equivalent), and 2) emission from the engine exhaust of a motor vehicle, rolling stock, aircraft, vessel, or
pipeline pumping station engine, and 3) the normal application of fertilizer and pesticides.
Authorized Release. Means 1) a release which is a federally permitted release under 42 U.S.C. 9601 (10); or 2) a
release to waters of the United States or adjoining shorelines which is exempt from notification under 40 CFR 117.11
through 40 CFR 117.14; 3) the introduction of any pollutant into a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) which is
not in violation of applicable pretreatment regulations controlling the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned
treatment works; or 4) any release which is specifically authorized by a local, state or federal agency, to facilitate life
safety objectives and/or overall control of a hazardous materials emergency.
Reportable Quantity. Means that quantity as set forth in Section 121.04 of this ordinance.
Store. To deposit or place a substance in the city for a period of ten (10) days or more provided such substance is
not otherwise in transit.
Use. To store, maintain, treat, process, handle, generate, dispose of, or otherwise manage. Use shall not include
any mode of transportation other than on-site transportation.
Vessel. Means every description of watercraft or other artificial contrivance used, or capable of being used, as a
means of transportation on water. (Ordinance No. 13-2000, passed Aug. 21, 2000)
§ 121.04 DETERMINATION OF REPORTABLE QUANTITIES
(A) Listed Hazardous Materials: The quantity in the column “RQ” for each hazardous material in the
“Environmental Protection Agency(ies) “Title III List of Lists” or as listed by the Local Emergency Planning
Committee of Hardin County, is the reportable quantity for that material. “Reportable Quantities” may be adjusted
higher or lower as the Environmental Protection Agency publishes new “Lists” or on the direction of the LEPC. This
information is on file in the City Clerk’s office.
(B) Unlisted Hazardous Materials: Unlisted hazardous wastes designated as hazardous materials have the
reportable quantity of 100 pounds, except for those unlisted hazardous wastes exhibiting the characteristics of EP
toxicity identified in 40 CFR 261.24. Unlisted hazardous wastes which exhibit EP toxicity have the reportable
quantities listed on file in the City Clerk’s office for the contaminant on which the characteristic of EP toxicity is based.
If an unlisted hazardous waste exhibit EP toxicity on the basis of more than one contaminant, the reportable quantity of
that waste shall be the lowest of the reportable quantities listed in appendix A for those contaminants. If an unlisted
hazardous waste exhibits the characteristic of EP toxicity and one or more of the other characteristics the reportable
quantity shall be the lowest of the applicable reportable quantity.
2000-S-3
62 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
(C) Oil: 1) The reportable quantity for releases of oil to waters of the United States or adjoining shorelines is any
quantity which violates applicable water quality standards or causes a film or sheen upon or discoloration of the surface
of the water or adjoining shorelines or causes a sludge or emulsion to be deposited beneath the surface of the water or
upon adjoining shorelines, 2) The reportable quantity for releases of oil to the environment other than releases to waters
of the United States or its adjoining shorelines is 56 gallons, 3) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a
release of oil from a properly functioning vessel engine shall not be deemed to be in a reportable quantity; however, this
provision shall not be applicable to oil accumulated in a vessels’ bilge.
(D) Release of Hazardous Material to Sanitary Sewer System: Notwithstanding any other provisions of this
section, any release of a hazardous material to a sanitary sewer system which is prohibited under applicable
pretreatment or other regulations governing discharges to the sanitary sewer shall be deemed to be discharged in a
reportable quantity.
(E) Component Hazardous Materials Release: A release of a mixture or solution of which a hazardous
material is a component shall be considered to be a release in a reportable quantity only where the component
hazardous material of the mixture or solution is released in a quantity equal to or greater than its reportable quantity.
(Ordinance No. 13-2000, passed Aug. 21, 2000)
§ 121.05 ADMINISTERING AGENCY
The purpose of this Ordinance is to establish a uniform city-wide program for protection of the environment from
releases of hazardous materials to be administered by existing governmental agencies. The CITY OF
ELIZABETHTOWN FIRE DEPARTMENT shall serve as the lead agency in the administration and enforcement of
this ordinance. (Ordinance No. 13-2000, passed Aug. 21, 2000)
§ 121.06 NOTIFICATION TO FIRE COMMUNICATIONS & DISPATCH
(A) Notice upon discovery: Whenever a release (other than an authorized release) of any hazardous material, in
a quantity which exceeds the reportable quantity occurs on any facilities of any kind, the person in charge, upon
discovery of such release, or evidence of there having been a release, even though it has apparently been controlled,
shall IMMEDIATELY cause notice of the existence of such release, the circumstances of same, and the location
thereof to be given to the Emergency Services Dispatches Office (county 911 center).
(B) Emergency Telephone Number: The notice required by this Section, in Elizabethtown, shall be given by
telephoning “911” or other such emergency telephone number as designated. This one call meets the requirement of
notifying local agencies. This shall not be construed as meeting the reporting requirements outlines in applicable state
and federal legislation.
(C) Duty to Control Release: The requirements of this section shall not be construed to forbid any person on or
about the facilities from using all diligence necessary to control such release prior to the notification of “911”,
especially if such efforts may result in the containment of the release and/or the abatement of extreme hazard to the
employees or the general public. Delays in reporting releases due to in-house notification of off-site owners/supervisors
shall not be acceptable and may result in penalties.
(D) Accidental Air Releases in Excess of the Reportable Quantities: of listed hazardous materials, on file in
the City Clerk’s office, or, if unlisted (as prescribed in Section 4 of the Ordinance), shall be reported under the
requirements of this Section unless a different reportable quantity has been established under a previous agreement
between the LEPC and the particular facility.
(E) Duty to Report to State or Federal Agencies: No statement contained in this section shall be construed to
exempt or release any person from any other notification or reporting procedure required by any state or federal agency.
(Ordinance No. 13-2000, passed Aug. 21, 2000)
2000-S-3
Hazardous Materials 63
§ 121.07 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION AND TRADE SECRETS
(A) Information and data provided by any person or obtained from any report, questionnaire, permit application,
permit and monitoring program, and from inspections shall not be made available to the public or any other
governmental agency, unless required by law.
(1) Upon submission of information in any form it shall be the obligation of the submitter to separate all
confidential and trade secret material from any material subject to disclosure under the law.
(2) Any requests made under the law for information containing confidential or trade secrets shall be brought
to the attention of the person requesting confidentiality of its trade secrets by certified mail, return receipt
requested. The notification shall advise the person requesting confidentiality of the decision of the administering
agency regarding release of the confidential information. In no event will such confidential information be
released until five (5) days have elapsed from date notice is sent by registered mail.
(3) Within seventy-two (72) hours after receipt of notification, the person requesting confidentiality of its
trade secrets shall have the burden to initiate appropriate actions at law or otherwise to protect its confidential or
trade secrets from disclosure, and must demonstrate that public disclosure of confidential or trade secrets is likely
to cause substantial harm to his/her competitive position.
(4) Any individual who releases information containing confidential or trade secrets in violation of the law
or this section shall be subject to disciplinary action by his employer for malfeasance, misfeasance, and willful
neglect of official duties, and may further be guilty of misuse of confidential information under KRS 522.040.
(B) The provisions of this section shall in no way prohibit the exchange of information, confidential or otherwise,
between public agencies when the exchange is serving a legitimate governmental need or is necessary in the
performance of a legitimate government function. (Ordinance No. 13-2000, passed Aug. 21, 2000)
§ 121.08 ENFORCEMENT; NOTICE OF VIOLATION
(A) Notice: Upon notification or discovery of any violation of the provisions of this Ordinance, the
Elizabethtown Fire Department shall immediately investigate the site upon which the violation is located. If a violation
exists, a notice describing the violation shall be served upon the person who is responsible for the facilities upon which
the violation has occurred, if the identity of the person is known. The notice shall also include the following, if
applicable:
(1) A statement that the situation must be abated within the period of time prescribed by the Elizabethtown
Fire Department, giving the person responsible for the release the option to initiate clean-up and disposal,
provided that no unreasonable delay or damage to the public is the result thereof.
(2) A statement that if the situation is not remedied within the prescribed period of time, administering
agency with jurisdiction may proceed to secure appropriate public or private assistance to correct the violation.
(3) A statement that the person shall be liable for any costs incurred by public agencies associated with their
responses except for those costs that are associated with a normal emergency response.
(4) A statement that the nature of hazardous materials emergency response is outside the definition of
“normal emergency response” for local government agencies as outlined in Section 121.08 (A)(3) above.
(5) A statement that if the administering agency, with jurisdiction, has secured correction of the violation, a
bill shall be sent charging the person the amount of costs and expenses incurred by the governmental agency in
securing the correction of the violation.
(6) A statement that penalties may be levied for violations that have occurred.
(B) Governmental Response: In cases where the identity of a person who is responsible for facilities upon which
a violation has occurred is not known at the time a violation is reported, the city or any governmental agency with
jurisdiction in Elizabethtown may take reasonable steps to abate any problem and may take reasonable steps to clean-up
the area affected to assure continuing safety of the public and the environment. When the identity of the person
responsible for the facility is determined, a bill shall be sent to the person for the costs for correcting the violation
according to the provisions of section 121.08 (A).
2000-S-3
64 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
(C) Injunctive Relief: The City of Elizabethtown is empowered to seek injunctive relief for violations of this
Ordinance should other means prove ineffective and a threat to public health and safety exists. (Ordinance No. 13-
2000, passed Aug. 21, 2000)
§ 121.09 PENALTIES
(A) Amount Exceeding Reportable Quantity: The person responsible for a hazardous material release in an
amount exceeding the reportable quantity may be fined not more than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00), if the release
is not authorized, and if the release involved willful violation, negligence, or repeated spills under similar conditions
and where a significant quantity of hazardous material is involved taking into account real or potential damage to the
environment and threat to the public health.
(B) Failure to Notify “911” Dispatch: The responsible person who fails to notify the “911” dispatch center as
required by section 121.06 of the Ordinance, may be fined not more than Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00).
(C) Any Provision other than Notification: The person who otherwise violates any provision of this Ordinance,
other than Section 121.06 (Notification), shall be fined not more than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00). Every incident
giving rise to such a violation shall constitute a separate offense; however, no person shall be held responsible for more
than one (1) violation per day where the violations occur at the same facility and are casually related.
(D) Civil Damage: Any person violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall, subject to the affirmative
defenses set forth in Section 121.11, become liable, civilly, to the City of Elizabethtown government by reason of such
violation, including, but not limited to, any clean-up, evacuation, administrative or other expenses, and legal expenses.
(E) Penalties Imposed Pursuant to Legislative Authority: Any penalties imposed under this section Shall be
levied by the City of Elizabethtown pursuant to its legislative authority. (Ord. No. 13-2000, passed Aug. 21, 2000)
§121.10 APPEALS BOARD
(A) The Appeals Board: empowered in Chapter 36.25 through 36.30 (passed 7/15/91) of the “City of
Elizabethtown Code of Ordinances” shall serve as the board of appeals in actions relative to violations of this
ordinance.
(B) Appeal: The Board, in hearing an appeal, shall recommend to the city that the administering agency’s action
be modified, upheld, or dismissed or that a fine or penalty levied upon a person for violation of any provision of this
Ordinance be set aside, modified, or left intact. (Ordinance No. 13-2000, passed Aug. 21, 2000)
§ 121.11 AFFIRNATIVE DEFENSES
It shall be an affirmative defense to any enforcement action, other than an action for violation of Section 121.06
(Notification) of this Ordinance, including recovery of clean-up costs pursuant to this Ordinance, if a person can prove
that a release of hazardous materials was caused solely by:
(A) an act of God, or
(B) an act of war, or
(C) negligence on the part of the City of Elizabethtown, or
(D) an act or omission of a third party, or
(E) any combination of the foregoing clauses. (Ordinance No. 13-2000, passed Aug. 21, 2000)
§ 121.12 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY
This Ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the City of Elizabethtown, or any of its City departments, for
any damages that result from reliance on this Ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. All
persons are advised to determine to their own satisfaction the level of protection, in addition to that required by this
Ordinance, necessary or desirable to ensure that there is no unauthorized release of hazardous materials. (Ordinance
No. 13-2000, passed Aug. 21, 2000)
2000-S-3
CHAPTER 122: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL
Section
122.01 Purpose
122.02 Definitions
122.03 Scope
122.04 Adoption of State Law
122.05 Creation of the Office of the City Alcoholic Beverage Control Administrator
122.06 License Fees
122.07 Certain Special Licenses Defined
122.08 Application/License
122.09 Refund of License Fee
122.10 Lost or Destroyed Licenses
122.11 Temporary Closing
122.12 Revocation or Suspension
122.13 Notice to Licensee; Surrender of License; Hearing
122.14 Transfer or Assignment
122.15 Refusal of License
122.16 Review of License
122.17 Regulatory License Fee
122.18 Change of Information
122.19 Dormancy
122.20 Approval of Premises
122.21 Delinquent Taxes or Fees
122.22 Books, Records and Reports
122.23 Hours for sale and delivery; Restrictions
122.24 Conditions, Prohibitions and Restrictions
122.25 Mandatory Responsible Alcoholic Beverage Service Training
122.26 Malt Beverage Keg Registration
122.27 Information Deemed Confidential; Penalty for Disclosure; Exceptions.
122.28 Enforcement
122.29 Penalties
122.30 Severability
§ 122.01 PURPOSE
The purpose of this section is to establish uniform regulations and requirements for the licensing and regulation of
alcoholic beverage manufacture and sales pursuant to authorization of KRS 241 through 244.
(Ord. No. 21-2015, passed 12-07-2015)
§ 122.02 DEFINITIONS
The definitions of the words used throughout this section, unless the context requires otherwise, shall have the same
meaning as those set out in the Kentucky Alcoholic Beverage Control law (KRS Chapters 241, 242, 243 and 244) of
the Commonwealth of Kentucky and all amendments and supplements thereto.
(Ord. No. 21-2015, passed 12-07-2015)
§ 122.03 SCOPE
This section shall be construed to apply to the manufacture and traffic in both malt beverages and distilled spirits
and wine where the context permits such application. Nothing in this Ordinance shall excuse or relieve the licensee, or
the owner, proprietor, employee, agent or person in charge of any licensed premises where alcoholic beverages are sold
from the restrictions, requirements and penalties of any other ordinance of the City or of any statutes of the
Commonwealth of Kentucky relating to violations pertaining to alcoholic beverages.
(Ord. No. 21-2015, passed 12-07-2015)
65
2018-S-1
66 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
§ 122.04 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW
The provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Law of the Commonwealth of Kentucky (KRS Chapters
241, 242, 243 and 244) and all amendments and supplements thereto, are adopted so far as applicable to this
Ordinance except as otherwise lawfully provided herein.
Any violation of State law relating to the sale, production, storing or otherwise trafficking in alcoholic
beverages shall also constitute a violation of this Ordinance.
No person shall sell, deal in, barter or exchange or possess for sale, or for the purpose of evading any law or
ordinance, give away any alcoholic beverages in any quantity whatever, or cause the same to be done, without
complying with all of the provision of this ordinance and all State statutes and regulations applicable thereto.
All prohibitions, restrictions, and regulations pertaining to alcoholic beverage contained in KRS Chapter 241
through 244 shall apply to alcoholic beverage use in the City.
(Ord. No. 21-2015, passed 12-07-2015)
§ 122.05 CREATION OF THE OFFICE OF THE CITY ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL
ADMINISTRATOR
A. Pursuant to KRS 241.160, there is hereby created the office of City Alcoholic Beverage Control Administrator
(hereinafter referred to as City ABC Administrator). The duties of this office are assigned to the office of City Clerk.
B. The Mayor of the City shall appoint a City ABC Administrator.
C. The salary for said office, if any, shall be fixed from time to time by the City Council.
D. The functions of the City ABC Administrator shall be the same with respect to the City licenses and
regulations as the functions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Board of the Commonwealth of Kentucky
(hereinafter referred to as ABC Board) with respect to state licenses and regulations, except that no amendment to
these regulations proposed by the City ABC Administrator may be less stringent than the statutes relating to
Alcoholic Beverage Control, or than regulations of the ABC Board. No regulation of the City ABC Administrator
shall become effective until it has first been appropriately approved by the City Council.
E. No person shall be a City ABC Administrator, an ABC Investigator or an employee of the City under the
supervision of the City ABC Administrator, who would be disqualified to be a member of the ABC Board under
KRS 241.100. (KRS 241.170).
F. The City ABC Administrator shall have all authority as authorized under Chapters 241 through 244 of the
Kentucky Revised Statutes.
G. Should the City ABC Administrator at any time have reasonable grounds to believe that any applicant,
licensee, employee of a licensee, or any stockholder, agent or employee of a licensed corporation, has a criminal
record, he or she shall have the authority to require such person to appear in person at the Elizabethtown Police
Department for the purpose of having his or her fingerprints taken.
H. The City ABC Administrator for entering upon his or her duties as such, shall take the oath as prescribed in
Section 228 of the Constitution, and shall execute a bond with a good corporate surety in the penal sum of not less
than five thousand ($5,000.00) dollars, and shall swear to faithfully perform the duties of his or her office pursuant
to the provisions of Section 62.060 of the Kentucky Revised Statutes et seq. The cost of any necessary bond
required under this section shall be borne by the City of Elizabethtown.
I. Appeals from the orders of the City ABC Administrator may be taken to the state ABC Board by filing with the
Board within thirty (30) days a certified copy of the orders of the City ABC Administrator. Matters at issue shall be
heard by the Board as upon an original proceeding. Appeals from orders of the City ABC Administrator shall be
governed by KRS Chapter 13B.
(Ord No. 21-2015, passed 12-07-2015
2018-S-1
Alcoholic Beverage Control 67
§122.06 LICENSE FEES
For the privilege of causing, permitting and engaging in the actions, business, and transactions authorized thereby
in regard to traffic in alcoholic beverages in the City and pursuant to the authority of KRS 243.070, there is hereby
established a corresponding City license for each of the state licenses described in KRS 243.070. The fee for each City
license shall be as set out in the following schedule, and may be amended from time to time as authorized by law.
Distilled spirit licenses as set forth in KRS 243.030:
Distiller’s license, per annum $500.00
Rectifier’s license:
1. Class A, per annum $3,000.00
2. Class B (craft rectifier), per annum $960.00
Wholesaler’s distilled spirits and wine license, per annum $3,000.00
Quota retail package license, per annum $1,000.00
Quota retail drink license, per annum $1,000.00
Special temporary, per event $50.00
Nonquota type 1 retail drink license, per annum $2,000.00
Nonquota type 2 retail drink license, per annum $1,000.00
Nonquota type 3 retail drink license, per annum $300.00
Special temporary alcoholic beverage auction license, per event $50.00
Special Sunday retail drink license, per annum $0.00
Extended hours supplements license, per annum $2,000.00
Caterer’s license, per annum (The fee for holders of a LR100 or NQ2 is $0.00) $800.00
Bottling house or bottling house storage license, per annum $1,000.00
Brewer’s license, per annum $500.00
Microbrewery license, per annum $500.00
Malt beverage distributer’s license, per annum $400.00
Nonquota retail malt beverage package license, per annum $200.00
Nonquota type 4 malt beverage drink license, per annum $200.00
Limited Restaurant license, per annum $1,200.00
Limited golf course license, per annum $1,200.00
Qualified historic site license, per annum $1,030.00
The fee for each of the first five (5) supplemental bar licenses shall be the same as the fee for the primary
drink license. There shall be no charge for each supplemental license issued in excess of five (5) to the
same licensee at the same premises.
The holder of a nonquota retail malt beverage package license may obtain a nonquota type 4 malt
beverage drink license for a fee of fifty dollars ($50). The holder of a nonquota type 4 malt beverage
drink license may obtain a nonquota retail malt beverage package license for a fee of fifty dollars ($50).
The City ABC Administrator shall transmit fees upon collection to the City Finance Department to be deposited
into the appropriate designated account. City licenses shall be issued by the City ABC Administrator upon receipt of
notice from the ABC Board Administrator of the finality of appeal or protest permitted upon such license pursuant to
the provisions of KRS 243.360, and the fact the ABC Board Administrator has approved the applicant’s state license.
(Ord. No. 21-2015, passed 12-07-2015) (Amended Ord. 13-2016, passed 7-18-16) (Amended Ord. 09-2017, passed 8-
7-17)
2018-S-1
68 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
§ 122.07 CERTAIN SPECIAL LICENSES DEFINED
A. Quota Retail Package License (KRS 243.230, KRS 243.240): The State ABC Board has authorized twelve
(12) licenses. A quota Retail Package license shall authorize the licensee to purchase, receive, possess, and sell distilled
spirits and wine at retail in unbroken packages only, and only for consumption off the licensed premises.
B. Quota Retail Drink License (KRS 243.250): The State ABC Board has authorized eleven (11) licenses. A
Quota Retail Drink Licenses shall authorize the licensee to purchase, receive, possess and sell distilled spirits and wine
at retail by the drink for consumption on the licensed premises.
C. Limited Golf Course License (KRS 243.038, KRS 243.039): This license is limited to 850 Pine Valley Drive
in the Pine Valley Precinct, an eighteen hole golf course that meets United States Golf Association criteria as a
regulation golf course, and which held a local option election for the limited sale of alcoholic beverages in its precinct.
Said local option election voted favorably for the lifting of prohibition for the limited sale of alcoholic beverages by the
drink for that golf course on June 19, 2001.
D. Limited Restaurant License (KRS 242.185, KRS 241.010(26), KRS 242.1244, KRS 243.034): This license
may be issued to an owner or lessee of a restaurant which receives 70% or more of its gross annual income from the
sale of food and has minimum seating capacity of 100 persons at tables. The sale of alcoholic beverages shall be
accessory to the sale of food, offered only during times in which the licensee’s kitchen and food service staff is on duty.
A local option elected voted favorably for the lifting of prohibition for limited sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink
for restaurants with 100 seats and 70% food sales on May 28, 2002.
E. NQ2 Retail Drink License (KRS 243.084): This license authorizes the licensee to purchase, receive and sell
alcoholic beverages at retail by the drink for consumption on the licensed premises A NQ2 License can be issued to
hotel with 50 sleeping units and 50% food sales from its total food and alcohol sales; a restaurant with 50% food sales
from its food and alcohol sales; an airport; a riverboat; a distillery; or a business located within or adjacent to an
entertainment destination center license premise.
F. NQ3 Retail Drink License (KRS 243.086): This license may be issued to a private club in existence for longer
than one (1) year; a dining car; or a bed and breakfast.
G. Special Temporary Licenses (KRS 243.260): This license shall authorize the licensee to exercise the privileges
of a quota retail drink license and an NQ4 retail malt beverage drink license at designated premises for a specified and
limited time and shall expire when the qualifying event ends. All restrictions and prohibitions applying to a distilled
spirits and wine quota retail drink license or a NQ4 retail malt beverage drink license shall apply also to a special
temporary event. A special temporary license will only be issued to a nonprofit charitable organization or in
conjunction with a civic event or community sponsored event, i.e. fairs and festivals. Holidays such as Christmas,
Easter and Lent are not considered events.
(Ord. No. 21-2015, passed 12-07-2015)(Amended Ord. 13-2016, passed 7-18-16) (Amended Ord. 09-2017, passed 8-7-
17)
§ 122.08 APPLICATION/LICENSE
A. Before an application shall be considered, the applicant must publish a notice of its intent to apply for an
alcohol beverage license in a newspaper meeting the requirements of KRS Chapter 424.
(1) The advertisement shall state the name and addresses of the members of partnership if the
applicant is a partnership, as well as the name of the business and its address, or if the applicant is a
corporation, the names and addresses of the principal office and directors of the corporation, as well as the
name and addresses of the corporation itself, the location of the premises for which the license is sought,
and the type of license for which application is made.
(2) The applicant shall attach to the application a newspaper clipping of the advertisement and proof
of the publication as provided in KRS 424.170.
B. All licenses granted under this section shall be approved by the City ABC Administrator. Applications for
the issuance of new licenses and for renewals of existing licenses shall be in writing and upon the forms provided
by the ABC Board and the City of Elizabethtown, as amended and supplemented from time to time.
2018-S-1
Alcoholic Beverage Control 69
C. The application shall be verified and shall set forth in detail such information concerning the applicant and
the premises for which the license is sought as required by the Kentucky Revised Statutes, the ABC Board and the
City of Elizabethtown including as follows:
(1) Name and address;
(2) Nature of interest;
(3) Whether or not a citizen of the United States;
(4) Date of birth;
(5) Date residence was established in Kentucky, if a resident of Kentucky. If Elizabethtown resident
indicate when residence was established;
(6) Whether or not he or she has any interest in any other license or corporation or partnership holding
a license under this act;
(7) Extent of stock ownership;
(8) Whether or not he or she has any interest in any license or corporation or partnership holding a
license in any other state or province.
Each application shall be accompanied by a certified check, cash or a postal or express money order
for the license fee. Promptly upon receipt thereof the City ABC Administrator shall transmit the same to
the City Finance Department for deposit into the appropriate designated account.
D. All applicants shall voluntarily submit to a criminal background check and shall sign a waiver allowing the
release of this information to the City ABC Administrator.
E. All City licenses shall be in such form as may be prescribed by the City Council and shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the licensee
(2) The number of the license;
(3) The type of license;
(4) A description by street and number, or otherwise, of the licensed premises;
(5) The name of the owner of the building in which the licensed premises is located;
(6) The expiration date of the license;
(7) A statement in substance that the license shall not be a property or vested right and that it may be
revoked at any time pursuant to law.
F. After January 1, 2017, all licenses approved by the City ABC Administrator and issued by the City of
Elizabethtown shall be valid for a period of no more than a year and shall be renewable upon the date established
by the Kentucky Department of Alcohol Beverage Control for the expiration of state licenses.
G. The renewal by the City ABC Administrator of the license shall not be construed to be a waiver or
acceptance of any violation which occurred prior to such renewal and shall not prevent subsequent proceedings
against the licensee.
H. Any licenses issued for less than 6 months of any year shall be assessed a fee ½ of license fee.
I. In addition, any other penalties allowed by this section or any other statutory provision, a violation of this
section shall authorize and require the revocation of the license and the City shall not be required to refund any
portion of the license fee.
(Ord. No. 21-2015, passed 12-07-2015) (Amended Ord. 13-2016, passed 7-18-16) (Amended Ord. 09-2017,
passed 8-7-17)
§ 122.09 REFUND OF LICENSE FEES:
Should any licensee under this Ordinance be prohibited from conducting said business for the full period covered
by the license because of any changes that may hereafter be made in the laws of the State of Kentucky with reference to
alcoholic beverage or other causes outside licensee’s control, then the City shall refund to the licensee the proportionate
license free based on sufficient proof to the City ABC Administrator that such period of inactivity was not the fault of
the licensee or the result of a revocation, suspension or other wrong doing by licensee or agent or employee of the
licensee.
(Ord. No. 21-2015, passed – 12/07/2015)
2018-S-1
70 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
§ 122.10 LOST OR DESTROYED
When a license has been lost or destroyed without fault on the part of the licensee or his agent or
employees, a duplicate in lieu of the original license shall be issued by the City ABC Administrator and the City
ABC Administrator shall be satisfied as to the reason, provided however, that the person applying for said
duplicate license shall pay a fee of ten dollars ($10) for issuing said duplicate.
(Ord. No. 21-2015, passed – 12-07-2015)
§ 122.11 TEMPORARY CLOSING
In the course of any one day of operation of a licensed premise, should multiple violations of the ordinance or other
statutes or ordinances of a public disorder nature, e.g. disturbing the peace, be reported and investigated by the City
Police Department or City ABC Administrator, such one day multiple occurrences shall be reported to the City ABC
Administrator by the Chief of Police. The City ABC Administrator shall, in the interest of public health, safety, morals
and welfare, direct the Chief of Police to temporarily suspend the license in question for the remaining hours of the day
in question by locking the premises after dispersing the patrons. The temporary suspension shall remain in effect until
review of the alleged violations by the City ABC Administrator, such review shall occur on the next business day.
(Ord. No. 21-2015, passed 12-07-2015)
§ 122.12 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION
A. Any license may be revoked or suspended by the City ABC Administrator if the licensee shall have
violated any of the provisions of Kentucky Revised Statutes Chapters 241, 243 or 244, or any rule or regulation of
the ABC Board or of the Department of Revenue relating to the regulation of the manufacture, sale and
transportation or taxation of alcoholic beverages or if such licensee shall have violated or shall violate any act of
Congress or any rule or regulation of any federal board, agency or commission, or this Ordinance; now, heretofore,
or hereafter in effect relating to the regulation of the manufacture, sale and transportation or taxation of
intoxicating liquors or any rules or regulations of the City heretofore in existence or authorized by the terms of
Kentucky Revised Statutes Chapters 241, 243 and 244 to be created, or referred to, irrespective of whether the
licensee knew of or permitted the violation or whether the violation was committed in disobedience of his
instructions, or any such license may be revoked or suspended for any cause which the City ABC Administrator in
the exercise of his or her sound discretion deems sufficient.
B. A license may be revoked for any of the reasons for which the City ABC Administrator would have been
required to refuse a license if the facts had been known.
C. Any license must be revoked or suspended for the following causes:
(1) Conviction of the licensee or his agent or employee for selling any illegal beverages on the
premises licensed.
(2) Making any false, material statements in an application for a license.
(3) If, within a period of two (2) consecutive years, any licensee or any of his clerks, servants, agents
or employees of the licensee shall have been convicted of two (2) violations of the terms and provisions of
KRS Chapter 241, 243 or 244 or any act heretofore or hereafter in effect relating to the regulation of the
manufacture, sale and transportation of alcoholic beverages or if, within such period, any licensee or any of
the clerks, servants, agents or employees of the licensee shall have twice been convicted of any felony or of
any misdemeanor directly or indirectly attributable to the use of alcoholic beverages, or of one (1) such
felony and one (1) such misdemeanor.
(4) Willful and deliberate failure or default of a licensee to pay an excise tax or any part thereof, or
any penalties imposed by or under the provisions of any statutes, this Ordinance or acts of congress relative
to taxation, or for a violation of any rules or regulations of the Department of Revenue made in pursuance
thereof.
2018-S-1
Alcoholic Beverage Control 71
(5) Revocation of any license granted under any act of Congress relative to the regulation of
manufacture, sale and transportation of alcoholic beverages. Any license must be revoked or suspended in
the case of sale of alcoholic beverages by the licensee at a price in excess of the price set by federal or state
regulations.
(6) Setting up, conducting, operating or keeping, on the licensed premises, any gambling game, device,
machine or contrivance, or lottery or gift enterprise, or handbook or facility for betting or transmitting sports
bets; or permitting to be set up, conducted, operated, kept, or engaged in, on the licensed premised, any such
game, device, machine, contrivance, lottery, gift enterprise, handbook or facility.
(Ord. No. 21-2015, passed 12-07-2015)
§ 122.13 NOTICE OF LICENSEE; SURRENDER OF LICENSE; HEARING
A. Within three (3) days after any order of revocation of a license becomes final, notice of revocation shall be
given to the licensee and to the owner of the licensed premises. A notice mailed to the licensee and to the owner of
the licensed premises at the address shown in the last application for a license or in the last statement supplemental
to the application shall be deemed sufficient compliance with this section. The licensee shall at once surrender his
license to the City ABC Administrator. If the revoked license is not forthwith surrendered by the licensee, the
Chief of Police at the request of the City ABC Administrator shall immediately cause one of his officers to take
physical possession of the license and return it to the City ABC Administrator.
B. When a license has been revoked, the former licensee may, with prior approval of the City ABC
Administrator, dispose of and transfer his stock of alcoholic beverages to an appropriate entity.
C. Appeal from the decision of the City ABC Administrator shall be to the ABC Board.
D. If a license is revoked or suspended by an order of the City ABC Administrator, the licensee shall at once
suspend all operations previously authorized under his license.
(Ord. No. 21-2015, passed 12-07-2015)
§ 122.14 TRANSFER OR ASSIGNMENT
No license issued under this ordinance shall be transferred or assigned either as to licensee or location except with
prior approval of the City ABC Administrator and not until a payment of one hundred dollars ($100) shall be made to
the City of Elizabethtown.
(Ord. No. 21-2015, passed – 12-07-2015)
§ 122.15 REFUSAL OF LICENSE
A City license shall be refused:
A. For any cause that the State shall refuse to issue or renew a license and for suspension or revocation of a
City license shall be the same as provided for state licenses according to KRS 243.450, 243.490 and 243.500, as
well as violation of any City ordinance regarding alcohol beverage licensing, sales or the administration thereof; or
B. If the applicant has committed any act for which a revocation of license would be authorized; or
C. If the applicant has made any false material statement in his application; or
D. If the applicant is seeking a license for the sale and distribution of distilled spirits, wine and/or malt based
beverages in a sexually oriented business; or
E. For any reason that the City ABC Administrator which he or she, in the exercise of his or her sound
discretion may deem sufficient.
(Ord. No. 21-2015, passed 12-07-2015)
2018-S-1
72 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
§ 122.16 REVIEW OF LICENSE
Applicants to whom a license is issued authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages pursuant to this Ordinance
shall provide periodic information demonstrating compliance. This document shall be provided on a schedule to be
coordinated with the applicant’s regulatory fee filings. This information shall consist of a certificate from a
Certified Public Accountant, owner or other designate familiar with the applicant’s pertinent business records. This
certificate shall state:
“I declare, under penalties of perjury, that this return has been examined by me and to the best of my
knowledge and belief is a true, correct and complete return.”
(Ord. No. 21-2015, passed 12-07-2015)
§ 122.17 REGULATORY LICENSE FEE
A. A regulatory license fee is imposed on the gross receipts of sale of alcoholic beverages of each license issued by
the City ABC Administrator. Said license fee shall be set by the City Council in the annual budget for each fiscal year
and such percentage rate shall be established to generate revenue that does not exceed the total of the reasonable
expenses actually incurred by the City in the previous fiscal year for the additional cost, as demonstrated by reasonable
evidence, of policing, regulation and administration as the result of the sale of alcoholic beverages within the City.
Such fee shall be in addition to any other tax, fee or license permitted by law, but a credit against such fee shall be
allowed in the amount equal to the license or fee imposed and such regulatory fee shall be applied annually from July 1
to June 30.
B. For Quota Retail Drink License, Quota Retail Package License and Limited Golf Course License, payment
of such regulatory fees shall be remitted to the City ABC Administrator, and shall accompany the tax returns
approved for such use by the City. These returns and payments are due monthly by the 20th day of the following
month at which time one-twelfth (1/12) of the annual fees shall be deducted as a credit.
C. For all other licenses, payment of such regulatory fees shall be remitted to the City ABC Administrator,
and shall accompany the tax returns approved for such use by the City. These returns and payments are due no
later than by the end of the month immediately following each calendar quarter at which time one-fourth (1/4) of
the annual fees shall be deducted as a credit.
D. Failure to pay such quarterly remittance within ten (10) days of the due date constitutes a violation and
subject’s licensee to suspension or revocation.
E. Penalty for failure to file a return and pay monthly remittance by the due date is five percent (5%) of the
tax for each thirty (30) days or fraction thereof. The total late filing penalty shall not exceed twenty-five percent
(25%) of the tax, provided, however, in no case shall the penalty be less than ten dollars ($10).
F. Penalty for failure to file a return and pay quarterly remittance by the due date is five percent (5%) of the
tax for each ninety (90) days or fraction thereof. The total late filing penalty shall not exceed twenty-five percent
(25%) of the tax, provided, however, in no case shall the penalty be less than ten dollars ($10).
G. Interest at the rate of eight percent (8%) per annum will apply to any late payments.
(Ord No. 21-2015, passed 12-07-2015)
§ 122.18 CHANGES OF INFORMATION
A. Since a number of licenses issued by the City are in the name of a corporation, it is necessary that stock
ownership changes in such corporation be reported to the City ABC Administrator. The City ABC Administrator
can therefore, investigate the person to whom the stock is transferred in order to ascertain whether that person is
precluded by statute from holding an interest in an alcoholic beverage license.
B. As used herein, the word "change" is construed to include any change in directors or officers of the
corporation, or change in ownership of stock whereby any person secures ten percent (10%) of the outstanding
stock. Transfer of more than ten percent (10%) of the total stock shall require a new license.
2018-S-1
Alcoholic Beverage Control 73
C. The following information will be required concerning any new director, officer, or person securing any
interest in alcoholic beverage license:
(1) Name and address;
(2) Nature of interest;
(3) Whether or not a citizen of the United States;
(4) Date of birth;
(5) Date residence was established in Kentucky, if a resident of Kentucky. If Elizabethtown resident indicate
when residence was established;
(6) Whether or not he or she has any interest in any other license or corporation or partnership holding a
license under this act;
(7) Extent of stock ownership;
(8) Whether or not he or she has any interest in any license or corporation or partnership holding a license in
any other state or province.
This information shall be filed with the City ABC Administrator as an amendment of the application pursuant
to which the license was granted.
(Ord. No. 21-2015, passed 12-07-2015)
§ 122.19 DORMANCY
A. It is necessary that a licensee actually conduct the business authorized by such a license or else the license
will be declared dormant and become null and void after ninety (90) days. Such is the intent of this Ordinance.
Realizing that a licensee, like other business, may have his business interrupted by situations not under his control,
various exceptions to the dormancy rule have been included in this Ordinance.
B. Any license under which no business is transacted during a period of ninety (90) days shall become null
and void. At the expiration of the ninety (90) day period the license shall be surrendered to the City ABC
Administrator.
C. Except that the provisions of subsection (B) hereof shall not apply to any licensee who is unable to
continue in business at the premises for which a license is issued due to construction, an act of God, casualty,
death, the acquisition of the premises by any federal, state, city or other governmental agency under power of
eminent domain, acquisition is voluntary or involuntary, or loss of lease through failure of landlord to renew
existing lease. Such licensee shall furnish to the City ABC Administrator a verified statement setting forth the fact
that the licensee is unable to continue in business prior to the expiration of the ninety (90) days of inactivity, for
any of the reasons set forth herein, and the City ABC Administrator may grant an extension of the dormancy with
the license continuing to remain in effect during the license period or until same is transferred to another premises,
notwithstanding the fact that no business is transacted during said period; provided, however, no such license shall
be considered valid unless business is conducted thereunder within twelve (12) months from the date of notice to
the City ABC Administrator. Such extension may not extend beyond the renewal date but may be for such times as
the City ABC Administrator deems appropriate in exercise of his sound discretion.
D. All renewal licenses must be on file with the City ABC Administrator within thirty (30) days prior to the
expiration of the licenses for the preceding license period or the same shall be canceled, except where the licensee
is unable to continue in business at the same premises licensed during the preceding license prior due to
construction, an act of God, casualty, death, the acquisition or threatened acquisition of these premises by any
federal, state, city or other governmental agency or private corporation, possessing power of eminent domain,
whether such acquisition is voluntary or involuntary, or loss of lease through failure of landlord to renew existing
lease; that said licensee shall file a written verified statement no less than twenty (20) days from the expiration date
of the license, setting forth these facts, and the City ABC Administrator is hereby authorized to extend the time for
filing of a renewal of such license for a reasonable length of time within the sound discretion of the City ABC
Administrator; provided, however, such licensee shall pay the scheduled license fee from the expiration date of the
former license or licenses. Said license fee shall not be payable until application is made for the transfer of said
license to a new location.
(Ord. No. 21-2015, passed 12-07-2015)
2018-S-1
74 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
§ 122.20 APPROVAL OF PREMISES
The City ABC Administrator shall not grant any alcoholic beverage license or approve the renewal of a license until
said applicant and his place of business shall be have been approved by the City Building Official, and any and all other
inspections required by the Kentucky Building Code are completed.
(Ord. No. 21-2015, passed 12-07-2105)
§ 122.21 DELINQUENT TAXES OR FEES
No license to sell alcoholic or malt beverages shall be granted or renewed to any person who is delinquent in the
payment of any taxes or fees due the City at the time of the issuing of the license; nor shall any license be granted or
renewed to sell upon any premises or property, owned and occupied by the licensee upon which there are any
delinquent taxes or fees due the City. Further, if a licensee becomes delinquent in the payment of any taxes or any fees
due the City at any time during the license period, the license to sell alcoholic or malt beverages shall be subject to
revocation or suspension.
(Ord. No. 21-2015, passed 12-07-15)
§ 122.22 BOOKS, RECORDS AND REPORTS
A. Every licensee under this ordinance shall keep and maintain upon the licensed premises adequate books and
records of all transactions involved in the sale of alcoholic beverages in the same manner required by the reasonable
rules and regulations of the ABC Board. Such books, video/audio and records shall be available at all reasonable times
for inspection by the City ABC Administrator and such City employees who may assist the City ABC Administrator in
his or her review.
B. Licensees that have video/audio recordings shall be required to maintain all available video/audio recordings
for a minimum of seven (7) days, unless other applicable rules and regulations require otherwise.
C. For the purpose of assisting the City ABC Administrator in enforcement of this section, every licensee
required to report to the ABC Board under KRS 243.850 shall provide a copy of such report to the City ABC
Administrator. Copies of any and all reports and correspondences to the ABC Board required by Statute shall be
furnished to the City ABC Administrator.
(Ord. No. 21-2015, passed 12-07-2015)
§ 122.23 HOURS FOR SALE AND DELIVERY; RESTRICTIONS
A. Upon the licensee being granted a license for the retail or wholesale sales of distilled spirits, wine and malt
beverages or the sale of malt based beverages by the drink on its premises, it shall be permitted to sell or dispense
said beverages Monday through Saturday between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and midnight.
B. The licensee may sell or dispense distilled spirits, malt beverages and wine on Sunday between the hours
of 1:00 p.m. and 12:00 a.m.
C. The licensee may sell or dispense distilled spirits, malt beverages and wine on Election Day during normal
times allowed under this section.
D. The licensee shall provide a separate locked department in which all stocks of distilled spirits and wine are
kept during these hours when sales are prohibited. KRS 244.290.
E. All delivery of alcoholic beverages in the City shall be made during normal business hours, Monday through
Saturday. No delivery shall occur between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday. (KRS
244.480) No delivery shall occur on Sunday.
(Ord. No. 21-2015, passed 12-07-2015)
2018-S-1
Alcoholic Beverage Control 75
§ 122.24 CONDITIONS, PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS
A. No gambling or game of chance unless otherwise authorized by the Commonwealth of Kentucky shall be
permitted in any form on such licensed premises. Dice, slot machines, or any device of chance are prohibited and
shall not be kept on such premises.
B. It shall be unlawful for any licensee licensed under this Ordinance to have or maintain any radio receiving
apparatus on such premises which is intentionally adjusted so as to receive police messages broadcast from any law
enforcement agency in Hardin County as it is now or may hereafter be operated. In addition to other penalties
provided for the violation of this section, the Chief of Police or the City ABC Administrator shall have the
authority to confiscate any and all such radio receiving apparatus.
C. The licensee shall be responsible for maintaining security on his premises including providing adequate
outside lighting to permit customers to utilize the parking area and to promote the safety, health and welfare of the
general public utilizing the licensed premise. Security standards are further necessary to discourage unlawful
activity in and around the licensed premises.
D. It shall be unlawful for the licensee under this Ordinance who sells alcoholic beverages of any kind, to give
away or offer to give away anything tangible of value as a premium or prize, or for any other purpose in direct
connection with the sale of alcoholic beverages nor shall any licensee give away any alcoholic beverage in any
quantity for less than a full monetary consideration.
E. No licensee or agent or employee of the licensee shall permit any person to become drunk or intoxicated
on the premises, nor shall any licensee permit any drunk or intoxicated person to remain on the licensed premises.
F. The licensee shall not sell or dispense alcoholic beverages to any person who is under 21 years of age. The
licensee shall check all identifications to ascertain that every person attempting to purchase or consume alcoholic
beverages is at least 21 years of age.
G. The licensee shall display at all times in a prominent place a sign at least 8" x 11" in 30 point or larger type
which states as follows:
Persons under the age of twenty-one (21) are subject to a fine of up to One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) if they:
1. Enter licensed premises to buy, or have served to them, alcoholic beverages.
2. Possess, purchase or attempt to purchase, or get another to purchase alcoholic beverages.
3. Misrepresent their age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic beverages.
H. The licensee, before commencing any business for which a license has been issued, shall post and display
at all times in a conspicuous place in the room or principal room where the business is carried on so that all persons
visiting the place may readily see the license. The licensee shall not at any time post the license on premises other
than the licensed premises or upon premises where traffic in alcoholic beverages is being carried on by any person
other than the licensee, or knowingly deface, destroy or alter the license in any respect.
I. The licensee shall post in a prominent place easily seen by patrons a printed sign at least eight and one-half
inches (8 ½) by eleven (11) inches in size, with gender-neutral language supplied by the Cabinet for Health Services,
which shall warn that drinking alcoholic beverages prior to conception or during pregnancy can cause birth defects. A
person who violates this subsection shall be subject to a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than fifty
dollars ($50.00). KRS 243.895.
J. Any off premises signage advertising the sale of alcoholic beverages is prohibited.
K. No wholesaler or distributor shall sell any alcoholic beverages to any person in the City for any
consideration except under the usual credit or cash terms of the wholesaler or distributor at or before the time of
delivery. Nor shall any retail licensee sell to a purchaser for any consideration except for cash at time of purchase.
L. No licensee shall knowingly employ in connection with his business, in any capacity whatsoever, any
person who:
1. Has been convicted of any felony, misdemeanor or offense directly or indirectly attributable to the use of
alcoholic beverages, within the last two (2) years;
2. Is under the age of twenty (20) years who will be serving alcoholic beverages.
3. Within two (2) years prior to the date of his employment, has had any City license under this Ordinance
revoked for cause.
2018-S-1
76 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
Violation of this subsection shall subject both employer and employee to penalties provided in this section and
shall be cause for revocation of license.
M. All persons who shall be serving alcoholic beverages shall undergo any training required by the state ABC
Office, the cost of which shall be the responsibility of the licensee.
N. No licensee shall offer or permit nudity, adult entertainment activities, including nude or nearly nude
dancing, adult motion picture, television, slide or stage shows, cabarets or sexual entertainment centers on any
licensed premise. No licensee shall permit explicit sexual activity, whether actual or simulated, upon any licensed
premise. No licensee shall sponsor or permit wet t-shirt or wet clothing contests, lingerie fashion shows, mud
wrestling or similar activities, not shall a licensee allow dancing with touching for compensation (including but not
limited to wages, tips or gratuities), or any other service, display or contest requiring physical contact between
patrons and/or patrons and employees on any licensed premises. No licensee shall sponsor, offer or permit drinking
contests, all-you-can-drink specials or free drinks on any licensed premise in the City.
(Ord. No. 21-2015 passed – 12-0702015) (Amended Ord. 09-2017, passed 8-7-17)
§ 122.25 MANDATORY RESPONSIBLE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SERVICE TRAINING:
A. All persons involved in the serving of alcoholic beverages by the drink shall participate in and complete a
responsible beverage service training program similar to the criteria of the State S.T.A.R. Training Program. A
responsible beverage service program shall effectively train its participants in the identification of valid and fake
identification, reducing illegal alcohol sales to minors, reducing sales to persons who are already intoxicated,
promoting responsible consumption, provide information to sellers and servers to protect themselves from thirdparty
liability lawsuits and educating licensees and servers about Kentucky liquor laws.
B. All persons required to complete training under paragraph (A) above shall complete that training within
thirty (30) days of the date on which the person first becomes subject to the training requirement. When a new
business is licensed to serve alcoholic beverages, all employees must be trained prior to the opening of the
business. All persons completing the training required by this section shall be re-certified through a responsible
alcoholic beverage service training program not less than once every three (3) years thereafter.
C. The owner of any license serving alcoholic beverages shall be responsible for compliance with the training
requirements and shall maintain for inspection by the City ABC Administrator a record or file on each employee
that shall contain the name, job title, date of employment and proof of certification of each seller or server
regulated by this section. This information shall be available at any reasonable time to any alcoholic beverage
control officer or any police officer.
(Ord. No. 21-2015, passed 12-07-2015)
§ 122.26 MALT BEVERAGE KEG REGISTRATION
A. As used in this section, “KEG” is defined as a container designed and capable of holding six (6) or more
gallons of malt beverage.
B. All retail licensees (herein referred to as “licensee”) operating within the City of Elizabethtown who sell malt
beverages in kegs for consumption off the premises of the licensee shall attach a control label. The label must have a
control number, and the name of the business. Each label must be affixed to each keg at the time of sale and shall
require the purchaser to complete and sign a keg registration form for the keg stating the following:
1. The purchaser is of legal age to purchase, possess and use the malt beverage;
2. The purchaser is not purchasing the keg for resale and will not allow any person under the age of twenty-one
(21) to consume the malt beverage;
3. The purchaser will not remove, obliterate or allow to be removed or obliterated the identification label;
4. The purchaser will state the property address where the keg will be consumed and physically located; and
5. The purchaser is aware of his/her duty to maintain a copy of the keg registration form visible and readily
accessible from the location of the keg.
2018-S-1
Alcoholic Beverage Control 77
C. The licensee shall obtain the name, address and telephone number of the purchaser and shall require the
purchaser to produce a valid driver’s license number and, if that is not available, to produce at least one other valid
form of identification.
D. The licensee shall retain copies of the keg registration forms for a period of one year and shall make the keg
registration form available for inspection by state and local alcoholic control officers and other enforcement officers.
E. The keg registration form shall be forwarded to the City ABC Administrator within five (5) working days in all
situations when the keg is not returned or returned with the identification label removed or obliterated.
F. The City ABC Administrator is authorized to develop appropriate rules and regulation and to develop and make
available forms for the identification label and keg registration forms.
G. All licensees that sell or offer for sale kegs shall post on the licensed premises a notice provided by the City
concerning the provisions of this ordinance.
H. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell or offer for sale kegs without the identification label attached and
the keg registration form completed. It shall also be unlawful for any person to remove or to obliterate the identification
tag or to fail to have the declaration form visible and readily accessible from the located of the keg. The penalties for
violation of this section shall be the penalties as set out in the penalties section of this ordinance. In addition, licensee
violating this section shall be subject to appropriate alcoholic beverage control administrative remedies.
(Ord. No. 21-2015, passed 12-07-2015)
§ 122.27 INFORMATION DEEMED CONFIDENTIAL; PENALTY FOR DISCLOSURE; EXCEPTIONS.
Any information, including returns, documents, or payments made pursuant hereto and any other
information gained by the City ABC Administrator or any other official, agent, or employee of the City of
Elizabethtown as a result of any return, investigation, hearing or verification required or authorized by the
ordinance shall be confidential; except, in accordance with proper judicial order, and any person or agent divulging
such information shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than Fifty Dollars ($50.00) nor more than
Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days, or both, at the discretion of the
court. Provided, however, such person may disclose to the Commissioner of the Revenue Cabinet of the State or
his or her duly authorized agent, or the Commissioner of Internal Revenue Service, or his or her duly authorized
agent, all such information and extend the right to inspect any of the books and records of the City to said
Commissioner of the Revenue Cabinet of the State and/or to said Commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service
who must grant to the City the reciprocal right to obtain information from the files and records of the Internal
Revenue Service and maintain the privileged character of the information so furnished to them.
(Ord. No. 21-2015, passed 12-07-2015)
§ 122.28 ENFORCEMENT
City police officers and the City ABC Administrator or the officers of that department are authorized to enforce
this ordinance for alleged violations.
(Ord. No. 15-2015, passed 12-07-2015)
§ 122.29 PENALTIES
The following penalties shall be in addition to any criminal prosecution instituted in Hardin District Court
against an alleged violator.
The City ABC Administrator may assess a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per
violation. This payment of said fine shall be transmitted to the City Finance Department to be deposited in the
appropriate designated account.
2018-S-1
78 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this Ordinance, for which no other penalty is
hereby provided, shall, for the first offense, be fined not less than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) nor more than Two
Hundred Dollars ($200.00) or imprisoned in the county jail for not more than six (6) months, or both, and for the
second and each subsequent violation, he shall be fined not less than Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) nor more than
One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned in the county jail for not more than six months, or both. The
penalties provided for in this subsection shall be in addition to the revocation or suspension of the offender's license. If
the offender is a corporation, LLC, partnership, joint stock company, association, fiduciary or other business entity, the
principal officer or officers responsible for the violation may be imprisoned.
(Ord. No. 21-2015, passed 12-07-2015)
§ 122.30 SEVERABILITY
If any portion of this section is declared null and void, the remaining provisions will remain in full force and effect.
(Ord. No. 21-2015, passed 12-07-2015))
2018-S-1
CHAPTER 123: RESCINDED
(ORDINANCE NO. 21-2015)
79
CHAPTER 123A: RESCINDED
(ORDINANCE NO. 21-2015)
80
81
(This page intentionally left blank)
2018-S-1
82 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
(This page intentionally left blank)
2018-S-1
83
(This page intentionally left blank)
2018-S-1
84 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
(This page intentionally left blank)
2018-S-1
85
(This page intentionally left blank)
2018-S-1
86 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
(This page intentionally left blank)
2018-S-1
CHAPTER 124: RESCINDED
(ORDINANCE NO. 01-2008)
87
2008-S-1
88 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
CHAPTER 125: REGULATING SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES & PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT
Section
125.01 Findings & Intent
125.02 Definitions
125.03 Application of Ordinance to City-owned and County-owned Facilities
125.04 Prohibition of Smoking in Enclosed Public Places
125.05 Prohibition of Smoking in Places of Employment
125.06 Prohibition of Smoking in Outdoor Arenas and Stadiums
125.07 Reasonable Distance
125.08 Where Smoking Not Regulated
125.09 Declaration of Establishment as Nonsmoking
125.10 Posting of Signs
125.11 Non-retaliation and Non-waiver of Rights
125.12 Enforcement
125.13 Violations and Penalties
125.14 Code Enforcement Board
125.15 Governmental Agency Cooperation
125.16 Other Applicable Laws
125.17 Construction
125.18 Severability
125.19 Effective Date
§ 125.01 Findings & Intent.
The Elizabethtown City Council finds that:
Whereas numerous studies have found that tobacco smoke is a major contributor to indoor air pollution. Breathing
secondhand smoke is a cause of disease in healthy nonsmokers. These diseases include heart disease, stroke, respiratory
disease and lung cancer.
Whereas, the U.S. Surgeon General has issued a comprehensive scientific report which concludes that there is no
risk-free level of exposure to secondhand smoke. (Department of Health and Human Services. New Surgeon General’s
Report Focuses on the Effects of Secondhand Smoke. Public Health Service, Centers for Disease Control, 2006.)
Whereas the smoking of tobacco is a form of air pollution, a danger to health and a material public nuisance.
Accordingly, the Elizabethtown City Council adopts the foregoing as justification for this ordinance, the purpose of
which is:
(1) To protect the public health and welfare by prohibiting smoking in public places and places of employment;
and
(2) To guarantee the right of nonsmokers to breathe smoke-free air; and
(3) To recognize that the public’s need to breathe smoke-free air shall have priority over the individual’s desire
to smoke.
(Ord. No. 24-2006, passed 10-16-06)
89
2008-S-1
90 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
§ 125.02 Definitions.
A. Business means a sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation, or other business entity, either for
profit or not for profit, including retail establishments where good or services are sold; professional corporations and
other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural, or other professional services are delivered; and
private clubs.
B. Employee means a person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary
wages or profit, and a person who volunteers his or her services for a non-profit entity.
C. Employer means a person, business, partnership, association, corporation, including a municipal corporation,
trust, or non-profit entity that employs the services of one or more individual persons.
D. Enclosed Area means all space between a floor and ceiling that is enclosed on all sides by solid walls or
windows (exclusive of doorways), which extend from the floor to the ceiling.
E. Health Care Facility means an office or institution providing care or treatment of diseases, whether
physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical, physiological or psychological conditions, including but not limited to,
hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics, including weight control clinics, nursing homes, homes for the aging
or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentist, and all
specialist within these professions. This definition shall include all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate
rooms, and wards within health care facilities.
F. Places of Employment means an area under the control of public or private employer that employees
normally frequent during the course of employment, including but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges,
restrooms, conference rooms, meeting rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias and hallways. A private residence is not
a “place of employment” unless it is used as a childcare, adult day care, or health care facility.
G. Private Club means an organization, whether incorporated or not, which is the owner, lessee, or occupant of
a building or portion thereof used exclusively for club purposes at all times, which is operated solely for a recreational,
fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary gain, and which only sells
alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation. The affairs and management of the organization are conducted by a
board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at an annual meeting. The organization
has established bylaws and/or a constitution to govern its activities. The organization has been granted an exemption
from the payment of federal income tax as a club under 26 U.S.C. Section 501.
H. Public Place means an enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted,
including, but not limited to, banks, bars, educational facilities, health care facilities, hotel and motel lobbies,
Laundromats, polling places, public transportation facilities, reception areas, restaurants, retail food production and
marketing establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores, shopping malls, sports arenas, theaters, and waiting
rooms. A private club is a “public place” when being used for a function to which the general public is invited. A
private residence is not a “public place” unless it is used as childcare, adult day care, or health care facility.
I. Restaurant means an eating establishment, including but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich
stands, and private and public school cafeterias, which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees,
as well as kitchens and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. The term
“restaurant” shall include a bar area within the restaurant.
2008-S-1
Regulating Smoking in Public Places & Places of Employment 91
J. Retail Tobacco Store means a retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories
and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental.
K. Service Line means an indoor line in which one (1) or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of
any kind, whether or not the service involves the exchange of money.
L. Shopping Mall means an enclosed public walkway or hall area that serves to connect retail or professional
establishments.
M. Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, pipe, or other
lighted or heated tobacco or plant product intended for inhalation, in any manner or in any form. “Smoking” also
includes the use of an e-cigarette which creates a vapor, in any manner or any form or the use of any oral smoking
device for the purpose of circumventing the prohibition of smoking in this section.
N. Sports Arena means sports pavilions, stadiums, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools,
roller or ice rinks, bowling alleys, and other similar places where members of the general public assemble to engage in
physical exercise, participate in athletic competition, or witness sports or other events.
(Ord. No. 24-2006, passed 10-16-06) (Am. Ord. 18-2018, passed 06-08-18)
§ 125.03 Application of Ordinance to City-owned and County-owned Facilities.
Smoking policies concerning facilities owned or operated by the City, County or Commonwealth shall be governed
by regulations adopted in compliance with KRS 61.165.
Pursuant to KRS 61.165 smoking is prohibited in all City-owned facilities and buildings.
(Ord. No. 24-2006, passed 10-16-06, Am. Ord. No. 05-2007, passed 02-20-07)
§ 125.04 Prohibition of Smoking in Enclosed Public Places.
Smoking is prohibited in all enclosed public places as defined in Section 2. H., above, within the City of
Elizabethtown, Kentucky.
(Ord. No. 24-2006, passed 10-16-06)
§ 125.05 Prohibition of Smoking in Places of Employment.
A. Smoking is prohibited in all enclosed facilities within places of employment. This prohibition includes, but is
not limited to common work areas, auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private offices, elevators,
hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias, employee lounges, stairs and restrooms.
B. This prohibition on smoking shall be communicated to all existing employees by the effective date of this
Ordinance and to all prospective employees upon their application for employment.
(Ord. NO. 24-2006, passed 10-16-06)
§ 125.06 Prohibition of Smoking in Outdoor Arenas and Stadiums.
Smoking is prohibited in the seating areas of all outdoors arenas, stadiums and amphitheaters.
(Ord. No. 24-2006, passed 10-16-06)
2008-S-1
92 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
§ 125.07 Reasonable Distance.
Smoking is prohibited within a reasonable distance of at least fifteen (15) feet from the outside entrance to or open
windows of any enclosed area in which smoking is prohibited by this Ordinance and from the air intake of a ventilation
system serving an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited, in order to insure tobacco smoke does not enter that
enclosed area through entrances, windows, ventilation systems or other means.
(Ord. No. 24-2006, passed 10-16-06)
§ 125.08 Where Smoking Not Regulated.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Ordinance to the contrary, the following areas shall be exempt from the
provision of Section 4 and 5:
A. Private residences, except when used as a licensed childcare, adult day care or health care facility.
B. Hotel and motel rooms that are rented to guests and are designated as smoking rooms; provided however, that
not more than twenty percent (20%) of rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be so designated. All smoking
rooms on the same floor must be contiguous. Smoke from the designated smoking rooms shall not infiltrate into areas
where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this Ordinance. The status of rooms as smoking or nonsmoking
may not be changed, except to add additional nonsmoking rooms.
C. Retail tobacco stores, provided that smoke from these premises does not infiltrate into areas where smoking is
prohibited under the provisions of this Ordinance.
D. Private clubs that have no employees; provided that when such clubs are being used for functions to which
the general public is invited, the prohibitions set out in Section 4 and 5 shall apply.
E. Outdoor areas of places of employment, except those covered by the provisions of Section 6 and 7.
(Ord. No. 24-2006, passed 10-16-06)
§ 125.09 Declaration of Establishment as Nonsmoking.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Ordinance, an owner, operator, manager or other authorized person in
control of an establishment, facility, or outdoor area may declare that entire establishment, facility, or outdoor areas as a
nonsmoking place regardless of its designation under this ordinance. Within such premises as an authorized
nonsmoking designation has been made and signage conforming to the specifications set out in Section 10. A. is posted,
smoking shall be prohibited as if otherwise prohibited by this Ordinance.
(Ord. No. 24-2006, passed 10-16-06)
§ 125.10 Posting of Signs.
A. “No Smoking” signs or the international “No Smoking” symbol, consisting of a pictorial representation of a
burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it: shall be clearly and conspicuously posted in every
public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this Ordinance. The party responsible for the
placement of the signage is the owner, operator, manager or other person in control of the premises.
B. A conspicuous sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited shall be posted at each entrance utilized by the
public entering and exiting public places within which smoking is prohibited by this Ordinance. A conspicuous sign
clearly stating that smoking is prohibited shall be posted at each entrance utilized by employees entering and exiting
places of employment within which smoking is prohibited by this Ordinance.
2009-S-1
Regulating Smoking in Public Places & Places of Employment 93
C. All ashtrays shall be removed from any area within which this Ordinance or the owner, operator, manager, or
other person having control of the area prohibits smoking, except for ashtrays displayed for sale and not for use on the
premises.
(Ord. No. 24-2006, passed 10-16-06)
§ 125.11 Non-retaliation and Non-waiver of Rights.
A. No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner retaliate against an employee,
applicant for employment, or customer because that employee, applicant, or customer exercises any rights afforded by
this Ordinance or reports or attempts to prosecute a violation of this Ordinance.
B. An employee who continues to work in a setting where an employer allows smoking in violation of this
Ordinance does not waive or otherwise surrender any legal rights the employee may have against the employer or any
other party.
(Ord. No. 24-2006, passed 10-16-06)
§ 125.12 Enforcement.
A. The City’s Code Enforcement Officer, the City Police, the Fire Department and all other City officials and
employees designated by the Mayor or City Council shall enforce this Ordinance.
B. Notice of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be given to all applicants for a business license in the City of
Elizabethtown.
C. Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this Ordinance may initiate enforcement with any of the
authorized person listed above.
D. The Health Department, Fire Department, or their designees shall, while in an establishment performing
otherwise legal inspections shall inspect for compliance with this Ordinance.
E. Owners, managers, operators, or employees of establishments regulated by this Ordinance shall inform
persons seen violating this Ordinance of the requirements of this Ordinance. In the event an owner, manager, operator
or employee of an establishment regulated by this Ordinance observes a person or persons violating this Ordinance, he
or she shall immediately direct the person or persons in violation to extinguish the item being smoked.
1. In the event the person [or persons] violating this Ordinance complies with this directive, no violation shall
exist for the owner, manager, operator or employee witnessing the violation. In the event an owner, manager,
operator or employee of an establishment regulated by this Ordinance observes a person or person violating this
Ordinance and fails to immediately direct the person [or persons] in violation to extinguish the items being smoked,
the owner, manager, operator or employee failing to take appropriate steps required by this Ordinance shall be in
violation of this Ordinance.
2. In the event the person [or persons] violating this Ordinance fails or refuses to comply with this directive, the
owner, manager, operator or employee directing the person [or persons] violating this Ordinance shall take
immediate and reasonable steps to obtain the removal of the person [or persons] from the premises.
As an example of the reasonableness required, if there is a person violating the ordinance who, the owner, manager,
operator or employee of an establishment regulating by this Ordinance is required to removed from the premises,
but the person is intoxicated or otherwise reasonably believed to be unable to safely drive or conduct himself or
herself if required to leave those premises, in this event the owner, manager, operator or employee may reasonably
determine to allow the person violating this ordinance to remain on the premises until appropriate arrangements
may be made for the person’s removal.
2008-S-1
94 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
In the event the person [or persons] violating this Ordinance is timely removed from the premises; no violation
shall exist for any owner, manager, operator or employee related to the establishment in which these events
occurred. In no event is an owner or agent of the premises to forcibly remove the person violating the Ordinance.
Compliance is achieved under this subsection if the owner or agent of the premises orders the person violating the
Ordinance to leave its premises and promptly notifies the police if the person refuses.
3. In the event the person [or persons] violating this Ordinance fails or refuses to comply with this directive and
the owner, manager, operator or employee who observed the violation or if a different person who directed the
person [or persons] in violation to leave the premises, fails to take immediate and reasonable steps to obtain the
removal of the person [or persons] from the premises, the owner, manager, operator or employee failing to take
appropriate steps required by this Ordinance shall be in violations of this Ordinance.
4. In all events, the establishment in which a violation occurs shall be in violation of this Ordinance for each
violation that occurs on its premises and in connection with which the owner, manager, operator or employee fail to
take appropriate steps required by this Ordinance.
5. An employee who observes a person [or persons] violating this Ordinance may immediately notify his or her
owner, manager or supervisor of the violation in satisfaction of the employee’s responsibility under this Ordinance.
The failure of the satisfaction of the employee’s responsibility under this Ordinance. The failure of the employee’s
owner, manager or supervisor to take appropriate steps required by this Ordinance in response to the employee’s
notice shall not constitute a violation on the part of the employee.
6. In the event all duties required under this Section are satisfied yet the person violating this Ordinance persists
in his or her violation and/or refuses to vacate the premises on which the violation occurred, the owner, manager,
supervisor and/or employee shall immediately contact one or more of the agencies or departments authorized above
to enforce this Ordinance informing the agency or department of the circumstances of the violation.
7. The mere presence of a person smoking within premises of an establishment governed by this Ordinance
does not constitute a violation on the part of the establishment. The establishment and its agents shall only be
charged for a violation of this Ordinance if the responsible agent[s] of the establishment fail to timely satisfy each
responsibility prescribed for them in this Section.
F. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Ordinance, the City, the Hardin County Health Department, an
employee, or any person aggrieved by a failure to comply with this Ordinance, whether by commission or omission,
including violations on the part of an owner, operator, manager, employee, or other person[s] in control of a public
place or a place of employment covered by this Ordinance may bring legal action to enforce this Ordinance, either by
civil action seeking injunctive relief or by criminal complaint in a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. No. 24-2006, passed 10-16-06)
§ 125.13 Violations and Penalties.
A. A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this Ordinance shall be
guilty of a violation, punishable by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00).
B. A person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or places of employment and
who fails to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a violation, punishable by:
1. A fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first violation within a one-year period.
2008-S-1
Regulating Smoking in Public Places & Places of Employment 95
2. A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the second violation within one (1) year.
3. A fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each additional violation within one (1) year.
C. In addition to the fines established by this Section, violations of this Ordinance by a person who owns,
manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment may result in the suspension or
revocation of any permit or license issued to the person for the premises on which the violation occurred.
D. Violation of this Ordinance is declared to be a public nuisance, which may be abated by the City or its
designated agents by restraining order, preliminary and permanent injunction, or other means provided for by law. The
City may recover the reasonable costs of any court enforcement action seeking abatement of this nuisance.
E. Each day on which a violation of this Ordinance occurs shall be considered a separate and distinct violation.
(Ord. No. 24-2006, passed 10-16-06)
§ 125.14 Code Enforcement Board.
Any person or entity cited under this Ordinance may appeal said citation and request a hearing before the Code
Enforcement Board. The process for said appeal shall be governed by Section 34 of the Elizabethtown Code of
Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 24-2006, passed 10-16-06)
§ 125.15 Governmental Agency Cooperation.
The City requests the Hardin County Health Department for its assistance in the effective implementation of this
Ordinance.
(Ord. No. 24-2006, passed 10-16-06)
§ 125.16 Other Applicable Laws.
This Ordinance shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other
applicable laws.
(Ord. No. 24-2006, passed 10-16-06)
§ 125.17 Construction.
This Ordinance shall be construed so as to further its stated purposes.
(Ord. No. 24-2006, passed 10-16-06)
§ 125.18 Severability.
In any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this Ordinance or its application to any person or factual context
shall be held invalid, that invalidity shall not affect the remaining provisions of this Ordinance, which may be given
effect independent of the provision or application declared invalid.
(Ord. No. 24-2006, passed 10-16-06)
§ 125.19 Effective Date.
This Ordinance shall be effective the 1st day of December, 2006.
(Ord. No. 24-2006, passed 10-16-06)
2008-S-1
96 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
CHAPTER 126: ESTABLISHMENT OF RESTAURANT TAX
Section
126.01 Definitions
126.02 Restaurant Tax
126.03 Reporting Procedures to City Council
126.04 Reporting Procedures for Restaurants
126.05 Transfer of Funds to Elizabethtown Tourism & Convention Bureau
126.06 Collection and Enforcement
126.07 Interest and Penalties
126.08 Information Deemed Confidential: Penalty for Disclosure: Exceptions
126.09 Duties, Director of Finance
126.10 Procedure for Applying for Refund or Overpayment
126.11 Failure to File Return; Failure to Pay the Restaurant Tax Withheld; Underpayment of amount due
126.12 Severability
126.13 Other Ordinances Not Repealed
§ 126.01 Definitions.
Restaurant: As used in this chapter, restaurant means any fixed or mobile commercial establishment that engages
in the preparation and serving of ready-to-eat foods in portions to the consumer, including, but not limited to:
restaurants, coffee shops, cafeterias, short order cafes, luncheonettes, grilles, tea rooms, sandwich shops, soda fountains,
roadside stands, street vendor, catering kitchens, delicatessen, or similar places in which food is prepared for sale for
consumption of the premises or elsewhere. It does not include school cafeterias which are operated by the school system
and not an independent corporation, food vending machines, establishments serving beverage only in single service or
original containers. Temporary food stand, operated by non-profit organizations are exempt from this tax. Hospital
cafeterias owned by a governmental entity and not an independent corporation are exempt from this tax. Cafeterias that
are located inside industrial factories in which services are limited to employees only are exempt from this tax.
Commission: The Elizabethtown Tourism and Convention Bureau.
(Ord. No. 22-2007, passed 04-23-07)
§ 126.02 Restaurant Tax.
On and after October 1, 2007, there is hereby levied upon the retail sale of all food and beverages by a restaurant
located within the municipal limits of the City of Elizabethtown a tax equal to two percent (2%) of the gross amount of
each sale (excluding any other tax). This tax may or may not be passed on to the ultimate customer/consumer at the
discretion of the restaurant.
(Ord. No. 22-2007, passed 04-23-07; Am. Ord. No. 23-2007, passed 05-21-07
§ 126.03 Reporting Procedures to City Council.
A. The funds collected from this tax shall be maintained by the City Director of Finance in a special fund and
disbursed to the Commission monthly. All such money shall be used solely for the purpose of promoting
recreational, convention and tourist activity in the City of Elizabethtown, as set out in KRS Section 91A.390, and
shall not be used to provide a subsidy in any form to any motel, hotel or restaurant.
97
2008-S-1
98 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
B. The Commission must obtain approval from the City Council of the City of Elizabethtown prior to using any
revenues from the restaurant tax for the purposed of capital improvements including the purchase or acquisition of
land. In the event that an approved capital project must be debt serviced by bonds or bonded by either the City of
Elizabethtown or the city’s Elizabethtown Public Properties Holding Company LLC, the Commission will pledge
amounts agreed upon by the Commission and City Council necessary to satisfy principal and interest payments of
the bond issue.
(Ord. No. 16-2009, passed 09-08-09)
C. The Commission is strongly encouraged to obtain approval from the City Council of Elizabethtown for any projects
that are estimated at a cost of $10,000 or more. In obtaining the approval, the Commission must provide the City
Council a complete copy of any and all plans, data, research, appraisals, blueprints, etc. regarding the project.
D. The Commission will continue to tender its annual budget to the City Council for approval as required by KRS
91A.390.
E. The Commission shall provide a monthly written report to the City Council which includes all income,
expenditures, disbursements, and request pertaining to restaurant tax funds.
(Ord. No. 22-2007, passed 04-23-07)
§ 126.04 Reporting Procedures for Restaurants.
On or before the twentieth (20th) day of each calendar month, each restaurant owner and/or operator shall report to
the City Director of Finance on forms provided by the City of Elizabethtown the gross amount of sales of the restaurant
from food and beverages for the preceding calendar month, and calculation of the tax due for that month by computing
two percent (2%) of its gross sales from food and beverages. The owner/operator of the restaurant shall remit with the
form the tax due to the City Director of Finance.
(Ord. No. 22-2007, passed 04-23-07)
§ 126.05 Transfer of funds to Elizabethtown Tourism & Convention Bureau.
On or before the last day of each calendar month, the City Director of Finance shall transfer to the Elizabethtown
Tourism and Convention Bureau the gross of monies collected from the restaurant tax collected as of the 25th of the
current month. The Elizabethtown Tourism and Convention Bureau shall reimburse the City of Elizabethtown five
percent (5%) of the tax collected as reimbursement for the costs of collections, including but not limited to the cost of
reporting forms, postage, court cost, attorney’s fees and all other expenses incurred in collection of this tax by the fifth
(5th) day following the monthly transfer of funds.
(Ord. No. 22-2007, passed 04-23-07) (Am. Ord. No. 16-2009, passed 09-08-09)
§ 126.06 Collection and Enforcement.
A. It shall be the duty of the City Director of Finance to collect and receive the restaurant tax imposed by this
Ordinance.
B. The City Director of Finance shall keep records showing the amount paid by each restaurant owner and/or operator
and the date of such receipt.
C. The City Director of Finance is hereby charged with the enforcement of provisions of this Ordinance, and is hereby
empowered to prescribe, adopt and promulgate, and enforce rules and regulations relating to any matter pertaining
to the administration and enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance, including but not limited to provisions of
the reexamination and correction of returns to which and underpayment or overpayment is claimed or found to have
been made, and the rules and regulations as promulgated by him shall be binding upon the taxpayer. Provided,
however, all such rules, regulations and decisions shall be subject to the consent and approval of the Mayor and
City Council.
2010-S-1
Restaurant Tax 99
D. The City Director of Finance, or any agent or employee designated by him or her in writing, may examine the
books, papers, and records of any restaurant in order to determine the accuracy of any return made, or if no return
was made, to ascertain the amount of restaurant tax imposed by the terms of this ordinance as he or she may deem
is reasonably necessary for the purpose incident to the performance of his or her duties hereunder. The City
Director of Finance may enforce this right by application to the appropriate court having jurisdiction over these
matters.
E. The City Director of Finance may dispense with examination of the books, papers, and records of any taxpayer in
any case where the City Director of Finance is furnished with a certificate of a qualified Certified Public
Accountant, or the sworn statement of any other reputable accountant or bookkeeper stating that the amount of
restaurant tax reported conforms to the State or Federal Income Tax Return filed for the applicable period.
F. A restaurant owner and/or operator who collects the restaurant tax from one (1) or more persons and who fails to
file a return and make payments therewith shall in addition to the penalties prescribed herein upon conviction be
subject to a fine of not less than Fifty Dollars ($50.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00), or
imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days, or both such fine and imprisonment, for each offense. Such
criminal penalties shall be in addition to the penalties imposed within this Ordinance.
(Ord. No. 22-2007, passed 04-23-07)
§ 126.07 Interest and Penalties.
A. Any person who fails to file any return required within the afore stated time due to who fails to pay such restaurant
tax when same shall become due, shall be charged a penalty of Five Percent (5%) of the amount of the unpaid
restaurant tax for each month such return remains un-filed or tax unpaid, not exceeding a penalty of Twenty-Five
Percent (25%) in the aggregate.
B. All restaurant taxes imposed by this Ordinance which remain unpaid after they become due shall bear interest at the
rate of one-half of one percent (.5%) per month (or part thereof).
C. Any person who shall fail, neglect or refuse to make any return or pay any tax due required by this Ordinance, or to
pay the city those so withheld under the terms of this Ordinance, or any person who shall refuse to permit the City
Director of Finance or any agent or employee designated by him in writing, to examine books, records, and papers
pertaining to information required under this Ordinance, or who shall knowingly make any incomplete, false, or
fraudulent return, or who shall attempt to do anything whatsoever to avoid the full disclosure of the amount of
gross receipts in order to avoid the payment of the whole or any part of the restaurant license tax, shall become
liable to the city for such tax as well as the interest and penalty thereon, and shall in addition, be subject to a fine of
not less than FIFTY DOLLARS ($50.00) or more than FIVE HUNDRED DOLLARS ($500.00) or imprisonment
for not less than thirty (30) days, each day of non filing constituting a separate offense. Such criminal penalties
shall be in addition to the penalties imposed above.
(Ord. No. 22-2007, passed 04-23-07)
§ 126.08 Information Deemed Confidential; Penalty for Disclosure: Exceptions.
Any information, including returns, documents, or payments made pursuant hereto and any other information
gained by the City Director of Finance or any other official, agent, or employee of the City of Elizabethtown as a result
of any return, investigation, hearing or verification required or authorized by the ordinance shall be confidential; except,
in accordance with proper judicial order, and any person or agent divulging such information shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a fine of not less than Fifty Dollars ($50.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment
not to exceed Thirty (30) days, or both, at the discretion of the court, and upon conviction shall be dismissed from
employment by the City. Provided, however, such person may disclose to the Commissioner of the Revenue Cabinet of
the state or his or her duly authorized agent, or the other Commissioner of
2008-S-1
100 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
Internal Revenue Service, or his or her duly authorized agent, all such information and extend the right to inspect any of
the books and records of the City to said Commissioner of the Revenue Cabinet of the state and/or to said
Commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service who must grant to the City the reciprocal right to obtain information
from the files and records of the Internal Revenue Service and maintains the privileged character of the information so
furnished to them.
(Ord. No. 22-2007, passed 04-23-07)
§ 126.09 The City Director of Finance, or any agent or employee designated by him or her in writing, shall have
the following duties in connection with the restaurant tax.
A. Keep accurate records of all returns and of all sums received for restaurant taxes. Such records shall contain the
names and addresses of each taxpayer, and the dates and amounts of payments. He or she shall keep the original
returns on file for a period of not less than three (3) years after filing.
B. Enforce the provisions of this Ordinance, all in accordance with any policies set forth in any ordinance, municipal
order, or executive order.
C. Prepare forms and instructions for the returns and payments required by this Ordinance. All instructions shall be
clear and shall be as short as possible.
D. Examine returns. And for any returns appearing to be correct, made inquiries, investigations, and adjustments in the
amount of tax due.
E. Where necessary to determine accurate figures for determining the amount of tax due, examine books, records, and
information stored in computers of any taxpayer, provided that each city officer or employee acting under this
ordinance shall identify himself or herself and request the information desired. If the officer or employee is refused
admission to any place of business or refused access to any records or computer memory, the City Director of
Finance or employee shall leave the premises and shall seek an appropriate court order, with the assistance of the
city attorney, to obtain access to the information needed.
F. The City Director of Finance shall approve the form of all returns and written instructions prior to use by an agent
or employee designated by him or her in writing.
G. The City Director of Finance may prepare pamphlets for distribution to the public, clearly explaining the restaurant
tax, returns, and payments required.
(Ord. No. 22-2007, passed 04-23-07)
§ 126.10 Procedures for Applying for Refund of Overpayment.
A. Any taxpayer (pursuant to this Ordinance) who truly believes that he has made or permitted an overpayment of his
or her liability for any restaurant tax required by this Ordinance may apply for refund of said overpayment provided
that he or she files an amended return, verified under oath and setting forth in detail the full explanation of the
reason of the said claimed overpayment of his or her liability, within one (1) year of the date of said overpayment is
made or the date he or she said restaurant tax payment was due, whichever occurs first.
B. If a refund has been properly claimed according to the provisions of paragraph A above, then the City Director of
Finance shall have the authority to honor and refund any such overpayment actually made above actual liability
upon the restaurant tax required under this Ordinance which he or she determines within his or her sole discretion
was made through honest mistake or inadvertence.
2008-S-1
Restaurant Tax 101
C. In no event shall any refund be made for any payment upon any restaurant tax unless the refund claim is submitted
and filed in strict compliance with the foregoing provisions of this section upon such refund claim forms or
amended return forms as hereafter shall be promulgated by the City Director of Finance from time to time.
(Ord. No. 22-2007, passed 04-23-07)
§ 126.11 Failure to File Return, Failure to Pay the Restaurant Tax Withheld, Underpayment of Amount Due.
A. If the taxpayer liable for collecting the restaurant tax and filing a return fails to make a return, the City Director of
Finance shall prepare an estimate of the amount of restaurant taxes due based on the best information available to
them. The City Director of Finance may make investigations to assist in making the estimate. He or she may
consider the volume of business done in the same type of business, and any other relevant maters. When the City
Director of Finance estimates the restaurant taxes, the amount of interest and late charges provided by this
Ordinance shall be added to the taxes due. He or she shall notify the taxpayer of the amount due. Such notification
shall be in writing and shall contain a brief description of the method and estimated figures used in arriving at the
estimated tax. Any taxpayer may dispute the amount of the estimated tax by filing within thirty (30) days of
notification of the estimated taxes a return accompanied by payment of the entire balance due together with the
interest and late charges due. Such return shall be processed like any late return, and shall establish the restaurant
tax liability of the taxpayer in place of the estimated amount prepared by the City Director of Finance. However,
the City Director of Finance may later determine that the amount shown in the return is insufficient so there is a
deficiency, in the same manner as in the case of other returns.
B. If the City Director of Finance determines, by examining available evidence, that the amount of restaurant taxes
paid over by the taxpayer is less than the amount required by this Ordinance, he or she shall notify the taxpayer of
the deficiency. The City Director of Finance may use any of the methods authorized in paragraph A of the section
to determine whether a deficiency exists and to determine the amount of such deficiency. He or she shall thereupon
notify the taxpayer of the deficiency. Such notice shall be in writing and shall state not only the amount of the
deficiency but also the methods and estimates used in arriving at the amount of the deficiency. If the taxpayer does
not object in writing within thirty (30) days of the date of receiving such notice, the taxpayer shall be deemed to
have accepted the revised figures for the restaurant tax liability. If the taxpayer does file written objection within
the time specified, the taxpayer shall pay the fees, together with penalties and interest, under protest and may
thereupon pursue administrative and judicial remedies as provided by this Ordinance and by state law to seek a
refund.
C. If the City Director of Finance finds that any taxpayer has overpaid, he or she shall notify them of overpayment and
shall refund the amount of the overpayment to them.
D. When the City Director of Finance notifies any taxpayer of any estimated amount due, alleged overpayment, or
refund, he or she shall include in the notice clear instructions on how, when, and where the taxpayer may protect or
appeal the decision.
E. If any taxpayer or any person, firm, association, or corporation required by this ordinance to pay a restaurant tax or
to file a return shall fail to file any return for any month, such failure to file shall constitute a continuing offense
against the city and the City Director of Finance may proceed to estimate and collect the restaurant taxes at any
time. In all other cases, no increases shall be made in the taxpayer’s restaurant tax liability unless the first notice of
such increase is received by the taxpayer within three (3) years of the time the return was first due.
(Ord. No. 22-2007, passed 04-23-07)
2008-S-1
102 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
§ 126.12 Severability.
The provisions of this Ordinance are severable. If any sentence, clause, section, or part of this Ordinance or the
application thereof to any particular case is for any reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid, such
unconstitutionally, illegality, or invalidity shall not affect or repeal any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses
or sections or parts of this Ordinance, it being the legislative intent of the City Council of Elizabethtown to ordain and
enact each provision, section, paragraph, sentence and part thereof, separately and independently of each other.
(Ord. No. 22-2007, passed 04-23-07)
§ 126.13 Other Ordinances Not Repealed.
Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to repeal or modify any other ordinance heretofore enacted and in force
in the City of Elizabethtown unless specifically repealed by separate ordinance.
(Ord. No. 22-2007, passed 04-23-07)
2008-S-1
CHAPTER 127: OUTDOOR CAFES
Section
§ 127.01 Permit Required
§ 127.02 Permit Application Process
§ 127.03 Permit Fee and Applicability
§ 127.04 Standards and Conditions
§ 127.05 Violations and Penalties
§ 127.06 Requirements Not Covered
§ 127.07 General
§ 127.08 Severability
§ 127.01 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or business to create, establish, operate, maintain or otherwise be engaged in
the business of operating an outdoor café on City property in the downtown unless he or she shall hold a permit
issued under the terms of this Ordinance.
Exceptions:
1. During “Special Community events” recognized by the City, a listing of which shall be
maintained in the Office of the Mayor;
2. The use of tables only when occurring at fewer than ten (10) events in one calendar year.
B. Outdoor Café Encroachment Permits shall only be issued to businesses properly licensed by the City, which
wish to provide services to its patrons or to locate tables and chairs or other objects directly related to their
business of food and refreshment service on the public property immediately adjacent to their business in the
downtown area. No outdoor café permit shall be issued to any business that sells alcoholic beverages unless
that business establishes that at least 50 % of its gross revenue is derived from the sale of food or other nonalcoholic
merchandise.
(Ord.19-2015, passed 11/16/15)
§ 127.02 PERMIT APPLICATION PROCESS
A. An application for an Outdoor Café Encroachment Permit shall be made to the Department of Planning &
Development using an application form prepared by the City. Any such application filed to comply with the
provisions of this ordinance shall provide the minimum information required by the application form and shall
be signed by both the person or business that operates the food service business to which the permit would
apply and the owner of the property in which the business is located if not the same. The application form
shall provide the following additional information to the City.
1. A copy of a valid City business license to operate a business establishment adjacent to the public
property which is subject to the outdoor café operation;
2. Proof of current liability insurance, issued by a company licensed to do business in the Commonwealth
of Kentucky, insuring the licensee and the City of Elizabethtown against all claims or liability for
damage to property or for bodily injury including death, arising from the result, direct or indirect, of
the use of the public property pursuant to the Outdoor Café Encroachment Permit, including liquor
liability insurance coverage (with a minimum amount of $1,000,000). The insurance shall name the
City of Elizabethtown as an additional insured and shall provide that the policy shall not terminate or
be canceled prior to the stated expiration date without a 30 day advance written notice to the City of
Elizabethtown by the insure. The policy shall provide coverage in the minimum amount of
$1,000,000; however, the City may require a higher minimum amount at its reasonable discretion.
103
2018-S-1
104 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
3. A drawing of the proposed outdoor café encroachment seating area showing the locations and
dimensions of the area, all proposed encroachments and publicly-owned benches, tables and other
objects within the area. This information should include but not be limited to, the width of the public
right-of-way, public street name, width of the public sidewalk, information on the type and materials
of the improvements (furniture and other fixtures) and other information deemed to be pertinent to
review the request.
4. Proof of any required ABC license(s), Health Department permits and any/all other applicable permits
for the lawful operation of the business.
B. The applicant shall be notified within thirty (30) days of filing a completed application form with the City of
the approval or denial of the permit.
(Ord.19-2015, passed 11/16/15)
§ 127.03 PERMIT FEE AND APPLICABILITY
A. There shall be no fee charged for an outdoor café encroachment permit.
B. Any permit issued under the provisions of this ordinance shall be valid from January 1 to December 31 of each
calendar year.
C. Any person who shall operate an outdoor café upon public property without a proper permit as required by this
ordinance shall be subject to penalties as established by this ordinance.
D. Any permit issued under the provisions of this ordinance shall be used only by the person or business entity
listed in the application form filed and the permit issued. Said permit shall be only for the location listed in the
application form filed and the permit issued. Said permit is not transferable to another applicant, person,
business entity or to another location.
(Ord.19-2015, passed 11/16/15) (Am. Ord. 08-2016, passed 05-20-16)
§ 127.04 STANDARDS AND CONDITIONS
A. All outdoor café encroachments must be within the permitted area as indicated on the application filed and
the approved permit issued by the City. The City may require the area to be marked or physically
indicated.
B. All outdoor café encroachments must maintain a minimum fifty-four inches (54”) clear passage way on the
public sidewalk for pedestrians; and shall not block access to any building, driveway or crosswalk.
C. Any change in the outdoor café encroachment area or the materials (furniture or fixtures) approved to be
within the outdoor café encroachment area must receive written approval from the City.
D. The maximum number of seats allowed in an outdoor café encroachment area is eight (8). The seating
authorized by a permit issued under the provisions of this ordinance shall not be used for calculating
seating requirements pertaining to an alcohol beverage application/license. A waiver of this seating
limitation may be allowed if it is determined to be appropriate by the Department of Planning &
Development and by authorization of the Mayor.
E. Outdoor café encroachment areas may be open to patrons of the business from 7:00 am to 11:00 pm daily.
2018-S-1
Outdoor Cafe 105
F. All outdoor café encroachment areas must maintain a minimum five (5) feet unobstructed clearance from a
fire hydrant.
G. All outdoor café encroachment areas must be kept sanitary, neat and clean at all times. The area shall be
free from accumulation of food, litter and other potentially dangerous and unsanitary matter. Table tops
must be so designed and of such material and workmanship as to be smooth, non-porous, easily cleanable
and durable and shall be in a good condition to be readily maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
H. No loudspeakers shall be allowed within the outdoor café encroachment area.
I. Patrons are not permitted to carry their own alcohol to the outdoor café encroachment area.
J. Smoking shall be prohibited in any outdoor café encroachment area.
K. All improvements (furniture and other fixtures) used in the outdoor café encroachment area must be
readily removable without damage to the surface of the public right-of-way and there shall be no
penetration of the public sidewalk surface.
L. The outdoor café encroachment area must be accessible to persons with disabilities.
M. All improvements (furniture and other fixtures) may not be stored on the public right-of-way for extended
periods and must be removed from the public right-of-way between December 15 and March 1.
N. Heating is permitted in outdoor café encroachment areas, as long as the heaters are portable and can be
removed. The heating unit must be approved by the Fire Chief or his designee and the City’s Electrical
Inspector.
O. The permitted use of the outdoor café encroachment area may be temporarily suspended by the City when
street, sidewalk or utility repairs are necessary.
(Ord.19-2015, passed 11/16/15)
§ 127.05 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
A. Any person or private entity who fails to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance or any order issued
pursuant to this Ordinance shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine. An official of the City may issue
a citation for any violation of this Ordinance.
B. Fines shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the first offense; two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the
second offense; and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the third offense and any additional offenses.
C. The outdoor café permit issued under the provisions of this ordinance is a temporary license that may be
denied, suspended or revoked for any conduct that is contrary to the provisions of this ordinance or for any use
of the permitted area that in any manner creates a public nuisance or constitutes a danger to the public’s health,
safety or welfare in the sole discretion of any official of the City.
D. Violations of this Ordinance may be abated by the City. The City may recover the reasonable costs of any
abatement action.
E. Any person or private entity cited under this Ordinance may appeal said citation and request a hearing before
the Elizabethtown Code Enforcement Board pursuant to the process and procedures of Ordinance #09-2003,
adopted April 2003, as amended.
(Ord.19-2015, passed 11/16/15)
2018-S-1
106 Elizabethtown - Business Regulations
§ 127.06 REQUIREMENTS NOT COVERED
Requirements necessary for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this code,
shall be determined by the Mayor or her designee.
(Ord.19-2015, passed 11/16/15)
§ 127.07 GENERAL
The Mayor is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this ordinance. The Mayor or her designee
shall have the authority to render interpretations of this ordinance and to adopt policies and procedures in order to
clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the
intent and purpose of this ordinance. Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements
specifically provided for in this ordinance.
(Ord.19-2015, passed 11/16/15)
§ 127.08 SEVERABILITY
If a section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is, for any reason, held to be
unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance.
(Ord.19-2015, passed 11/16/15)
2018-S-1
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
Chapter
130. OFFENSES AGAINST MUNICIPAL REGULATIONS
131. PROHIBITING THE WEARING OF HOODS AND MASKS
132. REGULATING THE USE OF FIRE AND/OR POLICE ALARMS
133. REQUIREMENTS FOR PUBLIC DISPLAY, SALE, POSSESSION,
TRANSPORTATION AND USE OF FIREWORKS & PYROTECHNIC
ARTICLES
134. REQUIREMENTS FOR THE MAINTENANCE OF PRIVATE FIRE PROTECTION
SYSTEMS
1
2018-S-1
2 Elizabethtown - General Offenses
CHAPTER 130: OFFENSES AGAINST MUNICIPAL REGULATIONS
Section
130.01 Curfew
130.02 Air or spring guns
130.03 Flourishing; firing deadly weapon
§ 130.01 CURFEW.
(A) Curfew for minors.
(1) It is a curfew violation for a child 13, 14, 15, 16, or 17 years of age to be in a public place:
(a) After l:00 a.m. and before 5:00 a.m. on Saturday or Sunday;
(b) After midnight on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday; or
(c) Before 5:00 a.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday.
(2) It is a curfew violation for a child under 13 years of age to be in a public place after 10:00 p.m. or before
5:00 a.m. on any day.
(B) Exemptions. This section does not apply to a child who is:
(1) Accompanied by his/her parent, guardian, or custodian;
(2) Accompanied by an adult specified by his/her parent, guardian, or custodian;
(3) Carrying out an errand or other lawful activity as directed by his/her parent, guardian, or custodian; or
(4) Participating in, going to, or returning from:
(a) Lawful employment; or
(b) A lawful athletic, educational, entertainment, religious, or social event.
(C) Authority of police during curfew hours.
(1) Any police officer may stop and question any minor suspected of violating this section's provisions and
may take the minor into custody when found violating provisions of this section. The officer shall take the minor to the
city police headquarters where the name of the minor's parent, guardian, or person having legal custody of him/her shall
be ascertained.
3
4 Elizabethtown - General Offenses
(2) The parent, guardian, or person having legal custody shall be notified of the child's detention as required
by KRS 610.200 and summoned by the investigating officer to appear at police headquarters to assist in the completion
of the investigation. If the parent, guardian, or person having legal custody fails to appear within two hours from the
time the child was taken into custody, the investigating officer shall follow the requirements set forth in KRS Chapter
610 and other applicable provisions of the State Unified Juvenile Code, regarding detention or release of the child.
(3) Unless the nature of the offense or other circumstances are such as to indicate the necessity of keeping
the child in secure custody, the officer shall release the child to the custody of his/her parent, guardian, person having
legal custody, or other responsible adult.
(4) If the investigating or apprehending officer is satisfied that a violation of division (A) of this section has
occurred, he/she shall cause formal charges to be filed requiring the child and his/her parent, guardian, or person having
legal custody to appear in the appropriate court to answer the charge of a violation of division (A).
(5) If formal charges are to be brought, before a child is released to the custody of a parent, guardian, person
with legal custody, or other responsible adult, the investigating officer shall obtain a written promise signed by such
person that the person will bring the child to the court at the stated time or at such time as the court may order. The
written promise, along with the written report of the investigating officer, shall be submitted to the court as required by
KRS 610.200.
(D) Any child violating division (A) of this section shall be subject to the procedures and penalties provided for
by the State Unified Juvenile Code. Any parent, guardian, or person having legal custody of a child who violates any
provision of division (A) of this section may be subject to the financial penalty provided for in KRS 610.180.
§ 130.02 AIR OR SPRING GUNS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge within the city any “BB” gun, air rifle or other weapon having as
its propelling force a compressed air, gas or spring mechanism.
('73 Code, § 15-5) (Ord., passed 11-19-56) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 130.03 FLOURISHING; FIRING DEADLY WEAPON.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to:
(1) Flourish a deadly weapon or firearm within the city limits.
(2) Discharge or fire any firearm or deadly weapon within the city limits except at a facility designed for the
discharge of such weapons specifically approved by the city, and operated under standard operating procedures.
(B) For the purpose of this section, FIREARM shall mean any weapon which will expel a projectile by the action
of an explosive.
('73 Code, § 15-6.1) (Ord., passed 11-6-78) Penalty, see § 10.99
1995 S-1
CHAPTER 131: PROHIBITING THE WEARING OF HOODS AND MASK IN PUBLIC PLACES
Section
134.01 Purpose and Findings
134.02 Definitions
134.03 Wearing Hoods or Masks in a Public Place
134.04 Exemptions
134.05 Penalties
§ 131.01 PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.
The government of the City of Elizabethtown exists to serve equally all of its citizens and to protect all of its
citizens from crimes and inciteful disturbances. (Ordinance No. 10-2001, passed April 16, 2001)
§ 131.02 DEFINITIONS
PUBLIC PLACES All walks, alleys, streets, boulevards, avenues, lanes, roads, highways or other ways or
thoroughfares dedicated to public use or owned or maintained by public authority; all grounds and buildings owned,
leased or operated for the use of organizations enjoying all tax-exempt privileges as a charitable use. (Ordinance No.
10-2001, passed April 16, 2001)
§ 131.03 WEARING HOODS OR MASKS IN A PUBLIC PLACE
No group of three or more persons shall, while wearing any hood, mask or device whereby a substantial portion of
the face is hidden or covered so as to conceal the identity of the wearer, enter, be or appear in any public place within
the City of Elizabethtown. (Ordinance No. 10-2001, passed April 16, 2001)
§ 131.04 EXEMPTIONS
The following are exempted from the provision of Section 2 of this Ordinance:
(a.) Any person under sixteen years of age;
(b.) Any person using masks in theatrical productions including use in Mardi Gras celebrations and masquerade
balls;
(c.) Any person lawfully engaged in trades or employment or in a sporting activity where a mask or facial
covering is worn for the purpose of ensuring the physical safety and physical protection of the wearer, or
because of the nature of the occupation, trade or professional or sporting activity; and
(d.) Any person wearing a gas mask in drills, exercises or emergencies. (Ordinance No. 10-2001, passed April 16,
2001)
§ 131.05 PENALTIES
Any person who violates Section 131.03 of the Ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be fined no
more than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) and/or imprisoned for no longer than fifty (50) days. (Ordinance No. 10-
2001, passed April 16, 2001)
2001-S-5
5
6 Elizabethtown - General Offenses
CHAPTER 132: REGULATING THE USE OF FIRE AND/OR POLICE ALARMS
Section
132.01 Definitions
132.02 Unlawful false alarms; notice and duty to inspect, repair and initiate training after five preventable false
alarms
132.03 Fines/Civil Penalties
132.04 Severability Clause
§ 132.01 DEFINITIONS
FALSE ALARMS The activation of any mechanical, burglary, robbery, security or fire alarm system for the
purpose of summoning police and/or fire personnel, or which causes one or more police or fire personnel to be
dispatched or summoned to a particular location within the City, when, in fact, no crime, fire, or other emergency has,
or is being attempted or committed, on the premises.
PREVENTABLE FALSE ALARM The careless activation of any police security or fire alarm by any
individual, or activation of any police security or fire alarm system proximately caused by the failure of the owner,
lessee,, operator, or occupant, or their contractor or agent, to properly design, install or reasonably maintain the security
or alarm system in a safe operating condition. Police security or fire alarms shall not be deemed a “preventable false
alarm” in violation of this article if it is determined by the Chief of Police, Chief of the Fire Department, or their
designee, that the alarm was caused by:
1. A act of vandalism causing physical damage to the premises;
2. Alarms occurring during electrical storms, tornadoes, blizzards, or other acts of God where there is evidence
of damage or disruption to the alarm system;
3. Electrical power or telephone circuit disruption beyond the control of the alarm company and/or user; or
4. Any and all other acts or omission by persons, or events beyond the reasonable control of the owner, lessee,
operator or occupant of the premises and the security alarm system
(Ord. 13-2002, passed 08-05-2002)
§ 132.02 UNLAWFUL FALSE ALARMS; NOTICE AND DUTY TO INSPECT; REPAIR AND INITIATE
TRAINING AFTER FIVE PREVENTABLE FALSE ALARMS
A. Prohibition; Preventable False Alarms. It shall be unlawful for any person to activate, initiate, transmit or
otherwise cause, authorize or allow more than five (5) “preventable false alarms” at the same location within a six
(6) month period.
B. Notice and Corrective Action Requirement.
1. If the police or fire department, through their respective designees, have probable cause to believe that five
(5) preventable false alarms have occurred at the same location within a six (6) month period, the chief of the
respective department, or his designee, shall within forty-eight (48) hours of having established probable
cause, notify the property owner or other entity, user or person in charge of the alarm system, in writing (by
delivering said notice in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested), of the nature and number of
preventable false alarms that have occurred to date, including a brief description of the date and
circumstances of each preventable false alarm, and shall further advise the property owner, entity, user, or
person in control of the alarm system, that any additional preventable false alarms after this period of
correction provided in (B)(2) shall constitute a violation of this article for which the offender may be subject
to prosecution or civil penalty. Therefore, a compliance status with zero (0) preventable alarms shall be
maintained for at least six (6) months to avoid additional penalty.
7
2002-S-2
8 Elizabethtown - General Offenses
2. Duty to inspect and repair. Upon written notification from the police or fire department, through their
respective designee, of the occurrence of five (5) preventable false alarms within a six (6) month period, the
property owner, entity, user or person in control of the police or fire security alarm system in question, shall
have the alarm system inspected by a representative of the manufacturer of the alarm system or a qualified
and reputable representative of a fire and security alarm system dealer, to determine if the false alarms are the
result of mechanical failure, malfunction, improper design, installation, lack of proper maintenance or human
error due to carelessness or lack of training. The inspection report shall note any and all deficiencies
believed to exist in the professional opinion of the qualified inspector, and what repairs or other corrective
action the inspector believes is required to render the alarm system safe, operational and functional in
relation to the type of property or business it was designed and intended to secure. It shall be the
responsibility of the property owner, entity, user or other person in control of the alarm system to make the
necessary repairs and/or take any and all other remedial measures reasonably identified and required by the
qualified inspector, and to submit a copy of the inspection report along with written proof of the repairs
and/or remedial action taken to correct any malfunctions or deficiencies identified in the alarm system to the
police or fire department from whom the original notice was received, within fourteen (14) days of receipt of
the formal notification required in subsection (B)(1) hereinabove.
3. Duty to train and provide orientation to employees and occupants. Upon written notification from the police
or fire department, through their respective designee, of the occurrence of five (5) preventable false alarms
within a six (6) month period, the property owner, entity, user or person in control of the police or fire
security alarm system in question, shall provide system operation instruction to all system operators or
potential authorized users of the premises, and shall provide written documentation of the training to the
police or fire department from whom the original notice was received, within fourteen (14) days of receipt of
the formal notification required in subsection (B)(1) hereinabove.
C. A false alarm shall not be deemed a “preventable false alarm” under the prohibition in subsection (A) of this
section if it occurs at a location for which the property owner, entity, user or person in control of the alarm system
has been formally notified to inspect and repair any malfunctions or deficiencies in accordance with subsection
(B)(1) and (2) as set forth hereinabove; provided, that the false alarm occurs within the time period prescribed for
the alarm system to be inspected and repaired, if necessary.
(Ord. 13-2002, passed 08-05-2002)
§ 132.03 FINES/CIVIL PENALTIES
Any person found to be in violation of any section of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof for each offense, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). As an
alternative to, or in conjunction with, the penalties set forth herein, any person found to be in violation of this article
may also be assessed a civil penalty not to exceed five hundred ($500.00), payable to the City of Elizabethtown within
twenty (20) days of the issuance of the citation. Civil penalties not paid within the time prescribed herein may be
recovered by the City in a civil action, in the same manner provided for the collection of a civil debt.
(Ord. 13-2002, passed 08-05-2002) (Am. Ord. 03-2005, passed 02-21-2005)
The enforcing agency, department or individual may choose to seek enforcement through the Code Enforcement
Board enacted on the 30th day of April, 2003, by Ordinance No. 09-2003.
(Ord. 19-2003, passed 06-23-2003)
§ 132.04 SEVERABILITY CLAUSE
If any portion of this Ordinance is declared null and void, the remaining provisions will remain in full force and
effect.
(Ord. 13-2002, passed 08-05-2002)
2005-S-2
CHAPTER 133. REQUIREMENTS FOR PUBLIC DISPLAY, SALE, POSSESSION,
TRANSPORTATION AND USE OF FIREWORKS AND PYROTECHNIC ARTICLES
Section
133.01 Sale of Fireworks
133.02 Age Restrictions – Purchasing, Possession, Transport
133.03 Age Restrictions – Selling, Handling
133.04 Sales Restricted to Retail Only
133.05 Public Fireworks Display
133.06 Training
133.07 Contraband (KRS 227.750)
133.08 State Law Affirmed
133.09 Penalties
133.10 Severability
§ 133.01 SALE OF FIREWORKS.
No fireworks shall be offered for sale within the city limits of Elizabethtown unless they comply with the
definition of “consumer fireworks” as defined by the Consumer Product Safety Commission (Title 16 CFR Parts 1500
and 1507) and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms (Title 27 CFR Part 555.11). However, no consumer
fireworks shall be offered for sale unless they comply with provisions of KRS Chapter 227.
(Ord. No. 10-2008, passed 06-16-08) (Am. Ord. No. 04-2010, passed 06-07-10)
§ 133.02 AGE RESTRICTION – PURCHASE, POSSESSION, TRANSPORT.
No person under the age of 18 shall purchase, possess, use or transport consumer fireworks (as defined in Section
133.01 except in the presence of a responsible adult.
(Ord. No. 10-2008, passed 06-16-08) (Am. Ord. No. 14-2011, passed 06-20-11)
§ 133.03 AGE RESTRICTION – SELLING, HANDLING.
No person under the age of 18 shall sell or otherwise handle fireworks for sale or transport. No person under the
age of 18 shall visit and remain in a fireworks stand or storage facility as a family member or friend of an employee.
(Ord. No. 10-2008, passed 06-16-08)
§ 133.04 SALES RESTRICTED TO RETAIL ONLY.
No person shall offer fireworks at wholesale, or as a dealer, or jobber, with the city limits of Elizabethtown, except
as provided for in KRS Chapter 227.
Fireworks shall not be sold or used, on city owned property, public rights-of-way or public places except for a
lawful display of fireworks subsequent to issuance of fireworks permit under Chapter 133.05 of this section.
In addition to any permit or registration fee required by the State of Kentucky, the City of Elizabethtown will
require a $100.00 permit fee for the issuance of certificate of occupancy to any temporary consumer fireworks retail
sales facility as defined in NFPA 1124 (Chapter 3.329.1, 2006 edition).
(Ord. No. 10-2008, passed 06-16-08) (Am Ord. No. 04-2010, passed 06-07-10) (Am. Ord. 14-2011, passed 06-20-11)
9
2013-S-1
10 Elizabethtown - General Offenses
§ 133.05 PUBLIC FIREWORKS DISPLAY.
No person shall conduct a “public fireworks display” without obtaining the requisite permit from the State Fire
Marshal’s Office in accordance with KRS Chapter 227. Public fireworks display shall be defined as any display of
“consumer” or “display” fireworks at a public area or as any display of fireworks at a private location if the fireworks
are other than those approved by section 133.01 of this section. The request for permit to the local Fire Chief shall be
accompanied by a $100.00 permit fee, and a permit shall only be issued if the conditions of KRS 227.710, KRS
227.720 and NFPA 1123 (most current edition) have been met in total.
(Ord. No. 10-2008, passed 06-16-08) (Am. Ord. No. 04-2010, passed 06-07-10) (Am. Ord. No. 14-2011, passed 06-20-
11)
§ 133.06 TRAINING.
Only persons “certified” through attendance at a locally recognized training program, or other program acceptable
to the city Fire Marshall, will be designated a “competent operator” and thus allowed to supervise a public fireworks
display. All display assistants shall be trained in the duties they are to perform, be under the direct supervision of the
competent operator, and be at least 18 years old. Renewal of certification shall be automatic upon proof of actively
participating in at least three (3) outdoor fireworks displays during the previous four (4) years.
(Ord. No. 10-2008, passed 06-16-08) (Am. Ord. No. 04-2010, passed 06-07-10)
§ 133.07 DAYS AND HOURS FOR USING CONSUMER FIREWORKS.
Unless specifically permitted by the Elizabethtown Fire Department, persons may only use, ignite, fire or explode
consumer fireworks on Memorial Day, July 3rd, July 4th, July 5th and Labor Day between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and
12:00 a.m. (midnight) and December 31st between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 12:30 a.m. on January 1st. Any person
wishing to use, ignite, fire or explode consumer fireworks any other day or time must notify the Elizabethtown Fire
Department and receive express permission.
(Ord. No. 08-2012, passed 06-04-12) (Ord. No. 07-2017, passed 06-19-17)
§ 133.08 USE OF FIREWORKS ON CITY PROPERTY.
It is not permitted for any person to ignite fireworks on City property including parks and public spaces except for
approved public fireworks displays.
(Ord. No. 08-2012, passed 06-04-12)
§ 133.09 CONTRABAND (KRS 227.750).
Any law enforcement officer, or designated Elizabethtown Fire Department officer, shall be legally authorized to
confiscate fireworks defined in state law as “contraband” (KRS 227.750).
(Ord. No. 10-2008, passed 06-16-08) (Ord. No. 08-2012, passed 06-04-12)
§ 133.10 STATE LAW AFFIRMED.
All provisions of Kentucky State Law regarding the sale and use of fireworks shall continue in force and effect
except as modified through enactment of this section.
(Ord. No. 10-2008, passed 06-16-08) (Ord. No. 08-2012, passed 06-04-12)
§ 133.11 PENALTIES.
Any person violating this section shall be cited for a civil offense pursuant to the Code Enforcement Board
Ordinance and Fine Schedule. Each day of violation shall be considered a separate occurrence. The civil fine shall be
paid directly to the City of Elizabethtown. If the fine is not paid within thirty (30) days from the date of notification,
then the City may recover said fine in a civil action in a court of proper jurisdiction. The City may also obtain an
injunction or abatement order to insure compliance with this section.
2017-S-1
Use of Fireworks & Pyrotechnic Articles 11
The citing officer may at his or her discretion cite the offender to appear before the Code Enforcement Board (Ord.
#09-2003).
(Ord. No. 10-2008, passed 06-16-08) (Am. Ord. No. 14-2011, passed 06-20-11) (Ord. No. 08-2012, passed 06-04-12)
§ 133.12 SEVERABILITY.
If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this section shall be held invalid or ineffective for any reason, the
remainder hereof shall continue in full force and effect, it being expressly hereby found and declared that the remainder
of this section would have been adopted despite the invalidity of such section, paragraph, clause or provision.
(Ord. No. 10-2008, passed 06-16-08) (Ord. No. 08-2012, passed 06-04-12)
2013-S-1
CHAPTER 134. REQUIREMENTS FOR THE MAINTENANCE OF PRIVATE
FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS
Section
§ 134.01 Installation of Private Fire Protection Systems
§ 134.02 Maintenance of Fire Protection Systems Required
§ 134.03 Testing of Fire Protection Systems Required
§ 134.04 Repairs to Fire Protection Systems Required
§ 134.05 Violations and Penalties
§ 134.01 INSTALLATION OF PRIVATE FIRE PROTECITON SYSTEMS
Installation of private fire protection water supply systems shall follow the guidelines found in the National Fire
Protection Association (NFPA) Standard 24 and the Elizabethtown Fire Protection Ordinance (Ordinance #19-1986
adopted May 1986, as amended by Ordinance #25-2011 adopted November 2011).
A. Easements to allow access to and maintenance of a private fire protection water supply system shall be
provided by the property owner. Easements may be required for approval of any subdivision or
development plans. The minimum easement width shall be ten (10) feet; however, the City Engineer
or Fire Chief may determine that a greater width is required for proper access and maintenance of the
private fire protection water supply system as warranted by specific site circumstances.
(Ord. 20-2015, passed 11/16/15)
§ 134.02 MAINTENANCE OF FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS REQUIRED
The approved private fire protection water supply system, as required by NFPA Standard 25, Inspection,
Testing, and Maintenance of Water-Based Fire Protection Systems, shall be maintained by each property owner when
such system is not part of the publically maintained fire protection system
(Ord. 20-2015, passed 11/16/15)
§ 134.03 TESTING OF FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS REQUIRED
Fire protection water supply systems, including private fire hydrants, shall be subject to periodic tests as
required by the Fire Chief or his designee and shall be operable at all times.
A. Fire hydrants shall be inspected annually and after any operation of the hydrant. Flow tests shall be
conducted every 3 years by the property owner.
B. Unobstructed access to fire hydrants shall be maintained at all times, which shall include a three (3)
foot clear space around the hydrant, unless otherwise approved by the Fire Chief or his designee.
Physical protection to prevent damage to hydrants may be required.
(Ord. 20-2015, passed 11/16/15)
12
2018-S-1
Private Fire Protection Systems 13
§ 134.04 REPAIRS TO FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS REQUIRED
Private fire protection water supply systems shall be repaired upon notification by the Fire Chief or his designee
as prescribed in NFPA Standard 25.
A. By order of the Fire Chief or his designee, the owner of a private fire protection system including
hydrants and appurtenances shall make repairs for the proper operation of the system, which shall
include the repair of leaks, physical damage and corrosion.
B. Should repairs not be made within the time prescribed by the order of the Fire Chief or his designee,
the City of Elizabethtown shall effect such repairs by City personnel or contractor and shall bill the
owner of the system for said repairs.
C. For emergency conditions where the issuance of an order by the Fire Chief or his designee to make
repairs is not feasible or timely, the City personnel or contractor may make repairs and subsequently
invoice the property owner for all costs. The City shall make effort to provide notice to the property
owner before any such emergency work is undertaken.
(Ord. 20-2015, passed 11/16/15)
§ 134.05 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Any person or private entity who fails to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance or any order issued
pursuant to this Ordinance shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine. The Fire Chief or his designee may issue a
citation for any violation of this Ordinance.
A. Fines shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first offense; one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the second
offense; and two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the third offense and any additional offenses.
B. Violations of this Ordinance may be abated by the City. The City may recover the reasonable costs of
any abatement action.
C. Any person or private entity cited under this Ordinance may appeal said citation and request a hearing
before the Elizabethtown Code Enforcement Board pursuant to the process and procedures of
Ordinance #09-2003, adopted April 2003, as amended.
(Ord. 20-2015, passed 11/16/15)
2018-S-1
14 Elizabethtown - General Offenses
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
Chapter
150. BUILDING REGULATIONS
151. FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
152. MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
153. PLANNING
154. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
155. ZONING CODE
156. CELLULAR TOWER APPLICATION FEE
157. EROSION PREVENTION & SEDIMENT CONTROL
158. STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT
2013-S-1 1
2 Elizabethtown - Land Usage
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
Standard Codes
150.01 Adoption of Kentucky Building Code and Standards of Safety; enforcement agents
150.02 Application
150.03 Other standard codes adopted by reference
Administration and Enforcement
150.15 Building Official
150.16 Permit and application fees
150.17 Noncompliance with permit requirements
150.99 Penalty
STANDARD CODES
§ 150.01 ADOPTION OF KENTUCKY BUILDING CODE AND STANDARDS OF SAFETY;
ENFORCEMENT AGENTS.
(A) The International Building Code with Kentucky amendments and the International Residential Code with
Kentucky amendments, promulgated in 815 KAR 7:125 by the Board of Housing, Building and Construction,
Commonwealth of Kentucky; the Kentucky Plumbing Code, as contained in Chapter 20, Title 815 of the Kentucky
Administrative Regulations; the Kentucky Standards of Safety, as contained in Chapter 10, Title 815 of the Kentucky
Administrative Regulations, together with any amendments, are hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth in this
code of ordinances.
(1) A copy of the Kentucky Building Code, together with a copy of all other regulations or NFiPA
pamphlets adopted or referred to thereunder, is on file in the office of the Department of Planning and Development,
and the Director of the Department shall at all times keep a copy of the building code for reference.
(2) Copies of the Kentucky Standards of Safety (Fire Prevention Code) are available through the Department
of Housing, Buildings and Construction, 1047 U.S. 127 South, Frankfort, Kentucky 40601 and the Elizabethtown Fire
Department.
(B) The Department of Planning and Development shall be designated as the local enforcement agency for the
International Building Code with Kentucky amendments and the International Residential Code with Kentucky
amendments. All building code inspections shall be performed by persons certified by the Kentucky Department of
Housing, Buildings and Construction. All electrical inspections shall be performed by a certified electrical inspector
specifically approved by this jurisdiction.
(Ord. 27, passed 7-1-91) (Am. Ord. No. 26-2007, 06-02-07, Am. Ord. No. 03-2008, 04-07-08, Am, Ord. No. 04-2014,
01-21-2014)
2014-S-1 3
4 Elizabethtown - Land Usage
(C) The Fire Chief and all other designated officers, agents, and employees of the city are hereby charged with the
enforcement of the provisions of the state Standards of Safety (Fire Prevention Code).
(Ord. 6, passed 1-21-91) (Ord. 27, passed 7-1-91)
(D) Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, wherever the following words are used in the building code
adopted herein, the definitions below shall apply:
(1) CORPORATION COUNSEL. The Attorney for the city.
(2) MUNICIPALITY. The City of Elizabethtown.
('73 Code, § 5-1.7) (Ord., passed 4-3-72; Ord. 6, passed 1-21-91; Ord. 27, passed 7-1-91; Ord. 1, passed 1-7-02)
Penalty, see § 150.99
Cross-reference:
Fire Chief, see § 39.15
§ 150.02 APPLICATION.
Pursuant to KRS 198B.060(8), a building inspection program is hereby established in Elizabethtown for
application to all buildings, including single-family dwelling as provided in the adopted codes..
(Ord., 27, passed 7-1-91) (Am. Ord. 26-2007, passed 06-02-07)
§ 150.03 OTHER STANDARD CODES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
(A) In addition to the codes adopted in § 150.01 of this chapter, the following codes shall be in full force and
effect as to all buildings, structures, real estate and improvements to real estate in the city.
(1) Kentucky Residential Code, 2013 (Ord #04-2014, passed 01-21-14)
(2) National Fuel Gas Code, 1999.
(3) National Electric Code, 2011. (Ord. #01-2012, passed 01-17-12)
(4) Life Safety Code, 1988 edition.
(5) National Fire Code, 1986 edition.
(B) The above codes, regulations, interpretations and pamphlets are on file in the office of the Department of
Planning and Development.
(C) Any and all future amendments and modifications, interpretations and regulations of the above codes'
ordinances to the extent of the amendments, interpretations, regulations and pamphlets shall become a part of this code
and this section and have the same force and effect as this section, as they are received by the office of the Department
of Planning and Development.
(D) The Elizabethtown Department of Planning and Development shall be designated the local enforcement
agency for the codes, regulations, interpretations and pamphlets hereinabove referred to.
('73 Code, § 5-2) (Ord., passed 12-7-70; Am. Ord., passed 6-5-78; Am. Ord., passed 2-7-83; Am. Ord., passed 1-20-
86)
2014-S-1
Building Regulations 5
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 150.15 BUILDING OFFICIAL.
(A) The office of Building Official is hereby created and the Director of Department of Planning and
Development shall be known as Building Official.
(B) The Building Official shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of City Council. The appointment
shall continue during good behavior and satisfactory service. He/she shall not be removed from office except for cause
after full opportunity has been given to be heard on specific charges. During temporary absence or disability of the
Building Official the appointing authority shall designate an Acting Building Official.
('73 Code, § 5-1)
(C) To be eligible to appointment, the candidate for the position shall have had experience as an architect,
structural engineer, building inspector or superintendent of building construction. He/she shall be in good health,
physically capable of making the necessary examinations and inspections. He/she shall not have any interest whatever,
directly or indirectly, in the sale or manufacture of any material, process or device entering into or used in or in
connection with building construction, alterations, removal, and demolition. ('73 Code, § 5-1.1)
(D) Duties.
(1) The Building Official or his/her personnel and/or department shall devote the necessary time to perform
duty of the office. The Building Official shall examine the premises for which permits have been issued and shall make
necessary inspections to see that the provisions of law are complied with and that construction is prosecuted safely. The
Building Official shall, when requested by proper authority, or when the public interest so requires, make investigations
in connection with matters referred to in the building code and render written reports on the same and shall issue such
notices or orders as may be necessary to enforce compliance with law, to remove illegal or unsafe conditions, to secure
the necessary safeguards during construction, or to require adequate exit facilities in buildings and structures.
(2) Inspections required under the provisions of the building code shall be made by the Building Official or
his/her duly appointed assistant. The Building Official may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection
services, after investigation of their qualifications and reliability. No certificate called for by any provision of the
building code shall be issued on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified to by a responsible officer of
such service.
(3) All such records shall be open to public inspection for good and sufficient reasons at the stated office
hours, but shall not be removed from the office of the Building Official without his/her written consent.
(4) The Building Official shall make written reports to his/her immediate superior once each month, or more
often if requested, including statements of permits and certificates issued, and orders promulgated.
('73 Code, § 5-1.2)
(Ord., passed 12-7-70; Am Ord., passed 4-3-72)
1995-S2 Repl.
6 Elizabethtown - Land Usage
(E) The Building Official or any employee charged with the enforcement of this chapter, acting in good faith and
without malice for the city in the discharge of his/her duties, shall not thereby render himself liable personally and
he/she is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of
any act required or by reason of any act or omission in the discharge of his/her duties. Any suit brought against the
Building Official or employee, because of such act or omission performed by him/her in the enforcement of any
provisions of this chapter, shall be defended by the legal department of the city until final termination of the
proceedings. ('73 Code, § 5-1.3) (Ord., passed 4-3-72)
(F) The Building Official may request and shall receive so far as may be necessary, in the discharge of his/her
duties, the assistance and cooperation of other officials of the municipality. ('73 Code, § 5-1.4) (Ord., passed 4-3-72)
(G) The Building Official, or other authorized officer in the discharge of his/her official duties, and upon proper
identification, shall have authority to enter any building, structure or premises at any reasonable hour. ('73 Code, § 5-
1.5) (Ord., passed 4-3-72)
(H) The Building Official shall be compensated in the amount as established by the City Council from time to
time by ordinance.
(I) No person shall be appointed or act as the Building Official unless such person has taken the oath required by
Section 228 of the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Kentucky and has provided bond, if required, with corporate
surety authorized to transact business in Kentucky and conditioned upon the performance of the duties specified herein.
Cross-reference:
Oath and bond required of city officers, see § 31.01
§ 150.16 PERMIT AND APPLICATION FEES.
The fees for permits and inspections shall be as set out below.
APPLICATION FEES
Conditional Use Permit $150.00
Variance $150.00
Preliminary Fee $500.00
Amended Preliminary Plat $250.00
Record Plat $250.00
Map Amendment $350.00
Planned Neighborhood District $500.00
Development Plan $100.00
Development Plan (Amended) $50.00
Development Plan (Commercial Design Guidelines) $200.00
(Amended Ord. 14-2003, passed – 06-16-2003; Amended Ord. 08-2008, passed 06-16-2008)
2008-S-2
CONSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE 7
Up to $9,999 No Fee
$10,000 to $19,999 $25.00
$20,000 to 34,999 $50.00
$35,000 to $49,999 $100.00
$50,000 to 74,999 $150.00
$75,000 to $99,999 $200.00
$100,000 to $149,999 $250.00
$150,000 to $199,999 $500.00
$200,000 to $299,999 $750.00
$300,000 to $399,999 $1,000.00
$400,000 to $499,999 $2,000.00
$500,000 to $749,999 $3,000.00
$750,000 to $999,999 $4,000.00
$1,000,000 to $2,499,999 $5,000.00
$2,500,000 to $4,999,999 $7,500.00
$5,000,000 + $10,000.00
SIGN INSTALLATION FEE $100.00
Temporary Banner Sign Installation Fee $35.00
(Amended Ord. 08-2008, passed 06-16-08; Amended Ord. 11-2009, passed 08-17-09)
DEMOLITION FEE SCHEDULE
Residential $50.00
Commercial $100.00
Moving of structure or building (Any building) $50.00
(Amended Ord. #02-2003, passed – 01-06-2003)
PLAN REVIEW FEE SCHEDULE
All Occupancy types,
except single family residential dwellings
Plan Examination Fees are adopted as
specified in the Kentucky Building Code
Single Family Residential Dwellings – 1999 square feet or less $100.00
Single Family Residential Dwellings – 2000 square feet or more $150.00
(Amended Ord. #02-2003, passed – 01-06-2003)
ELECTRICAL PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE
Single Family Dwelling Under 1500 Sq. Ft. $50.00
Single Family Dwelling Over 1500 Sq. Ft. to 2500 Sq. Ft. $100.00
Single Family Dwelling Over 2500 Sq. Ft. $150.00
Multi-Family Dwelling (Each Unit) $50.00
Mobile or Manufactured Homes $30.00
Temporary Service Poles $30.00
Signs $25.00
Change out of service $30.00
Swimming Pools $30.00
2010-S-1
8 Building Regulations
ELECTRICAL PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE CONTINUED
Remodel/Finishing or Basement No Charge
Accessory Building/Garages No Charge
Temporary on Main No Charge
Rechecks No Charge
Industrial/Commercial 2% of Elec. Contract
Minimum $100.00
(Ord. 17-1999, passed – 06-21-1999; Amended Ord. #02-2003, passed – 01-06-2003)
§ 150.17 NONCOMPLIANCE WITH PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
Where work for which a permit is required by city ordinance or regulation is started or proceeded with prior to
obtaining a permit, during the first 30 days of violation or 50% of construction, whichever comes first, a penalty of 50%
of the cost of the usual permit fee will be added to the permit fee. After 30 days of violation or more than 50%
construction the usual fee will be doubled, but the payment of such penalty shall not relieve any persons or corporation
from fully complying with the other codes, ordinances or regulations of this city in the execution of the work nor from
any other penalties prescribed by the codes, ordinances, or regulations.
('73 Code, § 5-1.8(C)) (Ord., passed 4-3-72; Am. Ord., passed 12-17-84; Am. Ord. 35-1988, passed 11-7-88; Am.
Ord. 27, passed 7-1-91) Penalty, see § 150.99
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
Any person who violates any provision of the state codes adopted in § 150.01 shall be subject to the following
penalties:
(A) Violators of the Kentucky Building Code shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $10 nor
more than $1000 for each offense. (KRS 198B.990(1))
(B) (1) Violators of the State Standards of Safety shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $25
nor more than $1000, imprisonment for not more than 60 days, or both, for each offense. (KRS 227.990(1))
(2) The imposition of penalties shall not preclude the city from instituting an appropriate action or
proceeding to prevent an unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or
use, or to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent the occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or to
prevent an illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about any premises. ('73 Code, § 10-3) (Ord., passed 2-17-64)
(C) Violators of the State Plumbing Code shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $10 nor
more than $100, imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both, for each offense. (KRS 318.990)
(D) Any person, firm, corporation or other organization violating §§ 150.16 or 150.17 by work begun or services
performed without the payment of the appropriate fee shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof the
violator shall be fined not less than $10 nor more than $500 plus court costs.
('73 Code, § 5-1.8(C)) (Ord., passed 4-3-72; Am. Ord., passed 12-17-84; Am. Ord. 35-1988, passed 11-7-88; Am. Ord.
27, passed 7-1-91)
2003-S-1
CHAPTER 151: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
151.01 Statutory authorization
151.02 Findings of fact
151.03 Statement of purpose
151.04 Objectives
151.05 Definitions
151.06 Lands to which this chapter applies
151.07 Basis for establishing the special flood hazard areas
151.08 Establishment of development permit
151.09 Compliance
151.10 Abrogation and greater restrictions
151.11 Interpretation
151.12 Warning and disclaimer of liability
151.13 Enforcement, Violation Notice and Penalties
Administration
151.25 Designation of local administrator
151.26 Establishment of Development Permit
151.27 Duties and responsibilities of the local administrator
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
151.40 General construction standards
151.41 Specific standards
151.42 Standards for streams without established base flood elevation (unnumbered A zones) and/or floodways
151.43 Standards for areas of shallow flooding zones
151.44 Standards for subdivision proposals
151.45 Standards for accessory structures in all zones beginning with the letter “A”
151.46 Critical Facilities
151.47 Appeals and variance procedures
151.48 Severability
9
2008-S-1
10 Elizabethtown - Land Usage
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Kentucky has in KRS 82.082 delegated to local government units the
authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry.
Therefore, the City Council of the City of Elizabethtown, Kentucky, hereby adopts the following floodplain
management chapter, as follows.
(Ord. No. 27-2007, passed, 07-16-07; Am Ord. No. 32-2007, passed 09-17-07)
§ 151.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
(1) The flood hazard area of the City of Elizabethtown, Kentucky are subject to periodic inundation which results
in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the
public health, safety, and general welfare.
(2) These flood loses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstruction in floodplains causing increased in flood
heights and velocity, and by the location in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other lands
which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damage.
(Ord. No. 27-2007, passed 07-16-07)
§ 151.03 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public
and private loss due to flooding by provisions designed to:
(1) Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water erosion hazards, or
which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocity;
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood
damage at the time of initial construction;
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which
accommodate or channel flood waters;
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion of flood damage; and
(5) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may
increase flood hazards to other lands.
(Ord. No. 27-2007, passed 07-16-07)
§ 151.04 OBJECTIVES.
The objectives of this chapter are to:
(1) Protect human life and health;
2008-S-1
Flood Damage Prevention 11
(2) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the
expense of the general public;
(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer
lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood
hazard or other flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blighted areas caused by flooding; and
(7) Ensure that potential homebuyers are on notice that property is in a Special Flood Hazard Area.
(8) Ensure that those who occupy a Special Flood Hazard Area assume responsibility for their actions.
(Ord. No. 27-2007, passed 07-16-07)
§ 151.05 DEFINITIONS.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the
meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
A ZONE. Portions of the special flood area (SFHA) in which the principle source of flooding is runoff from
rainfall, snowmelt, or a combination of both. In A zones, floodwaters may move slowly or rapidly, but waves are
usually not a significant threat to structures. Areas of 100-year flood, base flood elevations and flood hazard factors are
not determined.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE). A structure located on the same parcel of
property as the principle structure, the use of which is incidental to the use of the principle structure. Accessory
structures should constitute a minimal initial investment, may not be used for human habitation, and should be designed
to have minimal flood damage potential. Examples of accessory structures are detached garages, carports, storage sheds,
pole barns, and hay sheds.
ACCESSORY USE. A use which is incidental and subordinate to the principle use of the parcel of land on which
it is located.
ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING BUILDING). Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a structure
in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed
addition which is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing walls is new
construction.
AE ZONES. Special Flood Hazard Areas inundated by the 1% annual chance flood (100-year flood). Base flood
elevation (BFEs) are determined.
AH ZONES. An area of 100-year shallow flooding where depths are between 1 and 3 feet (usually shallow
ponding). Base flood elevations are shown.
AO ZONES. An area of 100-year shallow flooding where water depth is between one and three feet (usually sheet
flow on sloping terrain) Flood depths are shown.
2013-S-1
12 Elizabethtown - Land Usage
APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s interpretation of any provision of this chapter
or from the floodplain administrator’s ruling on a request for a variance.
AR/A1 – A30, AR/AE, AR/AH, AR/AO AND AR/A ZONES. Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHAs) that result
from the de-certification of a previously accredited flood protection system that is in the process of being restored to
provide a 100-year or greater level of flood protection. After restoration is complete these areas will still experience
residual flooding from other flooding sources.
A99 ZONE. That part of the SFHA inundated by the 100 year flood which is to be protected from the 100-year
flood by a Federal flood protection system under construction. No base flood elevations are determined.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or AH Zone on community's Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) where the base flood depths from one to three feet, there is no clearly defined channel, the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate; and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or
sheet flow.
BASE FLOOD. A flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also
called the “100-year flood”). Base flood is the term used throughout this chapter.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones
AE, AH, A1-30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30 AR/AH and AR/AO that indicates the water surface elevation
resulting from a flood that has a 1-percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT. That portion of a structure having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all four sides.
BUILDING. A walled and roofed structure that is principally aboveground, including a manufactured home, gas
or liquid storage tank, or other man-made facilities or infrastructures. See definition for structure.
C AND X (UNSHADED) ZONES. Areas determined to be outside the 500-year floodplain.
COMMUNITY. A political entity having the authority to adopt and enforce floodplain ordinances for the area
under its jurisdiction.
COMMUNITY RATING SYSTEM (CRS). A program developed by the Federal Insurance Administration to
provide incentives to those communities in the Regular Program to go beyond the minimum floodplain management
requirements to develop extra measures for protection from flooding.
COMMUNITY FLOOD HAZARD AREA (CFHA). An area that has been determined by the Floodplain
Administrator (or other delegated, designated, or qualified community official) from available technical studies,
historical information, and other available and reliable sources, which may be subject to periodic inundation by
floodwaters that can adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. Included are areas downstream from
dams.
CRITICAL FACILITY. Any property that, if flooded, would result in severe consequences to public health and safety
or a facility which, if unusable or unreachable because of flooding, would seriously and adversely affect the health and
safety of the public. Critical facilities include, but are not limited to: housing likely to contain occupants not
sufficiently mobile to avoid injury or death unaided during a flood; schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire and
emergency response installations, vehicle and equipment storage facilities, emergency operations centers likely to be
called upon before, during and after a flood, public and private utility facilities important to maintaining or restoring
normal services before, during and after a flood, and those facilities or installations which produce, use or store volatile,
flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials, hazardous materials or hazardous waste.
2013-S-1
Flood Damage Prevention 13
D ZONE. An area in which the flood hazard is undetermined.
DEVELOPMENT. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to,
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or permanent
storage of materials or equipment.
ELEVATION CERTIFICATE. A statement certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor on the
FEMA-approved form in effect at the time of certification that verifies a structure’s elevation and other related
information to verify compliance with this chapter.
ELEVATED STRUCTURE. For insurance purposes, a non-basement structure built to have the lowest floor
elevated above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings or columns.
EMERGENCY PROGRAM. The initial phase under which a community participates in the NFIP, intended to
provide a first layer amount of insurance at subsidized rates on all insurable structures in that community before the
effective date of the initial FIRM.
ENCLOSURE. That portion of a structure below the Base Flood Elevation (BFE) used solely for parking of
vehicles, limited storage, or access to the structure.
ENCROACHMENT. The physical advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, structures,
permanent structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. Any structure for which the “start of construction” commenced before the
effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMS effective before that date. “Existing construction”
may also be referred to as “Existing structures”.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or subdivision
for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the first floodplain management ordinance adopted
by the City of Elizabethtown, Kentucky based on specific technical base flood elevation data which established the area
of special flood hazards.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The preparation of
additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete
pads).
FIVE-HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD. The flood that has a 0.2 percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
year. Areas subject to the 500-year flood have a moderate to low risk of flooding.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM). A map on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) has delineated the areas of flood hazards and
the regulatory floodway.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). A map on which the boundaries of the flood, mudslide (i.e.
mudflow), and flood-related erosion areas having special hazards have been designated as Zones A, M, and/or E by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA).
2013-S-2
14 Elizabethtown - Land Usage
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). A map which the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) has delineated special flood hazard areas and the risk premium
zones.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or
Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) containing flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), and/or the
Flood Boundary Floodway Map (FBFM) and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOOD OR FLOORING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry
land areas from:
(a) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
(b) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
(c) Mudslides which are proximately caused by flooding and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the
surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path
of the current.
(d) The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or
undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by
an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an
unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and
unforeseeable event which results in flooding.
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by flood waters from
any source.
FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The individual appointed by a NFIP participating community to administer
and enforce the floodplain management ordinances.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures
for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited
to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management ordinances, and open space plans.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. This chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision
regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control), and
other applications of police power, which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state
and/or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage
prevention and reduction.
FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to
structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE. A certification by a registered professional engineer or architect, on a
FEMA-approved form in effect at the time of certification stated that a non-residential structure, together with attendant
utilities and sanitary facilities is watertight to a specified design elevation with walls that are substantially impermeable
to the passage of water and all structural components are capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic flood
forces, including the effects of buoyancy and anticipated debris impact forces.
2013-S-1
Flood Damage Prevention 15
FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also
referred to as the “regulatory floodway”.
FLOODWAY FRINGE. That area of the floodplain on either side of the regulatory floodway where encroachment
may be permitted without additional hydraulic and/or hydrologic analysis.
FREEBOARD. A factor of safety, usually expressed in feet about the BFE, which is applied for the purposes of
floodplain management. It is used to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights
greater than those calculated for the base flood. Freeboard must be applied not just to the elevation of the lowest floor
or floodproofing level, but also to the level of protection provided to all components of the structure, such as building
utilties, HVAC components, etc.
FRAUD AND VICTIMIZATION. As related in Section 151.47, Appeals and Variance Procedures, of this
chapter, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this
requirement, the City Council will consider the fact that every newly constructed structure adds to government
responsibilities and remains a part of the community for fifty to one hundred years. Structures that are permitted to be
constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods,
while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger,
and suffering that those increased flood damages may incur. In addition, future owners may purchase the property,
unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE FACILITY. A facility, structure, or other development, which cannot be
used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only a
docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair, or
seafood processing facilities. This term does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales or service facilities.
GOVERNING BODY. The local governing unit, i.e. county or municipality that is empowered to adopt and
implement ordinances to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.
HAZARD POTENTIAL. The possible adverse incremental consequences that result from the release of water or
stored contents due to failure of a dam or misoperation of a dam or appurtenances. The hazard potential classification of
a dam does not reflect in any way the current condition of a dam and its appurtenant structures (e.g., safety, structural
integrity, flood routing capacity).
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next
to the proposed walls of a building.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually in the Natural Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of
Interior) or preliminary determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on
the National register;
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical
significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a
registered historic district;
(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs
which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
2013-S-1
16 Elizabethtown - Land Usage
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation
programs that have been certified either:
(a) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(b) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
INCREASED COST OF COMPLIANCE (ICC). Increased cost of compliance coverage provides for the payment
of a claim for the cost to comply with State or community floodplain management laws or ordinances after a direct
physical loss by flood. When a building covered by a Standard Flood Insurance Policy under the NFIP sustains a loss
and the state or community declares the building to be substantially or repetitively damaged, ICC will help pay up to
$30,000 for the cost to elevate, floodproof, demolish, or remove the building.
ICC coverage is available on residential and non-residential buildings (this category includes public or government
buildings, such as schools, libraries, and municipal buildings) insured under the NFIP.
KENTUCKY REVISED STATUTE 151.250 – PLANS FOR DAMS, LEVEES, ETC TO BE APPROVED AND
PERMIT ISSUED BY CABINET – (ENVIRONMENTAL AND PUBLIC PROTECTION CABINET).
(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person and no city, county or other political subdivision of the
state, including levee districts, drainage districts, flood control districts or systems, or similar bodies, shall commence
the construction, reconstruction, relocation or improvement of any dam, embankment, levee, dike, bridge, fill or other
obstruction (except those constructed by the Department of Highways) across or along any stream, or in the floodway of
any stream, unless the plans and specifications for such work have been submitted by the person or political subdivision
responsible for the construction, reconstruction or improvement and such plans and specifications have been approved
in writing by the cabinet and a permit issued. However, the cabinet by regulation may exempt those dams,
embankments or other obstructions which are not of such size or type as to require approval by the cabinet in the
interest of safety or retention of water supply.
(2) No person, city, county or other political subdivision of the state shall commence the filing of any area with
earth, debris, or any other material, or raise the level of any area in any manner, or place a building, barrier or
obstruction of any sort on any area located adjacent to a river or stream or in the floodway of the stream so that such
filling, raising, or obstruction will in any way affect the flow of water in the channel or in the floodway of the stream
unless plans and specifications for such work have been submitted to and approved by the cabinet and a permit issued
as required in subsection (1) above.
(3) Nothing in this section is intended to give the cabinet any jurisdiction or control over the construction,
reconstruction, improvement, enlargement, maintenance or operation of any drainage district, ditch or system
established for agricultural purposes, or to require approval of the same except where such obstruction of the stream or
floodway is determined by the cabinet to be a detriment or hindrance to the beneficial use of water resources in the area,
and the person or political subdivision in control thereof so notified. The Department for Natural Resources through
KRS Chapter 350 shall have exclusive jurisdiction over KRS Chapter 151 concerning the regulation of dams, levees,
embankments, dikes, bridges, fills, or other obstructions across or along any stream or in the floodway of any stream
which structures are permitted under KRS Chapter 350 for surface coal mining operations.
LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC). Is an official FEMA determination, by letter, to amend or revise effective
Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Flood Board and Floodway Maps and Flood Insurance Studies. LOMC’s include the
following categories:
(1) Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA) – A revision based on technical data showing that a property was
incorrectly included in a designated SFHA. A LOMA amends the current effective FIRM and establishes that a specific
property is not located in a SFHA.
(2) Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) – A revision based on technical data that, usually due to manmade
changes, show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations, and planimetric features.
2013-S-1
Flood Damage Prevention 17
(3) Letter of Map Revision-Fill (LOMR F): A determination that a structure or parcel has been elevated by
properly placed engineered fill above the BFE and is, therefore, excluded from the SHFA.
LEVEE. A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with
sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM. A flood protection system that consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as
closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
LIMITED STORAGE. An area used for storage and intended to be limited to incidental items which can
withstand exposure to the elements and have low flood damage potential. Such an area must be of flood resistant
material, void of utilities except for essential lighting, and cannot be temperature controlled.
LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE. The elevation of the sidewalk, patio, deck support, or basement entryway
immediately next to the structure and after the completion of construction. It does not include earth that is emplaced for
aesthetic or landscaping reasons around a foundation wall. It does include natural ground or properly compacted fill that
comprises a component of a structure’s foundation system.
LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area including basement. An unfinished or flood
resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, structure access or storage in an area other than a basement
area is not considered a structure’s lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in
violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent
chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected or attached to the required
utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on site for 180
consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. The term “manufactured home” does not include a
“recreational vehicle” (see Recreational Vehicle).
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) or land divided into
tow or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MAP. The Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) or the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for a community
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
MAP PANEL NUMBER. The four digit number on a flood map, followed by a letter suffix, assigned by FEMA.
The first four digits represent the map panel. The letter suffix represents the number of times the map panel has been
revised. (The letter “A” is not used by FEMA, the letter “B” is the first revision.)
MARKET VALUE. The structure value, excluding the land (as agreed between a willing buyer and seller), as
established by what the local real estate market will bear. Market value can be established by independent certified
appraisal, replacement cost depreciated by age of structure (Actual Cash Value) or adjusted assessed values.
2013-S-1
18 Elizabethtown - Land Usage
MEAN SEA LEVEL. The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. For the purposes of the National
Flood Insurance Program, the MSL is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain as
shown on a community’s FIRM. For purposes of this chapter, the term is synonymous with either National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) 1929 or North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) 1988.
MITIGATION. Sustained actions taken to reduce or eliminate long-term risk to people and property from hazards
and their effects. The purpose of mitigation is twofold: to protect people and structures, and to minimize the costs of
disaster response and recovery.
MUDSLIDE (i.e. MUDFLOW). Describes a condition where there is a river, flow, or inundation of liquid mud
down a hillside, usually as a result of a dual condition of loss of brush cover and the subsequent accumulation of water
on the ground, preceded by a period of unusually heavy or sustained rain. A mudslide (i.e. mudflow) may occur as a
distinct phenomenon while a landslide is in progress, and will be recognized as such by the Floodplain Administrator
only if the mudflow, and not the landslide, is the proximate cause of damage that occurs.
MUDSLIDE (i.e. MUDFLOW) AREA MANAGEMENT. The operation of and overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing mudslide (i.e. mudflow) damage, including but not limited to emergency
preparedness plans, mudslide control works, and floodplain management regulations.
MUDSLIDE (i.e. MUDFLOW) PRONE AREA. An area with land surfaces and slopes of unconsolidated
material where the history, geology, and climate indicate a potential for mudflow.
NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP). The federal program that makes flood insurance
available to owners of property in participating communities nationwide through the cooperative efforts of the federal
government and the private insurance industry.
NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD). As corrected in 1929, a vertical control used as a
reference for establishing varying elevations with the floodplain. (Generally used as the vertical datum on the older
FIRM’s. Refer to FIRM legend panel for correct datum.)
NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date
of the City of Elizabethtown’s floodplain management regulations and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or subdivision for
which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including
at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the City of Elizabethtown’s adopted floodplain
management ordinances.
NON-RESIDENTIAL. Structures that are not designed for human habitation, including but is not limited to:
small business concerns, churches, schools, farm structures (including grain bins and silos), pool houses, clubhouses,
recreational structures, mercantile structures, agricultural and industrial structures, warehouses, and hotels or motels
with normal room rentals for less than 6 months duration.
NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM (NAVD). As corrected in 1988, a vertical control used as a
reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. (Generally used on the newer FIRM’s and Digitally
Referenced FIRM’s (DFIRM’s). (Refer to FIRM or DFIRM legend panel for correct datum.)
2013-S-1
Flood Damage Prevention 19
OBSTRUCTION. Includes but is not limited to any dam, wall, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment,
protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, structure, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill,
structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede,
retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect
debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream.
ONE-HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD (100-YEAR FLOOD). (See Base Flood) – The flood that has a 1 percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Any flood zone that begins with the letter A is subject to
the 100-year flood. Over the life of a 30-year loan, there is a 26-percent chance of experiencing such a flood with the
SFHA.
PARTICIPATING COMMUNITY. A community that voluntarily elects to participate in the NFIP by adopting
and enforcing floodplain management regulations that are consistent with the standards of the NFIP.
PRE-FIRM CONSTRUCTION. Construction or substantial improvement, which started on or before December
31, 1974, or before the effective date of the initial FIRM of the community, whichever is later.
POST-FIRM CONSTRUCTION. Construction or substantial improvement that started on or after the effective
date of the initial FIRM of the community or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later.
PROBATION. A means of formally notifying participating NFIP communities of violations and deficiencies in the
administration and enforcement of the local floodplain management regulations. During a period of probation, each
insurance policy is subject to a $50 surcharge.
PROGRAM DEFICIENCY. A defect in a community’s floodplain management regulations or administrative
procedures that impairs effective implementation of those floodplain management standards or of the standards of 44
CFR 60.3, 60.4, 60.5 and/or 60.6.
PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE. Anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or
neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary
manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
(1) Built on a single chassis;
(2) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection:
(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable to a light duty truck: and
(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping, travel or seasonal use.
REGULAR PROGRAM. The phase of a community’s participation in the NFIP where more comprehensive
floodplain management requirements are imposed and higher amounts of insurance are available based upon risk zones
and elevations determined in a FIS.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must
be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
one foot. See Base Flood.
2013-S-1
20 Elizabethtown - Land Usage
REMEDY A VIOLATION. The process by which a community brings a structure or other development into
compliance with State or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impact of
non-compliance. Reduced impact may include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood
damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or
reducing state or federal financing exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
REPAIR. The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing structure.
REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two or more separate occasions during a
10-year period where the value of damages equals or exceeds an average of 50% of the current value of the structure,
beginning on the date when the damage first occurred, or four or more flood losses of $1000.00 or more over the life of
the structure, or three or more flood losses over the life of the structure that are equal or greater than the current value of
the structure.
REPETITIVE LOSS PROPERTY. Any insurable building for which two or more claims of more than $1,000
were paid by the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) within any rolling 10-year period, since 1978. At least two
of the claims must be more than ten days apart but, within ten years of each other. A RL property may or may not be
currently insured by the NFIP.
RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
SECTION 1316. That section of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended, which states that no new
or renewal flood insurance coverage shall be provided for any property that the Administrator finds has been declared
by a duly constituted state or local zoning authority or other authorized public body to be in violation of state or local
laws, regulations or ordinances that are intended to discourage or otherwise restrict land development or occupancy in
flood-prone areas.
SEVERE REPETITIVE LOSS STRUCTURE. Any insured property that has met at least one of the following
paid flood loss criteria since 1978, regardless of ownership:
(1) Four or more separate claim payments of more than $5,000 each (including building and contents payments);
or
(2) Two or more separate claim payments (building payments only) where the total of the payments exceeds the
current market value of the property
In either case, two of the claims payments must have occurred within ten years of each other, Multiple losses at the
same location within ten days of each other are counted as one loss, with the payment amounts added together.
SHEET FLOW AREA. See “Area of Shallow Flooding”.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). That portion of the floodplain subject to inundation by the base
flood and/or flood-related erosion hazards as shown on a FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AE, A1-A30, AH, AO or AR.
START OF CONSTRUCTION. (includes substantial improvement and other new development) The date the
building permit is issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition
placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or
footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of
a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparations such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets, and/or walkways: nor does it include excavation for a
basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms: the installation on the property of accessory
structures, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part
of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.
2013-S-1
Flood Damage Prevention 21
STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; including manufactured homes,
gas or liquid storage tank, or other man-made facilities or infrastructures. See Building.
SUBDIVISION. Any division, for the purposes of sale, lease, or development, either on the installation plan or
upon any and all other plans, terms and conditions, of any tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots or parcels.
SUBROGATION. An action brought by FEMA to recover insurance money paid out where all or part of the
damage can be attributed to acts or omissions by a community or other third party.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the
structure to it’s before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before
the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a
structure, taking place during a 1-year period in which the cumulative percentage of improvements equals or exceeds 50
percent of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes
structures which have incurred “substantial damage”, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does
not, however, include either:
(a) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or
safety code specifications which have been identified by the local Code Enforcement Official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
(b) Any alteration of a “historic structure” provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued
designation of a “historic structure”.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVED EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS OR SUBDIVISIONS. Repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeding 50 percent of the
value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced.
SUSPENSION. Removal of a participating community from the NFIP for failure to enact and/or enforce
floodplain management regulations required for participation in the NFIP. New or renewal flood insurance policies are
no longer available in suspended communities.
UTILITIES. Includes electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment.
VARIANCE. Relief from some or all of the requirements of this ordinance.
VIOLATION. Failure of a structure or other development to fully comply with this ordinance. A structure or other
development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this
ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
WATER COURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel, or other topographic feature on or over which
water flows at least periodically.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of
1929, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or
riverine areas.
2013-S-1
22 Elizabethtown - Land Usage
WATERSHED. All the area within a geographic boundary from which water, sediments, dissolved materials, and
other transportable materials drain or are carried by water to a common outlet, such as a point on a larger stream, lake or
underlying aquifer.
X (SHADED) AND B ZONES. Areas of the 0.2%annual chance (500-year) flood, areas subject to the 100-year
flood with average depths of less than one foot or with contributing drainage area less than 1 square mile, and areas
protected by levees from the base flood.
ZONE. A geographical area shown on a Flood Hazard Boundary Map or a Flood Insurance Rate Map that reflects
the severity or type of flooding in the area.
(Ord. No. 27-2007, passed 07-16-07) (Am. Ord. No. 24-2011, passed 11-21-11)
§ 151.06 LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA), areas applicable to KRS 151.250 and,
as determined by the Floodplain Administrator or other delegated, designated, or qualified community official as
determined by the City Council of Elizabethtown, Kentucky from the available technical studies, historical information,
and other available and reliable sources, areas within the jurisdiction of the City of Elizabethtown, Kentucky which may
be subject to periodic inundation by floodwaters that can adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare
of the citizens of the City of Elizabethtown, Kentucky.
(Ord. No. 27-2007, passed 07-16-07)
§ 151.07 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) for Hardin County, dated August 16, 2007, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps
(FIRMS), other supporting data, and any subsequent amendments thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and declared
to be a part of these regulations by the City of Elizabethtown, and for those land areas acquired by the City of
Elizabethtown through annexation. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter
and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are
recommended to the City Council by the Floodplain Administrator and are enacted by the City Council pursuant to
statutes governing land use management regulations. The FIS and/or FIRM are permanent records of Hardin County
and are on file and available for review by the public during regular business hours at the office of the Hardin County
Planning Commission at 14 Public Square, Elizabethtown, Kentucky or the office of the Flood Plain Administrator at
City Hall, 200 West Dixie Avenue, Elizabethtown, Kentucky.
(Ord. No. 27-2007, passed 07-16-07, A. Ord. No. 32-2007, passed 09-17-07)
§ 151.08 ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
A Development Permit shall be required in conformance with the provision of this chapter prior to the
commencement of any development activities in the special flood hazard area (SFHA). See §151.26 for instructions and
explanation.
Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnish by the Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. No. 27-2007, passed 07-16-07)
2013-S-1
Flood Damage Prevention 23
§ 151.09 COMPLIANCE.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full
compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable state regulations. Violation of the requirement (including
violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor.
Nothing herein shall prevent the City Council of Elizabethtown, Kentucky from taking such lawful action as is
necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. No. 27-2007, passed 07-16-07)
§ 151.10 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions.
However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. No. 27-2007, passed 07-16-07)
§ 151.11 INTERPRETATION.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
1) Considered minimum requirements;
2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(Ord. No. 27-2007, passed 07-16-07)
§ 151.12 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is
based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights
may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special flood
hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create
liability on the part of the City Council of Elizabethtown, Kentucky, any officer or employee, the Commonwealth of
Kentucky, the Federal Insurance Administration, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, thereof for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(Ord. No. 27-2007, passed 07-16-07)
§ 151.13 ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATION NOTICE AND PENALTIES.
1) Civil Offense: If, at the time, development occurs which is not in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
including obtaining or complying with the terms and conditions of a floodplain construction permit and any approved
modifications, such development shall constitute a civil offense.
2) Notice of Violation: If, at any time, a duly authorized employee or agent of the Floodplain Administrator has
reasonable cause to believe that a person has caused development to occur which is not in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter including obtaining or complying with the terms and conditions of a floodplain construction
permit and any approved modifications thereof, a duly authorized employee of the Floodplain
2008-S-1
24 Elizabethtown - Land Usage
Administrator shall issue a notice to the person responsible for the violation and/or property owner, stating the facts of
the offense or violation, the section of this chapter and/or of the permit violated, when it occurred, how the violation is
to be remedied to bring the development into conformity with this chapter or with the approved permit, and within what
period of time the remedy is to occur, which period of time shall be reasonable and shall be determined by the nature of
the violation and whether or not it creates a nuisance or hazard. The remedy may include an order to stop work on the
development. The notice shall also state that a citation may be forthcoming in the event that the requested remedies and
corrective actions are not taken, which citation will request a civil monetary fine and shall state the maximum fine
which would be imposed. See below.
3) Notice of Citation: If, at any time, a duly authorized employee or agent of the Floodplain Administrator has
reasonable cause to believe that a person has caused development to occur which is not in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter including obtaining or complying with the terms and conditions of a floodplain construction
permit and any approved modifications thereof, a duly authorized employee of the Floodplain Administrator may issue
a citation to the offender stating the violation, prior notices of violation issued, how the violation is to be remedied to
bring the development into conformity with this chapter or with the approved permit, and within what period of time
the remedy is to occur, and what penalty or penalties are recommended. When a citation is issued, the person to who the
citation is issued shall respond to the citation within seven (7) days of the date the citation is issued by either carrying
out the remedies and corrections set forth in the citation, paying the civil fine set forth in the citation or requesting a
hearing before the governing body. If the person to whom the citation is issued does not respond to the citation within
seven (7) days, that person shall be deemed to have waived the right to a hearing and the determination that a violation
occurred shall be considered final.
4) Penalties: Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including
violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with granting of a variance or special exceptions, shall
constitute a misdemeanor offense. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements
shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined no more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than 12 months, or both,
and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Floodplain Administrator from taking such
other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. No. 27-2007, passed 07-16-07)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 151.25 DESIGNATION OF LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR.
The City Council of Elizabethtown, Kentucky hereby appoints the Director of Stormwater Management to
administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter by granting or denying development permits in
accordance with it provisions, and is herein referred to as the Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. No. 27-2007, passed 07-16-07)
§ 151.26 ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development begins within any special
flood hazard area established in §151.07. Application for a Development Permit shall be made on forms furnished by
Floodplain Administrator prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following:
plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question;
existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing.
Endorsement of local administrator is required before a state floodplain construction permit can be processed.
Specifically, the following information is required.
2008-S-1
Flood Damage Prevention 24A
1) APPLICATION STAGE
a) Proposed elevation in relation to Mean Sea Level (MSL) of the proposed lowest floor (including basement) of
all structures in Zone A and elevation of highest adjacent grade; or
b) Proposed elevation in relation to Mean Sea Level to which any non-residential structure will be floodproofed;
c) All appropriate certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect that the non-residential
flood-proofed structure will meet the flood-proofing criteria in §151.41 (2) and §151.43 (2);
d) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed
development.
2) CONSTRUCTION STAGE
Upon placement of the lowest floor, and before construction continues, or flood proofing by whatever
construction means, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator and to the State a
certification of the elevation of the lowest floor or flood-proofed elevation, as built, in relation to Mean Sea Level. In
AE, A1-30, AH and A zones where the Community has adopted a regulatory Base Flood Elevation, said certification
shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified
by same.
When flood proofing is utilized for a particular structure, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a certified professional engineer or architect. Any continued work undertaken prior to the submission of
the certification shall be at the permit holder’s risk. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the lowest floor and
flood proofing elevation survey data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit
holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the survey or
failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.
(Ord. No. 27-2007, passed 07-16-07)
§ 151.27 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR.
The Floodplain Administrator and/or staff is hereby appointed, authorized and directed to administer, implement
and enforce the provisions of this chapter. The Floodplain Administrator is further authorized to render interpretations
of this chapter, which are consistent with its spirit and purpose by granting or denying development permits in
accordance with its provisions.
The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to the following:
1) PERMIT REVIEW. Review all development permits to ensure that:
a) Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;
b) All other required state and federal permits have been obtained: Advise permittee that additional federal and
state permits may be required, and if specific federal or state permit requirements are known, require that copies of such
permits be provided and maintained on file with the development permit;
c) Flood damages will be reduced in the best possible manner;
d) The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of affected watercourses. For
purposes of this chapter, “adversely affects” means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot at any point.
2008-S-1
24B Elizabethtown - Land Usage
2) REVIEW AND USE OF ANY OTHER BASE FLOOD DATA. When base flood elevation data has not been
provided in accordance with §151.07, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any
base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency, or other source, in order to administer
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction. Any such information shall be submitted to the City Council of Elizabethtown,
Kentucky for adoption.
3) NOTIFICATION OF OTHER AGENCIES.
a) Notify adjacent communities, the Kentucky Division of Water, and any other federal and/or state agencies
with statutory or regulatory authority prior to any alteration or relocation of the watercourse, and
b) Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA); and
c) Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is
maintained.
4) DOCUMENTATION OF FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and
make available as needed the following:
a) Certification required by §151.41 (1) (lowest floor elevations) as shown on a completed and certified
Elevation Certificate. Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to Mean Sea Level) of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, in accordance with §151.26 (2);
b) Certification required by §151.41 (2) (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures) as shown on a
completed and certified floodproofing certificate. Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to Mean Sea Level)
to which the new or substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed, in accordance with §151.26 (2);
c) Certification required by §151.41 (3) (elevated structures),
d) Certification of elevation required by §151.44 (1) (subdivision standards),
e) Certification required by §151.41 (5) (floodway encroachments),
f) Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the
flood-carrying capacity is not diminished;
g) Review certified plans and specifications for compliance;
h) Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in §151.13.
5) MAP DETERMINATIONS. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the
special flood hazard areas, for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual
field conditions.
a) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for
example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Floodplain
Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given
a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in §151.47 (3)(b);
b) When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with §151.07, then
the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonable utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data
available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the Provision for Flood Hazard Reduction.
c) When flood-proofing is utilized for a particular structure, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain
certification from a registered professional engineer or architect, in accordance with §151.41 (2) a floodproofing
certificate;
d) All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the Floodplain
Administrator and shall be open for public inspections.
2008-S-1
Flood Damage Prevention 24C
6) RIGHT OF ENTRY.
a) Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, or whenever the
administrator has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any structure or upon any premises any condition or
ordinance violation which makes such building, structure or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the administrator
may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or perform any duty imposed
upon the administrator by this chapter.
b) If such structure or premises are occupied, he/she shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If
such building, structure, or premises are unoccupied, he shall first make reasonable effort to locate the owner or other
persons having charge or control of such request entry.
c) If entry is refused, the administrator shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry.
d) When the administrator shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law
to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or
premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the
administrator for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this chapter.
7) STOP WORK ORDERS.
a) Upon notice from the administrator, work on any building, structure or premises that is being done contrary to
the provisions of this chapter shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of
the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be
resumed.
8) REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
a) The administrator may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of this chapter, in case there
has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit
or approval was based.
b) The administrator may revoke a permit upon determination by the administrator that the construction,
erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation, or replacement of the structure for which the permit was
issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this chapter.
9) LIABILITY.
a) Any officer, employee, or member of the floodplain administrator’s staff, charged with the enforcement of
this chapter, acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself
personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may accrue to persons or
property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any officer,
employee, or member because of such act performed by him or her in the enforcement of any provision of this chapter
shall be defended by the department of law until the final termination of the proceedings.
10) EXPIRATION OF FLOODPLAIN CONSTRUCTION PERMIT.
a) A floodplain construction permit, and all provisions contained therein, shall expire if the holder of a
floodplain construction permit has not commenced construction within one hundred and eighty (180) calendar days
from the date of its issuance by the Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. No. 27-2007, passed 07-16-07)
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
§ 151.40 GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
In all Special Flood Hazard Areas the following provisions are required:
2008-S-1
24D Elizabethtown - Land Usage
1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse
or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy;
2) Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of
anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or fame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be
in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces.
3) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by materials and utility equipment
resistant to flood damage;
4) New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize
flood damage;
5) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be
designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions
of flooding; and if
6) Within Zones AH and AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide
flood waters around and away from proposed structures.
7) New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood
waters into the system;
8) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood
waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters;
9) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding; and
10) Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a structure, which is not in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, shall meet the requirements of “new construction” as contained in this chapter;
11) Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a structure, which is not in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if said non-conformity is not furthered, extended, or replaced.
(Ord. No. 27-2007, passed 07-16-07)
§ 151.41 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation data has been provided, as set forth in § 151.07 the
following provisions are required:
1) Residential Construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure (or
manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor including basement, mechanical equipment, and ductwork elevated no
lower than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a
structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance
with standards of §151.41 (3).
a) In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height exceeding the depth number of
specified in feet on the FIRM by at least one foot, or elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade if no
depth number is specified.
2008-S-1
Flood Damage Prevention 24E
b) In an A Zone, where no technical data has been produced by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, elevated one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, as determined by this community. The Floodplain
Administrator will determine the method by which base flood elevations are determined. Methods include but are not
limited to detailed hydrologic and hydraulic analyses, use of existing data available from other sources, use of historical
data, best supportable and reasonable judgment in the event no data can be produced. Title 401 KAR (Kentucky
Administrative Regulations) Chapter 4, Regulation 060 states as a part of the technical requirements for a State
Floodplain Permit: The applicant shall provide cross sections for determining floodway boundaries (and thereby Base
Flood Elevations) at any proposed construction site where FEMA maps are not available. All cross sections shall be
referenced to mean sea level and shall have vertical error tolerances of no more than + five-tenths (0.5) foot. Cross
sections elevations shall be taken at those points which represent significant breaks in slope and at points where
hydraulic characteristics of the base floodplain change. Each cross section shall extend across the entire base floodplain
and shall be in the number and at the locations specified by the cabinet. If necessary to ensure that significant flood
damage will not occur, the cabinet may require additional cross sections or specific site elevations which extend beyond
those needed for making routine regulatory floodway boundary calculations.
(Am. Ord. 32-2007, passed 09-14-07)
c) In all other Zones, the lowest floor shall be elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation.
Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a
registered professional engineer or surveyor, and verified by the community building inspection department to be
properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator.
Freeboard. Freeboard requirements add height above the base flood elevation to account for future flood fringe
development, uncertainties inherent with the methodologies, lack of data, debris that accompanies the base flood, and
flood levels higher than that of the base flood. A freeboard requirement means that new construction and substantial
improvements of existing structures will be protected to a level higher than the base flood elevation.
Freeboard is applied not just to the elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofing level, but also to the level of
protection provided to all components of the structure. All structure utilities, including ductwork, must be elevated or
protected to the freeboard level and all portions of the structure below the freeboard level must be constructed using
materials resistant to flood damage. If the lowest floor of garages or accessory structures is below the freeboard level,
the structure must meet the opening requirements of §151.41 (3).
Two references on these requirements are Protecting Building Utilities from Flood Damage, FEMA-348, and
Flood Resistant Materials Requirements, FIA-TB-2.
2) Non-Residential Construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial,
or nonresidential structure (including manufactured home used for non-residential purposes) shall be elevated to
conform with §151.41 (1) or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities:
(a) Be floodproofed below an elevation one (1) foot above the level of the base flood elevation so that the
structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
(b) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of
buoyancy;
(c) Have the lowest floor, including basement, mechanical equipment, and ductwork, elevated no lower than
one (1) foot above the level of the base flood elevation, or;
(d) A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are
satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in §151.26 (1) c.
(e) Manufactured homes shall meet the standards in §151.41 (4).
2008-S-1
24F Elizabethtown - Land Usage
(f) All new construction and substantial improvement with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor
(excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to
flooding, shall be constructed of flood resistant materials below an elevation one (1) foot above the base flood
elevation, and, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwater. Opening sizes (FEMA Technical Bulletin 1-93) for meeting this requirement must meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria:
(i) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or
(ii) Have a minimum of two openings with a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one
foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater.
3) Elevated Buildings. New construction or substantial improvements of elevated structures on columns, posts,
or pilings (e.g.) that include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the base flood
elevation shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters
to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls.
(1) Opening sizes for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or
architect or meet the following minimum criteria:
(a) Provide a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch
for every foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade foundation interior
grade (which must be equal to in elevation or higher than the exterior foundation grade); and
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices
provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions.
(2) Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage
door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or
entry to the living area (stairway or elevator); and
(3) The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms.
(4) The total floor area of all such enclosed areas shall not exceed 300 square feet.
(5) For enclosures greater than seven (7) feet in interior height, where elevation requirements exceed six (6)
feet above the highest adjacent grade, a copy of the legally recorded deed restriction prohibiting the conversion of the
area below the lowest floor to a use or dimension contrary to the structures’ originally approved design, shall be
presented as a condition of issue of the final Certificate of Occupancy.
4) Standards for Manufactured Homes and Recreational Vehicles.
(1) All new or substantially improved manufactured homes placed on sites located within A, A1-30, AO,
AH, and AE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) must meet all the requirements for new
construction, including elevation and anchoring. Locations include:
• On individual lots or parcels
• In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions,
• In new manufactured home parks or subdivisions or
• In substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or
• Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision,
• In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site upon which a manufactured home
has incurred “substantial damage” as the result of a flood,
2008-S-1
Flood Damage Prevention 24G
All Manufactured homes must be:
(i) Elevated on a permanent foundation, and
(ii) Have its lowest floor elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the level of the base flood elevation, and
(iii) Be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral
movement.
(2) Except manufactured homes that have incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood, all
manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision must be
elevated so that:
(i) The manufactured home is securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse and lateral movement, so that either the:
• The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the level of
the base flood elevation, or
• The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at
least an equivalent strength, of no less than 36 inches in height above the highest adjacent grade.
(3) All recreational vehicles placed on sites located within A, A1-30, AO, AH, and AE on the community’s
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) must either:
(i) Be on the site fewer than 180 consecutive days,
(ii) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or
(iii) Meet the permit requirements for new construction of this chapter including anchoring and elevation
requirements for “manufactured homes”.
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed and insured in accordance with the State of
Kentucky motor vehicle regulations, is on it wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect
type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
5) Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 151.07 are areas designated as
floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris,
potential projectiles and has erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply:
Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other developments
unless certification (with supporting technical data) by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that
encroachments shall not result in any increase in the base flood elevation levels during occurrence of base flood
discharge;
If §151.41 (5) is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements and other proposed new
development shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this subchapter.
6) Standards for Utilities.
a) All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate:
(i) Infiltration of flood waters into the systems, and
(ii) Discharge from the system into flood waters.
b) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from
them during flooding.
2008-S-1
24H Elizabethtown - Land Usage
7) Structures Elevated on Fill. A residential or non-residential structure may be constructed on permanent fill
in accordance with the following:
a) The lowest floor (including basement) of the structure or addition shall be no lower than one (1) foot above
the base flood elevation;
b) The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one foot deep before compacting and should extend at least
ten feet beyond the foundation of the structure before sloping below the base flood elevation, said slope being no
greater than a 2:1 ratio unless a stability analysis is provided by a registered professional engineer;
c) The top of the fill shall be no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. However, the ten-foot
minimum may be waived if a structural engineer certifies an alternative method to protect the structure from damage
due to erosion, scour, and other hydrodynamic forces;
d) The fill shall not adversely affect the flow or surface drainage from or onto neighboring properties;
e) All new structures built on fill must be constructed on properly designed and compacted fill (ASTM D-698 or
equivalent) that extends beyond the building walls before dropping below the base flood elevation and has appropriate
protection from erosion and scour. The design of the fill or the fill standard must be approved by a licensed professional
engineer; or
f) If the community adopts and enforces the soil testing and compaction requirements set fourth by the Standard,
Uniform, or National building Codes or the International Residential and Building Codes, it may qualify for additional
CRS credit.
8) Vegetative Buffer Strips (Riparian Zones). For all activities involving construction within 25 feet of the
channel, the following criteria shall be met:
a) A natural vegetative buffer strip shall be preserved within at least 25 feet of the mean high water level of the
channel.
b) Where it is impossible to protect this buffer strip during the construction of an appropriate use, a vegetated
buffer strip shall be established upon completion of construction.
c) The use of native riparian vegetation is preferred in the buffer strip. Access through this buffer strip shall be
provided for stream maintenance purposes.
(Ord. No. 27-2007, passed 07-16-07)
§ 151.42 STANDARDS FOR STREAMS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATION
(UNNUMBERED A ZONES) AND/OR FLOODWAYS.
Located with the special flood hazard areas established in §151.07, where streams exist but where no base flood
data has been provided or where base flood data has been provided without floodways, the following provisions apply:
1) No encroachments, including fill material or structures shall be located within special flood hazard areas,
unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water
surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification
should be supported by technical data that conforms to standards hydraulic engineering principles.
2) New construction or substantial improvements of structures shall be elevated or flood proofed to elevations
established in accordance with §151.07.
(Ord. No. 27-2007, passed 07-16-07)
§ 151.43 STANDARDS FOR SHALLOW FLOODING ZONES.
Located within the special flood hazard areas established in § 151.07, are areas designated as shallow flooding
areas. These areas have flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet (1-3’), where a clearly
defined channel does not exist and the water path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; therefore, the
following provisions apply:
2008-S-1
Flood Damage Prevention 24I
1) All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall:
a) Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above either the base flood elevation or in
Zone AO the flood depth specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map above the highest adjacent grade. In Zone AO, if
no flood depth is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated no less than two (2) feet above the
highest adjacent grade.
2) All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures shall:
a) Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above either the base flood elevation or in
Zone AO the flood depth specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, above the highest adjacent grade. In Zone AO, if
no flood depth is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated no less than two (2) feet above the
highest adjacent grade.
b) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be completely floodproofed either to the base flood
elevation or above or, in Zone AO, to or above the specified flood depth plus a minimum of one foot so that any space
below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
Certification is required as stated in §151.41 (2).
(Ord. No. 27-2007, passed 07-16-07)
§ 151.44 STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.
1) All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood
and be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
2) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
3) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and
4) In areas where base flood elevation and floodway data is not available (Zone A or unmapped streams), base
flood elevation and floodway data for subdivision proposals and other proposed development (including manufactured
home parks and subdivisions) greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is the lesser, shall be provided.
5) All subdivision plans will include the elevation of proposed structure(s) and lowest adjacent grad. If the site is
filled above the base flood elevation, the lowest floor and lowest adjacent grade elevations shall be certified by a
registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the Floodplain Administrator.
6) All new subdivision proposals shall include streets for emergency access that will be subject to no more than
six inches of flood waters during the 1% annual chance flood (100-year flood).
(Ord. No. 27-2007, passed 07-16-07)
§151.45 STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY STRUCTURES IN ALL ZONES BEGINNING WITH THE
LETTER “A”.
For all accessory structures in special flood hazard areas designated “A” the following provisions shall apply:
1) Structure must be non-habitable;
2) Must be anchored to resist floatation forces;
3) Will require flood openings/vents no more than one foot above grade, total openings are to be one square inch
per one square foot of floor area, at least two openings required on opposite walls;
2008-S-1
24J Elizabethtown - Land Usage
4) Built of flood resistant materials below a level one (1) foot above the base flood elevation;
5) Must elevate utilities above the base flood elevation;
6) Can only be used for storage or parking;
7) Cannot be modified for a different use after permitting.
(Ord. No. 27-2007, passed 07-16-07)
§151.46 CRITICAL FACILITIES.
Critical facilities shall be constructed on properly compacted fill and have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated at least one foot above the elevation of the 500-year flood. A critical facility shall have at least one access road
connected to land outside the 500-year floodplain that is capable of supporting a 12,500 pound vehicle. The top of the
road must be no lower than six inches (6”) below the elevation of the 500-year floodplain.
(Ord. No. 27-2007, passed 07-16-07; Am. Ord. No. 32-2008. passed 09-17-07)
§ 151.47 APPEALS AND VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
1) Nature of Variances: The variance criteria set forth in this section of the chapter are based on the general
principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be
granted for a parcel of property which physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this
chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics
must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land
itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners.
It is the duty of the City Council of Elizabethtown, Kentucky to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is
so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level is so serious that variances
from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare. The long-term goal of
preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance
guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance
can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a
variance are more appropriate.
2) Designation of variance and appeal board:
a) The City Council of Elizabethtown, Kentucky shall establish an Appeal Board consisting of the City
Engineer, Director of Planning & Development, the Executive Assistant to the Mayor and one designated member of
the City Council.
3) Duties of variance and appeals board:
a) The Appeals Board shall hear and decide requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter
and appeals of decisions or determinations made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration
of this chapter.
b) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Appeals Board or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to
the Hardin Circuit Court, as provided in Kentucky Revised Statutes.
(Am. Ord. No. 32-2007. passed – 09-17-07)
2008-S-1
Flood Damage Prevention 24K
4) Appeals/Variance Procedures: In passing upon such applications, the Appeal Board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and the:
a) Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
b) Danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
c) Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on
the existing individual owner and future owners of the property;
d) Importance to the community of the services provided by the proposed facility;
e) Necessity that the facility be located on a waterfront, in the case of functionally dependent facility;
f) Availability of alternative locations which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
g) Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
h) Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that
area;
i) Safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
j) Expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters and the
effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and,
k) Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and
repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, water systems, streets, and bridges.
5) Conditions for Variances: Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this chapter,
the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes
of this chapter.
a) Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels
during the base flood discharge would result.
b) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the “minimum necessary” to
afford relief considering the flood hazard. “Minimum necessary” means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation
from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the
City Council of Elizabethtown, Kentucky need to grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to
whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the City Council of Elizabethtown,
Kentucky believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance.
c) Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the “minimum necessary” to
afford relief considering the flood hazard. In the instance of an historical structure, a determination shall be made that
the variance is the minimum necessary to afford relief and not destroy the historic character and design of the structure.
d) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(i) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(ii) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the
applicant (as defined in this chapter); and
(iii) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood height,
additional threats to public safety, cause extraordinary public expense, create nuisance (as defined in the definition
section under “Public safety and nuisance”), cause fraud or victimization of the public (as defined in the definition
section) or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
e) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference
between the base flood elevation and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and stating that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
f) The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to
the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) upon request.
g) Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new
development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of Sections 6.3 A
through 6.3 E are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood
damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public
nuisance.
2008-S-1
24L Elizabethtown - Land Usage
6) Variance Notification: Any application to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the
signature of a community official that:
a) The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood elevation will result in increased
premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage, and;
b) Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. A copy of the notice
shall be recorded by the Floodplain Administrator in the Office of the County Clerk of Hardin County and shall be
recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.
c) The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all variances actions, including justification for
their issuance, and report such variances issued in the community’s biennial report submission to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
7) Historic Structures: Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of “historic structures” (see
definition) upon determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure.
8) No Impact Certification within the Floodway: Variances shall be issued within any mapped or designated
floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
(Ord. No. 27-2007, passed 07-16-07)
§ 151.48 SEVERABILITY.
This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter
be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a
whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of the chapter is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any party thereof
other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
(Ord. No. 27-2007, passed 07-16-07)
2008-S-1
CHAPTER 152: MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
Section
152.01 Standards for placement of mobile homes on lot
152.02 Compliance; inspection required
152.03 Compliance with standards as prerequisite to supplying of utilities
152.04 Failure to comply deemed nuisance; procedure for abatement
§ 152.01 STANDARDS FOR PLACEMENT OF MOBILE HOMES ON LOT.
(A) Piers and footings. All mobile homes shall be placed or located on piers and footings. All piers and footings
shall be spaced not more than ten feet apart, with end piers no further than five feet from the ends of the mobile home
unit. The minimum requirement for footers shall be 16 inches square, with a depth of at least four inches of solid
concrete. Piers shall not exceed 40 inches in average height, and shall be constructed of open- or closed-cell concrete
blocks, and shall measure at least eight inches in depth, eight inches in width and 16 inches in length. The open cells
shall be vertically placed upon the footers. All single-stacked piers shall be installed with the 16-inch dimension
perpendicular to the main frame of the mobile home. The piers shall be covered with a two-inch by 18-inch by 16-inch
wood or concrete cap. All corner piers shall be double-blocked, with blocks interlocked and capped with a solid
concrete block or the equivalent measuring four inches in depth, 16 inches in width and 16 inches in length.
(B) Ties. All mobile homes shall be secured by at least six frame ties and at least three over-the-top ties, and shall
be secured to the anchors as set out below. Double-wide mobile home units will be subject to the above requirements,
with frame ties placed along the outer side walls of each unit. All ties shall consist of cable or metal strapping or other
methods approved by the Building Inspector, and shall be fastened to ground anchors and drawn tight with turnbuckles
or other adjustable tension devices with the ground anchor. All ties shall be evenly spaced as practicable along the entire
length of the mobile home, with not more than five feet open-end spacing at each end. All add-on or expandable
sections of mobile homes shall have at least two vertical ties at each exposed end.
(C) Anchors. All ground anchors, including the means for attaching ties, shall be located to effectively match the
anchoring system; and all anchors shall be installed to a depth of not less than three feet. The complete tie-down
components used, including the anchor system, shall be able to withstand at least 4,800 pounds pull, or greater, without
failure.
('73 Code, § 13-21) (Ord., passed 3-21-77) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 152.02 COMPLIANCE; INSPECTION REQUIRED.
The City Building Inspector or other person designated by the City Council of the city shall inspect all mobile
homes to determine if there is compliance with the above standards.
('73 Code, § 13-22) (Ord., passed 3-21-77)
25
26 Elizabethtown - Land Usage
§ 152.03 COMPLIANCE WITH STANDARDS AS PREREQUISITE TO SUPPLYING OF UTILITIES.
City utilities shall not be supplied to any mobile home occupant or owner until the building official has determined
that the minimum requirements set out herein have been met.
('73 Code, § 13-23) (Ord. passed 3-21-77)
Cross-reference:
Notice of installation of utility company, § 50.01
§ 152.04 FAILURE TO COMPLY DEEMED NUISANCE; PROCEDURE FOR ABATEMENT.
(A) It shall be deemed a nuisance for any owner or occupant of any mobile home in the city to use any mobile
home which is in violation of the standards set out in § 152.01. The City Building Inspector or other official designated
by the City Council shall inspect any and all mobile homes in the city to determine if a nuisance has occurred. If, in
his/her opinion, the provisions of § 152.01 are not complied with, the owner and/or occupant of the mobile home shall
be given a notice that a hearing will be held in seven days in the state district court to determine whether or not a
nuisance exists and to show cause why utilities should not be terminated or shut off to the particular mobile home.
(B) Upon a finding by the court that a nuisance exists in violation of this section, the court may order the owner
and/or occupant to abate the nuisance and/or he/she may order the utilities to the premises terminated or shut off.
('73 Code, § 13-24) (Ord., passed 3-21-77) Penalty, see § 10.99
1995 S-1 Repl.
CHAPTER 153: PLANNING
Section
153.01 Comprehensive plan adopted by reference
153.02 Planning Commission
§ 153.01 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
(A) The comprehensive plan for the city, as officially adopted by the Elizabethtown Planning Commission on
August 9, 1988, and updated on November 23, 1993, and officially titled “Elizabethtown, Kentucky, Comprehensive
Plan 2010,” is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated into this code of ordinances as if fully set forth herein.
The plan was adopted in conformance with the requirements of KRS Chapter 100. In conformance with the
requirements of KRS 100.193, the City Council adopted the statement of goals and objectives, included in the
comprehensive plan, on January 18, 1988, and by ordinance on August 15, 1988.
(B) The comprehensive plan contains the following:
(1) Introduction;
(2) Issue and analysis;
(3) Goals and objectives;
(4) Land use plan;
(5) Community facilities plan;
(6) Transportation plan;
(7) Economic plan;
(8) Land use map; and
(9) Action plan.
(C) Copies of the plan are available in the office of the Department of Planning and Development.
('73 Code, § 17½-11) (Ord. 30-1988, passed 8-15-88)
§ 153.02 PLANNING COMMISSION.
There is hereby re-established and reconfirmed the Planning Commission pursuant to KRS 100.133, et seq. The
Planning Commission shall consist of five voting members. The term of office for members
27
1995 S-1
28 Elizabethtown - Land Usage
of the Planning Commission shall be four years, but the term of office of members first appointed shall be staggered so
that a proportionate number shall serve one, two, three and four years respectively, and later appointments or reappointments
shall continue the staggered pattern. An ex officio member of the Planning Commission shall be a
member of the City Council whose term in office shall be the same as his/her official tenure as a member of the City
Council. Any vacancies created herein shall be filled pursuant to KRS Chapter 100. The jurisdiction of the Planning
Commission shall be the city limits and all extraterritorial jurisdiction it has under the law.
('73 Code, § 2-9) (Ord., passed 7-6-70; Am. Ord., passed 6-20-83)
CHAPTER 154: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
Section
154.01 Adoption by reference
154.99 Penalty
§ 154.01 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
(A) The Property Maintenance Code of the city, as attached to Ord.10, passed 5-20-96, as promulgated by the
National Building Officials Code Administrators (BOCA), of 1993, except for the modifications of same set out in
Exhibit “A” attached to Ord. 10, passed 5-20-96, namely those sections that provide for an Appeals Board, penalties,
windows, bedroom accessibility, egress lighting and electrical receptacles; the remainder of this code being set out in
Exhibit “A” is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated into this code of ordinances as if fully set forth herein.
(B) Copies of said Property Maintenance Code are available for public inspection during normal hours at the
office of the City Clerk.
(Ord. 10, passed 5-20-96) (Ord. 04-2017, passed 05-19-17)
§ 154.99 PENALTY
Where appropriate, and not in conflict with any other penalty section, the enforcing agency, department or
individual may choose to seek enforcement through the Code Enforcement Board enacted on the 30th day of April,
2003, by Ordinance No. 09-2003.
(Ord. 19-2003, passed 06-23-2003)
29
2018-S-1
30 Elizabethtown - Land Usage
CHAPTER 155: ZONING CODE
Section
155.01 Zoning ordinance adopted by reference
155.02 Board of Adjustment
§ 155.01 ZONING ORDINANCE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
(A) From and after the passage, approval and publication of this ordinance, it appearing that the existing zoning
ordinance for the city was originally passed on July 2, 1973, and it appearing that the necessary prerequisites for
passage of this ordinance have been met according to law, including public hearings, research and due consideration,
that the zoning ordinance attached to an ordinance, passed June 16, 2008, designated Exhibit A and made a part hereof
as if printed herein, word for word, is enacted as the official zoning ordinance for the city and all ordinances and
amendments thereto existing or in conflict herewith are repealed.
(Am. Ord. 06-2008, passed 06-16-08)
(B) A copy of the zoning ordinance, as amended, is on file in the office of the City Clerk.
('73 Code, § 17½-1)
§ 155.02 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
There is created the Board of Adjustment for the city and any extraterritorial jurisdiction, pursuant to KRS
100.217, consisting of five members. Their terms in office shall be four years each, but the term of office for members
first appointed shall be staggered so that a proportionate number serve one, two, three and four years, respectively.
Vacancies on the Board of Adjustment shall be filled pursuant to KRS 100.217.
('73 Code, § 2-10) (Ord., passed 7-6-70; Am. Ord., passed 11-17-75; Am. Ord., passed 4-15-85)
31
2008-S-2
32 Elizabethtown - Land Usage
CHAPTER 156: CELLULAR TOWER APPLICATION FEES
Section
156.01 Purpose
156.02 Fees & Review
§ 156.01 PURPOSE
The City of Elizabethtown through its Planning Commission has adopted a Comprehensive Plan, Zoning
Ordinance and Subdivision Regulations.
The above-mentioned regulations are designed to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of
Elizabethtown.
The Kentucky General Assembly in the 2002 Legislative Session, passed House Bill 270 concerning cellular
antenna tower regulations that states that a planning commission shall not: Charge an application fee that exceeds an
amount that is reasonably related to expenses associated with processing an application to construct a cellular
antenna tower, and to issue any necessary permits including any required building permit, up to a maximum of $2,500.
Application fee amounts shall not be raised after June 15, 2002.
The City of Elizabethtown Planning Commission and Department of Planning & Development have the
responsibility of regulating the location, development and construction of cellular antenna towers and the
accompanying ground facilities. (Ord. 10-2002, passed 06-10-2002)
§156.02 FEES & REVIEWS
The application fees for this review and approval of cellular antenna tower facilities shall be established at
$2,500.00 and may be include, but not limited to, the following:
(1) Technical review of proposed cellular antenna tower location and associated engineering studies and analysis.
(2) Compliance with Elizabethtown regulations which may include a public hearing to evaluate the request and seek
public participation to determine the impacts on the proposed neighborhood and Elizabethtown.
(3) A Development Plan must be completed by the applicant, reviewed by the appropriate City staff and granted
approval prior to the construction activities.
(4) Submittal of a landscape plan consisting of specified plant materials shall be reviewed by the appropriate City staff
and granted approval. The plan shall provide for reduced visibility of the tower and ground facilities from
adjoining properties.
(5) Payment of building inspection fees for review of the construction plans and performance of on site inspections
with the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy reflective of the facility being in compliance with the Kentucky
Building Code.
(6) Payment of electrical inspection fees to assure compliance with the 2002 National Electrical Code adopted by the
Commonwealth of Kentucky.
(7) General administration of the management of a financial security to cover the cost of maintaining the facility and
the removal of the tower and facility if it is abandoned, damaged or destroyed.
With the above-mentioned components of the fees charged by the City of Elizabethtown, it is understood that
any unused portions of the fee charged will be refunded to the applicant. (Ord. 10-2002, passed 06-10-2002)
33
2002-S-1
34 Elizabethtown - Land Usage
CHAPTER 157: EROSION PREVENTION & SEDIMENT CONTROL
Section
157.01 Introduction/Purpose
157.02 Definitions
157.03 Permits
157.04 Review and Issuance
157.05 Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control Plan
157.06 Design Requirements
157.07 Inspection
157.08 Enforcement
157.09 Severability
157.10 Effective Date
§ 157.01 Introduction/Purpose.
The purpose of this Ordinance is to safeguard persons, protect property, and prevent damage to the
environment in the City of Elizabethtown. This Ordinance will also promote the public welfare by guiding, regulating,
and controlling the design, construction, use and maintenance of any development or other activity that disturbs the soil
or results in the movement of earth within the City of Elizabethtown.
During the construction process, soil is highly vulnerable to erosion by wind and water. Eroded soil endangers
water resources by reducing water quality and causing the siltation of aquatic habitat for fish and other desirable
species. Left unchecked, eroded soil migrates through the entire stormwater system and necessitates the early
maintenance and/or repair of inlet boxes, storm sewers, ditches, creeks, and other stormwater features. Streets with
sediment deposits are slick and hazardous to the motoring public. Clearing and grading during construction cause the
loss of native vegetation necessary for terrestrial and aquatic habitat.
Through the Clean Water Act (CWA), the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the
Kentucky Division of Water (KYDOW) established Phase II regulations and mandated Erosion Protection and
Sediment Control (EPSC) procedures for construction within the Commonwealth of Kentucky.
(Ord. No. 01-2007, passed 03-05-07)
§ 157.02 Definitions.
Best Management Practice (BMP) – A measure that is implemented to protect water quality and reduce the
potential for pollution associated with storm water runoff.
Blue Line Streams – Streams that are represented on the United States Department of the Interior Geological
Survey 1:24,000 quadrangle maps.
Channel – A natural or constructed/manmade watercourse with definite bed and banks to confine and conduct
continuously or periodically flowing water. Channel flow is that water which is flowing within the limits of the defined
channel.
City – City of Elizabethtown, Kentucky.
Clean Water Act (CWA) – Federal Regulation that prohibits the discharge of pollutants to Waters of the
United States unless said discharge is in accordance with an NPDES permit.
Clearing – Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover to expose erodible soil.
35
2008-S-1
36 Elizabethtown - Land Usage
Critical Area – A site difficult to stabilize due to exposed subsoil, steep slope, extent of exposure, or other
conditions.
Detention – The temporary delay of storm runoff prior to its discharge into receiving waters.
Developer – Any individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, or trust involved in commencing
proceedings to effect development of land.
Drainage Basin – A part of the surface of the earth that is occupied by and provides surface water runoff,
consisting of a surface stream or a body of impounded surface water together with all tributary surface streams,
bodies of impounded surface water, and contributing land area.
Drainage Way – Any channel that conveys surface runoff throughout the site.
Drainage/Dry Well – A bored, drilled, driven, dug, or naturally occurring shaft or hole with a depth
greater than the largest surface dimension; used to drain surface water into a subsurface formation.
Ephemeral Stream – A stream or part of a stream that flows only in direct response to rain, other forms of
precipitation, and snowmelt. Its channel is above the water table at all times.
Erosion – The wearing away of land surface by the action of wind, water, gravity, ice, or any combination
of those forces.
EPSC – Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control
EPSC Contractor – A person or other entity responsible for the installation, inspection, record-keeping,
and maintenance of erosion and sediment control BMP’s.
EPSC Plan – A set of plans indicating the specific measures and sequencing to be used to control
sediment and erosion on a development site during and after construction.
Excavation – Any portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed;
the depth below original ground surface to remaining surface.
Existing Grade – The slope or elevation of existing ground surface prior to cutting or filling.
Fill – Portion of land surface or area to which soil, rock, or other materials have been or will be added;
height above original ground surface after the material has been or will be added.
Finished Grade – The final slope or elevation of the ground surface after cutting or filling.
Flood Plain – The relatively flat or lowland area adjoining a watercourse or a body of water which has
been or may be covered temporarily by floodwater. Flood plains are often found along rivers, streams, creeks,
ditches, and stormwater piping systems and in proximity to lakes, ponds, and sinkholes.
Grading – Any stripping, cutting, filling or stockpiling of earth or land, including the land in its cut or
filled condition, to create new grades.
Impervious Surface – A term applied to any ground or structural surface that water cannot penetrate or
through which water penetrates with great difficulty.
2008-S-1
Erosion Prevention & Sediment Control 37
KYDOW General Permit (KGP) – An agreement between the KYDOW, the City, and the Permittee
which specifies conservation practices that shall be implemented in conjunction with the construction activities
specified in the terms and conditions of the general permit.
Land Disturbance – The purposeful act of clearing, grubbing, excavating or grading; disrupting ground
surface by or for construction activities, including construction access/roads, staging, and storage sites producing
significant areas of exposed soil and soils piles.
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) – EPA’s program to control the discharge
of pollutants to waters of the United States. NPDES is a part of the Federal CWA, which requires point and nonpoint
source dischargers to obtain permits. These permits are referred to as NPDES permits nationally and KPDES
permits within Kentucky.
Notice of Intent (NOI) – A formal notice to the EPA or the KYDOW that a construction project seeking
coverage under a General Permit is about to begin.
Notice of Termination (NOT) – A formal notice to the KYDOW that construction project is complete
and seeking release for the EPSC and the State General Permit.
Perimeter Control – A barrier that prevents sediment from leaving a site by filtering sediment-laden
runoff or diverting it to a sediment trap or basin.
Permit Phasing – Clearing a parcel of land sequentially in distinct phases, with the stabilization of each
phase completed before the clearing of the next.
Permittee – Shall mean the “Person Responsible for the Land Disturbing Activity”.
Plot Plan – A limited plan depicting proposed improvements and other physical features of the site.
Public Storm Drain – Drainage system that is maintained by the City.
Sediment – Solid materials, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has
been moved from its site of origin by air, water, or gravity as a product of erosion.
Sediment Control – Measures that prevent eroded sediment from leaving a site.
Site – A parcel or contiguous parcels of land where grading work is performed that is subject to erosion of
sediments as a result of cutting, filling, grading, or other disturbance of the soil.
sMS4 – Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System as established in the Kentucky Pollution
Discharge Elimination System (KPDES).
Stabilization – The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from eroding.
Start of Construction – The first land-disturbing activity associated with a development, including land
preparation such as clearing, grading, and filling; stockpiling topsoil; installation of streets and sidewalks; utilities
installation; excavation for basements, footings, piers, or foundations; erection of temporary forms; and installation
of accessory buildings such as garages.
Storm Water Management Plan (SWMP) – A plan based on hydrologic and hydraulic calculations that
determines flood stage and required improvements to minimize impact from development. The SWMP shall be
prepared by or under the direction of a licensed professional engineer.
2008-S-1
38 Elizabethtown - Land Usage
Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) – A plan required by storm water regulations or
permits that includes site map(s), an identification of construction/contractor activities that could cause pollutants
in the storm water, and a description of measures or practices to control these pollutants. This is synonymous with
the term “BMP Plan” used in the KYDOW General Permit. The SWPPP shall be prepared by or under the
direction of a licensed professional engineer.
Temporary Protection – Short-term stabilization of erosive or sediment producing areas.
Vegetative Protection – Stabilization of erosive or sediment producing areas by covering the soil with any
of the following materials: permanent seeding for long-term vegetative cover, short-term seeding for temporary
vegetative cover, sodding, producing areas covered with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass, tree planting, or
other planting.
Watercourse – Any body of water, including, but not limited to lakes, ponds, rivers, streams, and other
bodies of water as delineated by the City, State, or Federal government.
Waterway – A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to the public storm drain.
(Ord. No. 01-2007, passed 03-05-07)
§ 157.03 Permits.
A. Permits through the City are required for site construction projects and/or land disturbances. Depending on
the amount of disturbed area, various permits are necessary. Permit levels and parameters are as follows:
1) Level 1: Site construction less than one disturbed acre, increased impervious area less than or equal
to 6,000 square feet, and slopes less than 6% requires filing for a permit. This permit shall be
accompanied by a Plot Plan with Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control measures indicated. All
permits for commercial, industrial, and multi-family residential sites shall include a grading plan. All
permits in proximity to a major stormwater feature, such as a creek or stormwater culvert, shall
include a grading plan showing the proposed minimum finished floor (opening) relative to the
anticipated high water elevation.
2) Level 2: Site construction less than one disturbed acre and increased impervious area greater than
6,000 square feet or with slopes greater than or equal to 6% requires filing for a permit. The permit
shall be accompanied by a Grading Plan and an Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control Plan.
3) Level 3: Site construction of one disturbed acre or greater, including a linear disturbance from utility
construction, requires filing for a permit accompanied by a Grading Plan, an Erosion Prevention and
Sediment Control Plan, a SWPPP Plan, and a Copy of the Kentucky Division of Water Notice of
Intent (NOI) for the site.
4) Level 4: Utility Companies shall apply for a general permit from the City for land disturbance
operations. This permit must be renewed every 5 years. A NOI shall be obtained from the KYDOW
for disturbance of one acre or greater.
B. Notice to the City is required that the contractor has coordinated with the KYDOW and the US Army
Corps of Engineers to determine whether permits are required from those agencies before construction
begins.
C. No permit through the City is required for the following activities:
1) Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the protection of life, property, or natural
resources.
2008-S-1
Erosion Prevention & Sediment Control 39
2) Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted as a permitted main or accessory use.
However, permitting through regional, state, and federal agencies may be required.
D. Each application shall bear the name, address, and telephone information for the following parties: the
owner, the developer of the site, the general contractor for the site, the EPSC contractor, and any
engineering consultant retained for work on the site.
E. Each application shall include a statement that any land clearing, construction, or development involving
the movement of earth shall be in accordance with the EPSC Plan and the EPSC contractor shall be
responsible for implementing and maintaining all aspects of the plan.
F. The application shall be accompanied by the permit fee as established by this ordinance: Level 1 - $25,
Level 2 - $50, Level 3 - $100, and Level 4 – in accordance with the existing franchise agreement.
(Ord. No. 01-2007, passed 03-05-07)
§ 157.04 Review and Issuance.
A. The City will review each permit application to determine its conformance with the provisions of this
ordinance. Acceptance indicates that minimum requirements or intent are met and does not imply a
guarantee of performance. Based on the review of the permit application, the City will:
1) Accept the permit application
2) Accept the permit application subject to such reasonable conditions as may be necessary to meet the
requirements or intent of the objectives of this ordinance, and issue the permit subject to these
conditions; or
3) Deny the permit application, indicating the reason(s) and procedure for submitting a revised
application and/or submission.
B. The City reserves the right to inspect the site prior to any construction activity in furtherance of the review
process.
C. The City acceptance of the permit is for general compliance with the KPDES sMS4 program. The designer
is ultimately responsible for the specific details of design of the EPSC plan. The property owner remains
responsible for the implementation, maintenance, and compliance recordkeeping for the EPSC plan.
(Ord. No. 01-2007, passed 03-05-07)
§ 157.05 Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control Plan.
A. The EPSC Plan shall include the following:
1) A natural resources map identifying soil types, forest cover, topography, and other natural features of
concern. This map should be to scale equivalent to balance of submittal.
2) A schedule of events for the construction of the development site, including stripping and clearing,
rough grading, construction of utilities, infrastructure, final grading and landscaping. Sequencing
shall identify the expected date on which clearing will begin, the estimated duration of exposure of
cleared areas, areas of clearing, installation of temporary EPSC measures, and establishment of
permanent vegetation.
3) All EPSC measures necessary shall be shown on the plan by location and referred to by a legend for
all phases of construction. Depending upon the complexity of the project, the drafting of interim
plans may be required at the close of each season. Multiple EPSC plan sheets may be necessary to
best convey requirements for each phase.
2008-S-1
40 Elizabethtown - Land Usage
4) Seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seedbed preparation, expected seeding dates,
type and rate of lime and fertilizer application, and type and quantity of mulching for both temporary
and permanent vegetative control measures.
5) Provisions for maintenance of control facilities, including easements and estimates of the cost of
maintenance.
B. Modification to the plan shall be processed and accepted or denied in the same manner as Section IV of
this ordinance and authorized by the City by written authorization to the permittee, and shall include:
1) Major amendments of the EPSC plan shall be submitted to the City for acceptance.
2) Field modifications of a minor nature shall require authorization by the City and shall be noted and
dated on the EPSC record drawings. Where minor modifications prove to be ineffective, the EPSC
contractor shall return to the intent of the original plan within seven (7) days of notification by the
inspector.
(Ord. No. 01-2007, passed 03-05-07)
§ 157.06 Design Requirements.
A. The plan for any permitted land disturbance operation shall be designed using sound engineering practice
and shall met the minimum criteria set forth in the most recent version of the City’s Subdivision
Regulations, Storm Water Manual, and other City stormwater design guidelines. The plan, when
implemented, shall be sufficient to control erosion and prevent sediment from leaving the site. Cut and fill
slopes shall be no greater than 3:1, except as approved by the City to meet other community or
environmental objectives.
B. Clearing and grading of natural resources, such as forests and wetlands, and other natural features of
concern shall not be permitted, except when in compliance with all section this ordinance as well as any
regional, state and federal regulation. Clearing techniques that retain natural vegetation, drainage patterns,
and buffers along streams as described by the City Storm Water Manual, shall be used where possible.
C. Clearing, except that necessary to establish sediment control devices, shall not begin until all sediment
control devices have been installed and have been stabilized.
D. Phasing shall be required on all sites disturbing greater than 50 acres, with the size of each phase to be
established at plan review and approved by the City.
E. Erosion Prevention BMP requirements:
1) Soil stabilization shall be completed within fourteen days of final grade work. If an area is left
inactive for twenty-one days or more the area shall have temporary stabilization.
2) If seeding or other vegetative erosion prevention methods are used, vegetation shall become
established within three weeks. If a satisfactory stand of vegetation is not established, the site shall be
reseeded or an approved non-vegetative employed.
3) Special techniques such as rip rap, turf reinforcement, armoring, and other stabilization methods that
meet the design criteria outlined in the City Storm Water Manual shall be used on steep slopes or in
drainage ways to ensure stabilization.
4) Soil stockpiles must be stabilized or covered and have sediment control measures in place to control
sediment movement. Stock-piles left for 21 days or more shall have temporary stabilization or
vegetation established.
5) When no construction is planned during the winter months, the entire site shall be stabilized at the
close of the construction season. A heavy mulch layer or other approved stabilization method that
does not rely on seed germination, shall be placed to control sediment and prevent erosion.
2008-S-1
Erosion Prevention & Sediment Control 41
6) Minimize clearing and grading to the smallest possible area. Preserve existing vegetation and trees to
the maximum extent possible.
7) Areas to be left undisturbed by the proposed construction shall be clearly noted and delineated on the
plans and protected with temporary fencing, or other approved barrier, on the site.
8) Vegetative buffer strips in combination with other perimeter controls shall be used for the protection
of adjacent properties, watercourses, and rights of way.
9) Measures shall be implemented to control sedimentation deposits into drainage structures and
features, receiving water bodies, streets, streets right-of-ways, adjacent properties, and natural karst
features.
10) In no case shall the placement of temporary or final seeding exceed 120 days after the original
disturbance.
F. Sediment Control BMP Requirements:
1) Dust control techniques shall be employed to prevent the blowing of dust by air movements during
land disturbance, demolition, and other construction activities.
2) Diversion of upland runoff past disturbed slopes shall be implemented when effective.
3) Settling basins, sediment traps, tanks and/or perimeter controls shall be implemented as required to
control sediment, consistent with the City Storm Water Manual.
4) Effective debris and trash management shall be required.
G. Waterway, watercourse, ephemeral stream, and public storm, and public storm drain protection
requirements shall include the following:
1) When a watercourse will be crossed regularly during construction, install a temporary stream crossing
as approved by the Kentucky Division of Water and/or the City.
2) Stabilization of the watercourse channel before, during, and after any in-channel work.
3) Design of all on-site storm water conveyance channels in accordance with criteria outlines in the City
Storm Water Manual, the Subdivision Regulations, other City stormwater design guidelines, and
sound engineering practice.
4) Stabilization adequate to prevent erosion at the inlets and outlets of all pipes and paved channels.
H. Construction site access requirements designed to minimize the deposit of sediment or other materials on
public streets and rights-of-way shall include:
1) Continuous access via a stabilized rock entrance, constructed in accordance with the City Storm
Water Manual.
2) A tire wash rack shall be required by the City as necessitated by site traffic.
(Ord. No. 01-2007, passed 03-05-07)
§ 157.07 Inspection.
A. Plans accepted by the City for site earthwork, including grading, stripping, excavating, and filling, shall be
maintained at the construction site throughout the duration of the work. After EPSC measures have been
installed, the contractor shall contact the City to request a Preconstruction Inspection.
B. Upon completion of the Preconstruction Inspection and approval of EPSC measures, the permit will be
issued and site construction may commence.
C. The City shall make inspections as deemed necessary to ensure the EPSC measures are being properly
implemented and maintained during construction. If minimum requirements for the EPSC are not met, the
permittee shall be notified and enforcement actions shall be taken.
2008-S-1
42 Elizabethtown - Land Usage
D. The permitee or his/her agent shall make regular inspections of all control measures to determine the
overall effectiveness of the EPSC plan and the need for additional control measures. The frequency of
these inspections shall be once every seven (7) calendar days and before and after storm events of a halfinch
(1/2”) of precipitation or more. All inspections shall be documented in written form and kept on the
construction site by the EPSC contractor. Reports should be available for City, State, or Federal
inspections to review upon request during a site inspections.
E. The city or designated agent shall, by execution of the permit, be granted the right to enter the propery of
the applicant as deemed necessary to make regular inspections and to assure the validity of the reports filed
under sub-section D above.
(Ord. No. 01-2007, passed 03-05-07)
§ Section 157.08 Enforcement.
A. Stop-Work Order; Revocation of Permit
In the event that any person holding a site development permit pursuant to this ordinance violates the terms
of the permit or implements site development in such a manner as to materially adversely affect the health,
welfare, or safety of the public near the development site or vicinity so as to be materially detrimental to
the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the vicinity, the City may suspend or revoke
the site development permit.
B. Violation and Penalties.
No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair, or maintain any grading, excavation, or fill, or cause the
same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any terms of this ordinance. Each day of violation of this
ordinance may be considered a separate occurrence. Any person, partnership or corporation violating this
ordinance may be cited for a civil offense pursuant to the Code Enforcement Board Ordinance and Fine
Schedule. The civil fine shall be paid directly to the City of Elizabethtown. If the fine is not paid within
thirty (30) days from the date of notification, then the City may recover said fine in a civil action in a court
of proper jurisdiction.
The citing officer may at his or her discretion cite the offender to appear before the Code Enforcement
Board. The City may also obtain injunctions or abatement orders to insure compliance with this ordinance.
Nothing in this section shall negate the ability of the City to pursue applicable civil or criminal penalties as
prescribed by law.
It shall also constitute a violation of this Ordinance to damage or vandalize site erosion prevention and
sediment control measurers that are in place. In addition to any other penalty authorized by this section,
any person, partnership, or corporation convicted of violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall
be required to bear the expense of such restoration.
(Ord. No. 01-2007, passed 03-05-07)
§ Section 157.09 Severability.
If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this Ordinance or its application to any person or factual
context shall be held invalid, that invalidity shall not affect the remaining provisions of this Ordinance, which may
be given effect independent of the provision or application declared invalid.
(Ord. No. 01-2007, passed 03-05-07)
2009-S-1
Erosion Prevention & Sediment Control 43
§ Section 157.10 Effective Date.
This section shall be effective the 12th day of March, 2007.
(Ord. No. 01-2007, passed 03-05-07)
2008-S-1
44 Elizabethtown - Land Usage
CHAPTER 158: STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT
Section
158.01 Title, Purpose and General Provisions
158.02 Definitions and Acronyms
158.03 Program Objectives and General Approach
158.04 Authority and Right of Entry
158.05 Post-Construction Stormwater Management
158.06 Stormwater Quality Management Plan Permit Inspections
158.07 Post-Construction Qualified Professional
158.08 As-Built Requirements
158.09 Enforcement
§ 158.01 Title, Purpose and General Provisions.
(A) This Ordinance shall be known as the “Stormwater Quality Management Ordinance” for the City of
Elizabethtown (“the City”), Kentucky, and may be so cited.
(B) The purpose of this Ordinance is to provide regulations and measures that will address stormwater
quality in the City and to establish procedures by which these requirements are to be administered and enforced.
(C) Jurisdiction
1. The laws of the Commonwealth of Kentucky shall apply to this ordinance.
2. The Stormwater Quality Management Ordinance shall govern all properties within the
jurisdictional boundaries of the City.
3. This Ordinance is applicable to all new development and redevelopment activities that result in
the disturbance of one (1) acre or more of land including disturbance of less than that if part of a larger common plan.
(D) Agricultural activities are exempt from the provisions of this Ordinance.
(Ord. 07-2012, passed 04-02-12)
§ 158.02 Definitions and Acronyms.
Builder shall mean a person, partnership, contractor, or corporation constructing one or more buildings for
occupancy or any other use.
City shall be the City of Elizabethtown, Kentucky.
City Representative shall mean the Director of Stormwater Management or person or persons currently
designated by the Mayor to administer the Stormwater Program and any related permit activities.
Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C § 1251 et seq.)
Detention Basin shall mean a drainage facility constructed to restrict the runoff of stormwater to a prescribed
maximum rate and to detain for a specified period of time the excess waters that accumulate upstream from the outlet
structure.
Development shall mean the planning or construction project involving substantial property improvement and,
usually, a change of land-use character within the site; the act of using land for building purposes.
Drainage Area shall mean the surface area from which water drains to a point of consideration.
45
2013-S-1
46 Elizabethtown - Land Usage
Engineer shall mean a person licensed as a Professional Engineer in the Commonwealth of Kentucky in
accordance with KRS 322.
FEMA shall be used to refer to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Floodplain shall mean any area inundated by a 100-year flood or as determined by the FEMA Flood Insurance
Rate Map(s) or an engineering study.
Industrial Activity means activities subject to KPDES Industrial Permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section
122.26 (b)(14).
KDOW shall be used to refer to the Kentucky Division of Water.
Kentucky Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (KPDES) Stormwater Discharge Permit means a
permit issued by the Kentucky Division of Water (KDOW) under designated authority by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA), whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group or general area
wide basis.
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) shall mean a conveyance or system of conveyances,
including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or
storm drains, that is designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater; not privately owned; not a combined
sewer; and not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW).
Outfall shall mean the point or location where stormwater runoff discharges from a BMP, conduit, stream or
drain, storm sewer, channel, or detention/retention facility.
Person shall mean, except to the extent exempted from this Ordinance, any individual, partnership, firm,
association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution,
utility, cooperative, city, town, or other political subdivision of the State, any interstate body or any other legal entity
conducting land-disturbing activities subject to this Ordinance.
Pollutant means anything of a chemical component or nature which causes or contributes to pollution.
Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of any water’s physical, chemical, or biological
properties by the addition of a constituent.
Post-Construction Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (P-SWPPP) is a plan that illustrates how the
pollutants or pollution will be prevented, treated and otherwise managed in the long-term, beyond that of construction
phases.
Premises mean any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved.
Qualified Professional shall mean an individual who is trained and experienced in stormwater treatment
techniques and related fields as may be demonstrated by state licensure, professional certification, experience, or
completion of coursework, as accepted according to this Ordinance, that enable the individual to make sound,
professional judgments regarding stormwater control or treatment and monitoring, pollutant fate and transport, and
drainage planning.
Redevelopment Projects are classified as any activity at a current site that requires the submittal of a
development plan. Existing single family structures are exempt from redevelopment requirements.
2013-S-1
Stormwater Quality Management 47
Stop Work Order shall mean an order by the City directing a Permittee to suspend all construction and/or
operations except for work related to remediation of the violation.
Storm Sewer shall mean channel, ditch, catch basin, inlet pipe, culvert, conduit or other conveyance used for
the purposes of collecting and conveying stormwater.
Water Quality Retention Basin shall mean a drainage facility constructed to contain the runoff of stormwater
to a prescribed maximum rate/volume to pass into the groundwater system without discharging the retained volume to
surface waters except through an emergency bypass under conditions beyond the designed capacity.
(Ord. 07-2012, passed 04-02-12)
§ 158.03 Program Objectives and General Approach
(A) Program Objectives
1. Protection of the short-term and long-term public health, safety, and general welfare. This
objective will be achieved by the following:
a. Providing for regulation and management of the City’s stormwater system, including
public and private facilities in the City’s service area.
b. Protecting, and preserving stormwater quality and thereby fish and wildlife habitat within
the City and in downstream receiving waters.
c. Protecting those downstream and adjacent properties from Stormwater quality impairment.
2. Compliance with state and federal stormwater regulations developed pursuant to the Clean
Water Act Amendments of 1987 and subsequent amendments. This objective will be achieved by the following:
a. Benefiting stormwater quality to a level of "designated use" as defined by the Clean
Water Act Section 305(b) and 303(d) and minimizing the impacts from new development and/or areas of significant
redevelopment.
b. Managing the quality of stormwater discharged to the MS4 by controlling the
contribution of pollutants associated with new development and redevelopment.
c. Minimizing damage to public facilities and utilities.
d. Managing the use of the public and private stormwater / drainage system that will not
result in excessive maintenance costs.
e. encouraging the use of natural and aesthetically-pleasing designs that maximize the
preservation of natural areas.
f. Guiding the construction of stormwater management facilities by developing
comprehensive master plans that address stormwater quantity, quality, design, operation, and maintenance.
g. Encouraging the preservation of floodplains, floodways and open spaces to protect and
benefit the community’s quality of life and natural resources.
f. Encourage the planning for and use of regional BMPs.
(B) General Approach for Development
1. To most effectively achieve the program objectives, the City promotes an approach that
encourages the consideration and use of:
a. Regional BMPs.
b. Lo-impact development design principles, where consistent with good civil engineering
design.
c. Waterway buffers.
d. Low maintenance on-site BMPs.
e. A series of Multiple BMP treatment systems.
2013-S-1
48 Elizabethtown - Land Usage
2. The City will encourage a primary preference for regional BMPs through:
a. Enabling and facilitating private partnerships where on-site Stormwater quantity
and/or quality requirements may be achieved or offset by watershed-based solutions.
b. Enabling and supporting private/public partnerships, regional basin approaches, and
in-lieu fee funds.
3. In support of this approach, the City integrates into the planning and construction plan review
processes, when and where available, the use of:
a. Adopted watershed studies.
b. Adopted master plans.
c. City of Elizabethtown Stormwater Design and Water Quality Manual
d. FEMA floodplain delineations.
(Ord. 07-2012, passed 04-02-12)
§ 153.04 Authority and Right of Entry
Upon request to the Person, the City shall have safe and easy access to the areas to be inspected and/or
monitored.
(A) The City shall have the right-of-entry on or upon the project site. The City shall be provided access to
all parts of the premises subject to this Ordinance for the purposes of inspection, monitoring, sampling, and for the
performance of other duties necessary to determine compliance with this Ordinance.
(B) Where a project site has security measures in place which require proper identification and clearance of
individuals before entry into its premises, the Person shall make necessary arrangements with its security personnel so
that, upon presentation of suitable identification and written request, the City will be permitted to enter without delay
for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
(C) The City shall have the right to set up on a project site such devices necessary to conduct sampling
and/or metering of the stormwater operations or discharges.
(D) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the areas to be inspected and/or
monitored that can reasonably be moved shall be removed promptly by the Person at the written or verbal request of the
City. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the Person.
(E) The City or its designated representative may inspect the facilities of any user in order to ensure
compliance with this Ordinance. Such inspections shall be made with the consent of the owner, manager, or signatory
official. If such consent is refused, denied or not promptly addressed, the City may seek issuance of a search warrant.
(F) The City has the right to determine and impose inspection schedules necessary to enforce the
provisions of this Ordinance. Inspections may include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. An inspection to determine the effectiveness or operational viability of a permanent or longterm
stormwater quality management practice(s)
(Ord. 07-2012, passed 04-02-12)
§ 158.05 Post-Construction Stormwater Management
(A) Stormwater Quality Management
1. The Permittee shall complete a Permit application that includes a Post-Construction
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (P-SWPPP) to be completed, sealed and signed by a Licensed Professional
Engineer and submitted to the City Representative.
2013-S-1
Stormwater Quality Management 49
(B) Post-Construction Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan
The P-SWPPP shall include the following information:
1. A description of the proposed land use including amount of impervious area, directly
connected impervious area, and nature of the development.
2. Location, dimensions, detailed specifications, and construction details of all post-construction
stormwater quality Best Management Practices (BMPs), as defined in the City guidance documents.
3. A sequence describing when each post-construction stormwater quality BMP will be installed.
4. A Long-Term Operation and Maintenance Agreement containing maintenance guidelines for
all post-construction stormwater quality measures to facilitate their proper long-term function. This Agreement
shall be made available to future parties, including property owners, who will assume responsibility for the operation
and maintenance of the post- construction stormwater quality measures.
5. The P-SWPPP shall include provisions for waterway buffers.
a. The waterway buffer will be used to define areas where land disturbance activities
shall be permitted, but construction of any building or structure shall not be permitted.
b. A waterway buffer shall be applied to all waterways serving more than 25 acres of
tributary area or presented on a United States Geological Survey map as a blue line stream.
c. The waterway buffer shall be defined as the greater of:
o Area contained within a boundary established by the floodplain boundary as
defined by FEMA or City master planning: or
o The buffer will be 25-feet on each side from the top of waterway bank as
defined by geomorphic shape (not by the current water surface elevation).
d. The waterway buffer and floodplain may be used for application of Stormwater quality
devices. This may only be permitted if erosion prevention and sediment control, water quality, and floodplain cut fill
policies are adequately addressed as determined by the City.
e. Exemptions may be granted at the discretion of the City for:
o Roads and utilities crossing waterways.
o Pedestrian trails and walkways proximate to waterways.
o Other exemptions.
6. A Licensed Professional Engineer in the Commonwealth of Kentucky shall stamp all
construction plans and long-term maintenance documentation. This shall include all proposed improvements or
modifications to existing or new storm-water infrastructure and other related improvements or modifications.
7. The City may require the posting of a maintenance bond to secure the structural integrity of
said facilities as well as the functioning of said facilities in accordance with the approved Post-Construction SWPPP for
a term of twenty-four (24) months from the date of acceptance of dedication. An irrevocable letter of credit can be used
as the financial assurance in lieu of a maintenance bond although the contribution shall be equivalent to the amount that
would be estimated for the maintenance bond. The maintenance bond shall be calculated as 20% of the estimated
construction cost and may be reduced to 10% after twelve (12) months if there are no concerns by the City
Representative.
(C) BMP Design Requirements and Criteria
1. The City reserves the right to develop or adopt other guidance documents to serve as design
and implementation standards. Other guidance documents distributed by the City should be reviewed and considered
when preparing the Post-Construction SWPPP. These documents may be applied as standards by which designs are to
be prepared and controls implemented.
2. The City shall have authority to implement this Ordinance by appropriate regulations,
guidance or other related materials. In this regard, technical, administrative, or procedural matters may be modified as
needed to meet the objectives defined herein, so long as such modifications as to technical, administrative, or
procedural matters are not contrary or beyond the intent of the objectives defined above.
2013-S-1
50 Elizabethtown - Land Usage
a. Regulations, guidance or other related materials that may be given authority by this
Ordinance may include, but are not limited to: Best Management Practice (BMP) manuals, design regulations and
requirements, submittal checklists, review checklists, inspection checklists, certifications, stormwater management
manuals, in lieu fee schedule, and operation and maintenance manuals.
b. Materials may include information deemed appropriate by the City including and
specifications for the preparation of grading plans, guidance selecting environmentally sound practices for managing
stromwater, minimum specifications and requirements, more complete definitions and performance standards.
c. The above referenced documents may restrict or prevent the use of specific products,
techniques or management practices (that are to be accepted by the public or are deemed to have a negative impact on
public infrastructure or the MS4) that have been identified as unacceptable for performance, maintenance or other
technically based reasons.
d. Documents referenced above may be updated periodically to reflect the most current
and effective practices and shall be made available to the public. However, the failure to update the manual shall not
relieve any applicant from the obligation to comply with this Ordinance, and shall not prevent the City from imposing
the most current and effective practices.
3. The P-SWPPP shall include provisions for stormwater quality BMPs functioning
independently or in combination. Acceptable stormwater quality BMPs shall be defined by policy and guidance
documents as approved by the City.
4. The P-SWPPP shall include provisions for stormwater quality BMPs that are designed to
achieve the following design / performance objectives:
a. Development shall be designed with management measures that are built and
maintained to treat, filter, flocculate, infiltrate, screen, evapo-transpire, harvest and reuse stormwater runoff, or
otherwise manage the stormwater quality produced from an 80th percentile precipitation event (0.75” rainfall). At least
80% of the average annual post-construction total suspended solids (TSS) load shall be removed.
b. Reduce or buffer increases in stormwater runoff temperature caused by contact with
impervious surfaces.
c. Reduce or buffer increases in stormwater runoff volume and flow rate caused by
increases in impervious area.
d. Stormwater detention/ retention facilities shall be designed to address the rate at which
flow is released over the entire runoff discharge period and the volume of discharge over the critical design-storm
period as defined by City stormwater master plans. The outlet structure shall be designed as a v-notch weir or other
multiple stage configurations capable of controlling (limiting) the discharge rates for the 2, 10, 25, and 100 year, 24
hour, SCS Type II distribution, design storm events to pre-developed levels for all new developments. The approved PSWPPP
may require the first flush (0.75 inch rainfall) to be retained in the basin without discharge. Redevelopment
shall reduce the discharge from their site to meet this same standard. This may require the redesign and reconstruction
of existing basins at the site to meet the current standard.
e. Culvert and storm sewer improvements shall be designed to minimize scour. The
FHWA HDS No. 5 design methodology (latest edition) considering inlet and outlet control shall be used. For major
culverts and storm sewers, as designated by the City, a 100 year, SCS Type II 24 hour design flow shall be used with a
HW/d less than or equal to 1.0. For minor, subdivision level culverts and storm sewers, a 25 year SCS Type II 24 hour
storm and a HW/d less than or equal to 1.0 shall be used. In this instance, a check of the 100 year SCS Type II 24 hour
flow with a HW/d less than or equal to 1.2 shall also be performed. Pipe outlets shall be protected with channel lining
or permanent turf reinforcement mat, as supported by sound civil engineering design.
2013-S-1
Stormwater Quality Management 51
f. Stormwater hotspots are areas that often produce higher concentration of certain
pollutants, such as hydrocarbons or heavy metals, than are normally found in urban runoff. These sites shall be required
to provide effective removal of the particular pollutant(s) which they discharge. Effective removal shall be deemed as
that which existed prior to development of the site or in the case of redevelopment that which existed prior to any
development to the site. Review and approval is required prior to commencement of construction. Examples of
stormwater hotspots include:
o Gas/fueling stations
o Restaurants
o Vehicle repair facilities
o Vehicle washing / steam cleaning facilities (including mobile operations)
o Auto and metal recycling facilities
o Outdoor material storage areas
o Loading and transfer areas
o Landfills
o Industrial sites
o Industrial rooftops
Stormwater hotspots shall have treatment on site and cannot rely on regional solutions
offered by the City or the larger development to meet their individual treatment requirement.
g. Soil bioengineering, "green" and other "soft" slope and stream bank stabilization
methods shall receive preference over rip rap, concrete and other hard armoring techniques except where necessitated
by sound civil engineering design.
h. Retention - Supportive data must be submitted to justify the type of facility selected. If
the facility is designed to retain (volume control) all or a significant portion of runoff (as opposed to temporarily
detain), then appropriate soils analyses findings shall be submitted to the City. This submission shall also discuss the
impacts the facility will have on karst topography if found through inspection or a geotechnical investigation of the site.
The facility may be designed to infiltrate runoff to groundwater rather than transmit it downstream under conditions up
to a 100-year storm event. Injection wells shall not generally be permitted due to the relationship between subterranean
and surface flows.
i. Each P-SWPPP shall be evaluated for consistency with the stormwater master plan or
watershed study for the major watershed or watersheds within which the project site is located. The individual project
evaluation will determine if stormwater quantity and quality management practices can adequately serve the property
and limit impacts to downstream public and private properties. The presence of a regional facility(s) will be considered
in determining the extent to which stormwater quantity and/or quality controls will be necessary.
j. The City reserves the right to require superseding or additional treatment criteria or
objectives for specific pollutant(s) as necessary to meet overall stormwater quality management program objectives or
directives under a watershed improvement or Total Maximum Daily Load (TDML) program as administered by the
USEPA or Commonwealth of Kentucky.
k. On-site BMP Coordination with Regional BMPs
o All properties are expected to implement on-site stormwater
quality control measures, but the extent of application may be
reduced given the availability, proximity, and nature of regional
stormwater quality BMPs.
o The extent and type of on-site stormwater quality management
practices implemented shall be proportionate to the land use,
and proximity to regional stormwater quality management
practices.
2013-S-1
52 Elizabethtown - Land Usage
(D) BMP Ownership and Easement
1. Any stormwater management facility or BMP which services individual property owners shall
be privately owned. General routine maintenance (controlling vegetative growth, seeding, regrading, and removing
debris) shall be provided by the owner(s).The owner shall establish a public utilities and drainage easement over the
locality for access for inspection and emergency maintenance by the City. The City, or it’s designee, has the right, but
not the duty, to enter premises for emergency repairs.
2. Any stormwater management facility or BMP which services an individual residential
subdivision in which the facility or BMP is within designated open areas or serves as an amenity with an established
homeowners association shall be privately owned and maintained consistent with provisions of this Ordinance. The
owner shall maintain a public utilities and drainage easement which allows access for inspection and emergency
maintenance by the City. The City, or it’s designee, has the right, but not the duty, to enter premises for emergency
repairs.
3. Any stormwater management facility or BMP which services commercial and industrial
development shall be privately owned and maintained. The owner shall maintain a public utilities and drainage
easement which allows access for inspection and emergency maintenance by the City. The City, or it’s designee, has the
right, but not the duty, to enter premises for emergency repairs.
4. All regional stormwater management control facilities proposed by the owners, if approved and
accepted by the City for dedication as a public regional facility, shall be publicly owned and/or maintained. All other
stormwater management control facilities and BMPs shall be privately owned and/or maintained unless accepted for
maintenance by the City.
5. The City may require public dedication of privately owned stormwater facilities which
discharge to the City stormwater system. This shall be at the approval of the City Council.
(E) Regional Facilities Management
1. The objective of a regional stormwater management facility, pond, lake, or other device, is to
address the stormwater management concerns in a given watershed with greater economy and efficiency than possible
through individual facilities. The intended result is fewer stormwater management facilities to maintain in the affected
watershed while sustaining efficiency.
2. The City encourages regional stormwater quantity and/or quality management practices, which
may be consistently and efficiently managed and maintained. These types of practices will be encouraged in order to
replace or reduce the implementation of on-site stormwater quantity and/or quality management practices, as
determined to be appropriate by the City.
3. Where a regional stormwater management facility has been established by the City, or by an
authority operating on behalf of the City, a development or subdivision, unless excepted by the City, may participate in
said regional program in lieu of constructing site runoff control required by this Ordinance. This may be permitted
provided that:
a. Runoff from the development or subdivision is benefited by an approved existing or
proposed public regional stormwater management facility that is currently operational or will be operational within one
(1) year.
b. Participation in the form of contribution of funds, contribution of land, contribution of
stormwater management facility construction work, or a combination of these, the total value of which shall be in
accordance with a fee schedule adopted by the City.
c. The City finds that the stormwater quality management plans are in compliance with
all other applicable requirements and Ordinances.
d. Fiscal or other contribution shall be used for acquisition, design, construction, or
maintenance of one (1) or more regional stormwater management facilities with the Valley Creek Watershed.
2013-S-1
Stormwater Quality Management 53
e. Detention facilities may, and are encouraged to be designed to serve multiple
purposes. For example, runoff may be detained under wet-weather conditions, but also serve as common or recreational
areas during dry weather conditions. Where multi-purpose facilities are provided, or where flat grades or poorly
draining soils are encountered, provisions for adequate low-flow stormwater management system may be required.
Where the retention/detention facility is planned to be used as a lake, pond or stormwater quality management practice
with a permanent pool, calculations shall be performed and submitted to demonstrate that an adequate permanent pool
depth is expected during dry summer months without vegetative growth issues.
(F) Long-Term Operation and Maintenance Agreements
1. Long-Term Operation and Maintenance Agreements shall include a maintenance plan for all
stormwater quality BMPs in new development or redevelopment that require more than general maintenance (e.g.
periodic mowing).
a. The plan will be developed to ensure that the stormwater quality BMP(s) is (are) kept
functional. The maintenance agreement will specify minimum operation and maintenance requirements and intervals to
be performed by the property owner.
b. The plan shall address schedules for inspections and techniques for operation and
maintenance including vegetation clearing or mowing and removing accumulated trash, debris, sediment pollutants and
other forms of pollution.
c. The Agreement shall be noted on the final plat with the appropriate notation on the
particular lot(s).
d. The Agreement shall be included with property ownership title documents and shall be
binding on the OWNER, its administrators, executors, assigns, heirs, and any other successors in interest.
e. The format for the Long-Term Operational and Maintenance Agreement shall be
provided through example by the City, or through guidance documents.
f. Stormwater Detention and Retention Maintenance - Care must be taken to ensure that
any required facilities do not become nuisances or health hazards. Detention and retention facilities should be designed
to require minimal maintenance, and maintenance expectations must be clearly stated in the Long-Term Operation and
Maintenance Agreement.
g. When a stormwater quality BMP serves more than one (1) parcel, a
binding contract for the purpose of operation and maintenance is required. A property or home owners association shall
be responsible for operation and maintenance of the BMP(s) as directed by this Ordinance.
2. Single entity ownership – Where the permanent storm runoff control facilities are
designed to manage runoff from property in a single entity ownership, the maintenance responsibility for the stormwater
control facilities shall be with the single entity owner.
a. A single entity shall be defined as an association, public or private corporation,
partnership firm, trust, estate or any other legal entity allowed to own real estate exclusive of an individual lot owner.
b. The stated responsibilities of the entity shall be documented in the Long-Term
Operation and Maintenance Agreement. Terms including owning, operating and maintaining the facilities shall be
submitted with plans in application for a SWQMP Permit for an adequacy determination. Approval of a SWQMP shall
be conditioned upon the approval of these terms. These terms shall be in writing, shall be in recordable form, and shall,
in addition to any other terms deemed necessary by the City, contain a provision permitting inspection at any reasonable
time by the City of all facilities deemed critical in the public welfare.
c. Upon approval of the stormwater quality BMPs by the City, the facility owner(s) shall
demonstrate the ability to guarantee and apply the financial resources necessary for long-term maintenance
requirements. The funding mechanism shall be in a form approved by the City. The City will only approve funding
mechanism(s) for long-term maintenance responsibilities that can be demonstrated to be permanent or transferable to
another entity with equivalent longevity.
d. In the event that proposed funding is through an owners association, then it must be
demonstrated that the association may not dissolve unless long-term operation and maintenance activities are accepted
by another entity with equivalent longevity and adequate funding. Furthermore, the owners association’s responsibility
must be stated in the association’s declaration, covenants, or by-laws, as appropriate.
2013-S-1
54 Elizabethtown - Land Usage
e. Unless made specifically clear in the preliminary stages of the site design and
construction plan review procedure, it will be assumed that all stormwater detention, retention, treatment or storage
facilities and/or devices shall be owned, operated and maintained by a single entity as defined above.
3. City ownership – Where the City has accepted an offer of public dedication of the permanent
stormwater quality BMPs, the City shall be responsible for operation and maintenance.
(G) Special Watersheds
1. Special watersheds may be designated by the City with unique goals and requirements. The
minimum measures outlined in this ordinance shall be met at all times. Additional requirements, unique to the specific
watershed, shall be required to meet the specific needs of the watershed.
2. Special Watersheds designated:
a. Hawkins Drive – Flow Quantity Limitation. The post-developed flow rate and
quantity from the development cannot exceed the pre-developed flow rate and quantity in this unique watershed. The
karst feature that receives the flow from this watershed has no predictable capacity. Therefore site storage, reuse, and
other innovative methods to abate both rate and volume increases due to development shall be required,
b. Current and future listings by KDOW
(Ord. 07-2012, passed 04-02-12)
§ 158.06 Stormwater Quality Management Plan Permit Inspections
(A) Permittee Performed Inspections
1. Permittee performed inspections (self inspections) shall be performed by a Qualified
Professional.
2. Documentation of owner performed inspections and inspection findings shall be kept on site, if
appropriate facilities are available.
3. Documentation of owner performed inspections and inspection findings shall be made
available within two (2) business days for construction and seven (7) days for post-construction of a request by the City
or designated representative. Failure to timely submit documentation, as requested, will be assumed to indicate that
inspections were not performed and may result in corresponding enforcement procedures.
4. Post-Construction Inspection: Inspection and maintenance shall be performed at stormwater
quality BMPs on at least an annual basis and as otherwise determined in the Long-Term Operation and Maintenance
Agreement.
(B) Oversight Inspections
1. The City, or the City’s designated representative, has the authority to randomly and
periodically inspect the stormwater quality BMPs. The City may make inspections of the site at its discretion and shall
either approve the condition of the BMP or shall notify the Permittee wherein the condition fails to comply with the
approved SWQMP.
2. The City or its designated representative’s inspections and findings will be presented and
reviewed with the Permittee at the time of inspection (if site personnel are available), and be available in the City public
records.
3. The City shall identify in writing any measures with deficiencies or that are not in compliance
with the objectives of this Ordinance and the SWQMP Permit. A sight inspection will be mailed to the responsible
person for the site listing all deficiencies for the sight. The Permittee shall repair all deficiencies within seven (7)
calendar days after deficiencies or failures have been identified.
2013-S-1
Stormwater Quality Management 55
§ 158.07 Post-Construction Qualified Professional
(A) Possess a license as a Professional Engineer in good standing in the Commonwealth of Kentucky with
demonstrated knowledge and experience in:
1. Stormwater quality treatment practices and BMPs;
2. Operational standards;
3. Cause and failure indicators; and
4. Maintenance measures used to prevent and correct failures.
(Ord. 07-2012, passed 04-02-12)
§ 158.08 As-Built Requirements
(A) Prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, recording of the final plat or final release of bond, the
as-built condition (including: invert elevations, size, shape and location) of critical stormwater features must be
identified, approved, and provided in a electronic form to the City Representative.
1. The volume, slopes, configuration, condition and topographic information of all detention,
retention and water quality practices shall be certified by a Professional Engineer licensed in the Commonwealth of
Kentucky. This information shall be provided to the City, in the form of an as-built drawing or other electronic form
accepted by the City. The as-built certification shall indicate if final conditions are consistent with, or exceed, the goals
of the stormwater plan.
2. If it is determined that information provided in the as-built drawing, certification, inspection or
survey of the site does not meet or exceed the SWQMP provisions, the City reserves the right to withhold Certification
of Occupancy or final bond release. Furthermore, other enforcement mechanisms may be applied to the Permittee or
persons making certifying statements.
(Ord. 07-2012, passed 04-02-12)
§ 158.09 Enforcement
(A) Stop-Work Order; Revocation of Permit
In the event that any person holding a permit pursuant to this ordinance violates the terms of the permit
or implements site development in such a manner as to materially adversely affect the health, welfare, or safety of the
public near the development site or vicinity so as to be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to
property or improvements in the vicinity, the City may suspend or revoke the site development permit.
(B) Violation and Penalties
No person shall improperly construct, alter, repair, or maintain any BMP, or cause the same to be done,
contrary to or in violation of any terms of this ordinance. Each day of violation of this ordinance may be considered a
separate occurrence. Any person, partnership or corporation violating this ordinance may be cited for a civil offense
pursuant to the Code Enforcement Board Ordinance and Fine Schedule. The civil fine shall be paid directly to the City
of Elizabethtown. If the fine is not paid within thirty (30) days from the date of notification, then the City may recover
said fine in a civil action in a court of proper jurisdiction. The citing officer may at his or her discretion cite the offender
to appear before the Code Enforcement Board. The City may also obtain injunctions or abatement orders to insure
compliance with this ordinance. Nothing in this section shall negate the ability of the City to pursue applicable civil or
criminal penalties as prescribed by law. In addition to any other penalty authorized by this section, any person,
partnership, or corporation convicted of violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be required to bear the
expense of such restoration.
(Ord. 07-2012, passed 04-02-12)
2013-S-1
56 Elizabethtown - Land Usage
* Contains portion of description for current corporate boundary.
2018-S-1
ANNEXATION LIST
Description Ordinance # Date Approved
Bardstown Road Addition --- Aug. 7, 1939
Bardstown Road Addition - Final Adoption --- Nov. 6, 1939
West Dixie Addition --- Aug. 7, 1939
West Dixie Addition - Final Adoption --- Nov. 6, 1939
Valley Creek Addition --- Aug. 7, 1939
Valley Creek Addition - Final Adoption --- Nov. 6, 1939
Athletic Field --- Sept. 12, 1944
Athletic Field - Final Adoption --- Nov. 6, 1944
Grand View Addition 1-1948 Feb. 2, 1948
Helmwood Addition 2-1948 Feb. 2, 1948
North Miles Street - Green Hills Addition 3-1948 Feb. 2, 1948
South Dixie Addition 4-1948 Feb. 2, 1948
Grand View Addition - Final Adoption Annex Ord. 1 Mar. 15, 1948
Helmwood Addition - Final Adoption Annex Ord. 2 Mar. 15, 1948
N. Miles Street - Green Hills Addition - Final
Adoption
Annex Ord. 3 Mar. 15, 1948
Repealing Ordinance #4 - South Dixie Addition --- Mar. 15, 1948
Ryan Subdivision Addition 7-2-51A July 2, 1951
Pennsylvania Avenue to St. John Road 9-5-51A Sept. 5, 1951
Pennsylvania Avenue to St. John Road 9-5-51A Jan. 16, 1952
Kennedy Avenue to REA 9-12-51A Sept. 12, 1951
Kennedy Avenue to REA 9-12-51A Jan. 16, 1952
Beginning with Merritt Kerrick & Green Hills 3-17-52A Mar. 17, 1952
Beginning with Merritt Kerrick & Green Hills 4-7-52A Apr. 7, 1952
Beginning with Merritt Kerrick & Green Hills 4-7-52A June 16, 1952
Beginning with Merritt Kerrick & Green Hills 3-17-52A June 16, 1952
Grandview Subdivision to Alameda Manor
Subdivision and Shepherdsville Road
9-15-52 Sept. 15, 1952
Grandview Subdivision to Alameda Manor
Subdivision and Shepherdsville Road
9-15-52 Dec. 15, 1952
Woodland Heights Subdivision 3-16-53 Mar. 16, 1953
Helmwood Homesites 4-14-53 Apr. 14, 1953
Woodland Height Subdivision 3-16-53 July 20, 1953
* Contains portion of description for current corporate boundary.
2018-S-1
Helmwood Homesites 4-14-53 July 20, 1953
Leitchfield Road and Helm Road 9-26-56 Sept. 26, 1956
Indian Hills Subdivision --- Oct. 20, 1958
Indian Hills Subdivision --- Dec. 1, 1958
Indian Hills Subdivision --- July 20, 1959
Highlands Subdivision --- Aug. 24, 1959
Indian Hills Subdivision --- Sept. 21, 1959
Highland Subdivision - Boundary Corrected --- Oct. 5, 1959
E’town Time Corporation --- Mar. 7, 1960
E’town Time Corporation --- May 2, 1960
Edgewood Heights, Forest Hills Subdivision, Mercer
Drive & rear of Cedar Drive & College Property
--- Aug. 21, 1961
Edgewood heights, Forest Hills Subdivision --- Nov. 6, 1961
City Park --- May 21, 1962
City Park - Amended & Section South thereof
French Street
--- April 1, 1963
* Hodgenville Road Intersection, Hawkins Drive,
Dow Corning, Chandler Heights & Milby
Subdivision
--- Oct. 21, 1963
* Hodgenville Road Intersection, Hawkins Drive,
Dow Corning, Chandler Heights & Milby
Subdivision
--- Jan. 6, 1964
Section of Glendale Hill --- Oct. 5, 1964
Gates Rubber Company and Westview Subdivision --- Jan. 4, 1965
Freeman Lake Area, Bon Aire Subdivision, Gateway
Villa Subdivision, Fountainbleau Subdivision,
Section on Glendale Hill
--- June 3, 1968
Sept. 3, 1968
* Areas North, South, East and West of present City
limits (including Glendale Hill)
--- May 17, 1971
Aug. 2, 1971
De-annexation --- Nov. 3, 1971
* Two tracts on Bardstown Road and Area between
31W and Pear Orchard Road
--- July 21, 1975
Sept. 8, 1975
Remainder of Strickler Farm on US 62 West 5-1976 Feb. 23, 1976
Remainder of Strickler Farm on US 62 West Final 11-1976 Apr. 19, 1976
Proposed Industrial Park and Airport - West of City 27-1976 Oct. 18, 1976
Proposed Industrial Park and Airport - Amended 4-1977 Jan. 17, 1977
Proposed Industrial Park and Airport - Amended 6-1977 Feb. 21, 1977
* Proposed Industrial Park and Airport - Final 11-1977 Apr. 4, 1977
* Contains portion of description for current corporate boundary.
2018-S-1
Two areas West of US31W, including University
Estates
5-1978 Feb. 22, 1978
Repealing Ordinance #5-1978 25-1978 Aug. 14, 1978
Annexing Camelot Subdivision & Cardinal Creek,
Section 2
11-1979 Apr. 2, 1979
* Camelot Subdivision & Cardinal Creek, Section 2
(Final)
14-1979 June 4, 1979
Annexing three tracts on US 62 West 49-1980 Nov. 3, 1980
* Annexing three tracts on US 62 West - Final 1-1981 Jan 19, 1981
Annexing approximately 25 acres at Northwestern
Boundary off Old 31W (Intent to Annex)
13-1981 Apr. 6, 1981
Intent to Annex along US 31W South 42-1981 Sept. 21, 1981
Intent to Annex area at intersection of KY 251 &
Ring Road
43-1981 Sept. 21, 1981
Annexing Area on East side of 31W South 63-1981 Dec. 21, 1981
* Amending Annexation of Area on East side of 31W
South
5-1982 Feb. 1, 1982
Intent to Annex Pleasant acres and Convenient Acres 12-1982 Mar. 15, 1982
Intent to Annex area at KY 251 and Ring Road 23-1982 May 17, 1982
* Annexing Pleasant Acres and Convenient Acres 26-1982 June 7, 1982
Annexing approximately 25 acres at Northwestern
boundary off old 31W
38-1982 Oct. 4, 1982
* Annexing City-owned property at Ring Road & KY
251
42-1982 Oct. 18, 1982
Intent to Annex Robert L. Hall property at Ring Road
and KY 251
32-1983 Oct. 3, 1983
Annexing the Robert L. Hall property at Ring Road
and KY 251
33-1983 Nov. 21, 1983
Intent to annex W.C. Routt property on KY 447
North of present City limits
5-1984 Apr. 2, 1984
Annexing the W.C. Routt property on KY 447 North
of present City limits
7-1984 June 4, 1984
Intent to annex additional property on KY 447 North
(W.C. Routt property)
8-1984 June 4, 1984
Intent to annex certain property on Jackie Street 8A-1984 June 18, 1984
Intent to annex certain property on US62 East 12-1984 July 23, 1984
Annexing additional W.C. Routt property on KY 447 14-1984 Aug. 6, 1984
* Annexing certain property on Jackie Street 17-1984 Sept. 4, 1984
* Contains portion of description for current corporate boundary.
2018-S-1
* Annexing certain property on US62 East 21-1984 Oct. 15, 1984
Intent to Annex property between Pear Orchard Road
& Airport Road and North of Towne Mall
33-1985 Oct. 7, 1985
Annexing 20 acres North of Towne Mall 3-1986 Jan. 20, 1986
* Annexing 125 acres between Pear Orchard Road &
Airport Road
9-1986 Feb. 17, 1986
Intent to annex Pine Valley Drive & Mouser Property
(31W)
8-1987 May 4, 1987
Intent to annex 90 acre tract on Lincoln Parkway &
Sportsman Lake Road - Schlatter farm
11-1987 May 18, 1987
Intent to annex area on KY 1600 & Timber Lane 10-1987 May 18, 1997
Intent to annex Pine Valley Drive & Mouser Property
(31W)
15-1987 June 15, 1987
Intent to Annex 90 acre tract on Lincoln Parkway &
Sportsman Lake Road - Schlatter farm
16-1987 June 15, 1987
Intent to annex area on KY 1600 & Timber Lane 17-1987 June 15, 1987
Annexing property on KY 1600 (Cardinal Dr.) &
Timber Lane
20-1987 Sept. 8, 1987
* Annexing Pine Valley Drive & Mouser Property on
31W
21-1987 Sept. 8, 1987
Annexing 90 acres on Sportsman Lake Road &
Lincoln Parkway
22-1987 Sept. 8, 1987
Intent to annex Moore Property - KY 251 & Ring
Road
7-1988 Mar. 7, 1988
Intent to annex Rogers Property - KY 251 & Ring
Road
8-1988 Mar. 7, 1988
Intent to annex Briarwood/Beechwood (KY 1600) 6-1988 Mar. 7, 1988
* Annexing Moore Property (KY 251 & Ring Road) 16-1988 May 16, 1988
Annexing Joseph Rogers property (KY 251 & Ring
Rd.)
20-1988 June 6, 1988
* Annexing Briarwood/Beechwood (KY 1600) 21-1988 June 6, 1988
Intent to annex 75 Botto Ave. (Steve Johnson
Property)
25-1988 June 20, 1988
Intent to annex 2108 North Dixie (Adrian Ray
Property)
26-1988 June 20, 1988
* Annexing 75 Botto Avenue (Steve Johnson
Property)
29-1988 July 18, 1988
Intent to annex Clyde Hunt Property (KY 251 & Ring
Road)
33-1988 Sept. 19, 1988
* Contains portion of description for current corporate boundary.
2018-S-1
Annexing 2108 North Dixie (Adrian Ray Property) 34-1988 Oct. 17, 1988
* Annexing Clyde Hunt property (KY 251 & Ring
Road)
38-1988 Dec. 5, 1988
Intent to annex Pine Valley Golf Course 2-1989 Jan. 3, 1989
* Annexing Pine Valley Golf Course 5-1989 Feb. 6, 1989
Intent to annex 600-800 block of Pine Valley Drive 33-1989 Nov. 20, 1989
Intent to annex real property located along North
Dixie Ave. (31W) and Pear Orchard Road NW
34-1989 Nov. 20, 1989
* Annexing property located along 600-800 block of
Pine Valley Drive
4-1990 Feb. 19, 1990
* Annexing property along North Dixie Avenue
(31W) & Pear Orchard Road NW
7-1990 Feb. 19, 1990
Intent to annex real property known as approximately
100 acres on West Side of 31W South.
22-1990 Aug. 6, 1990
Intent to annex real property known as approximately
15 acres, part of Skyline Heights Subdivision
30-1990 Oct. 1, 1990
Intent to annex real property known as approximately
100 acres on the East and West sides of 31W South
31-1990 Oct. 15, 1990
* Annexing real property known as approximately
107 acres on the West side of 31W South
3-1991 Jan. 7, 1991
Annexing real property known as approximately 15
acres and being a part of Skyline Heights Subdivision
11-1991 Feb. 18, 1991
* Annexing real property located on both sides of US
31W North, the major part being on the East side of
US 31W and located adjacent to the present City
boundaries in and around Pine Valley Drive
5-1992 Apr. 13, 1992
Intent to annex real property located on the South
side of US 62 known as the Leitchfield Road
Annexation
6-1992 Apr. 13, 1992
* Annexing property located on the South side of US
62 known as the Leitchfield Road Annexation
14-1992 July 13, 1992
Intent to annex territory in the Cardinal Drive and
Ring Road Area
29-1993 Dec. 6, 1993
Intent to annex territory in the St. John Road and
Ring Road area
30-1993 Dec. 6, 1993
* Annexing territory in the Cardinal Drive and Ring
Road area
5-1994 Feb. 21, 1994
* Annexing territory in the St. John Road and Ring
Road area
6-1994 Feb. 21, 1994
* Contains portion of description for current corporate boundary.
2018-S-1
* Annexing territory along southern boundary of
Elizabethtown & US 31W
15-1995 June 19, 1995
* Annexing property located off Bewley Hollow
Road and Stonemill Drive
24-1996 Nov. 4, 1996
* Annexing territory located at 459 Sportsman Lake
Road
30-1998 Dec. 7, 1998
* Annexing territory located at 2900 South Dixie
Avenue
31-1998 Dec. 7, 1998
* Annexing territory located on South Wilson Road 01-1999 Jan. 4, 1999
* Annexing territory located along Ring Road 02-1999 Jan. 4, 1999
* Annexing territory located North Black Branch
Road containing 300 acres and owned by the
Elizabethtown Industrial Foundation
38-1999 Nov. 1, 1999
* Annexing an approximately 60 acre tract known as
Casteel Subdivision and being located along
Shepherdsville Road and owned by Kipper Homes,
Inc.
16-2001 Aug. 6, 2001
* Annexing property located in the 4600 block of
Leitchfield Road
26-2003 Sept. 2, 2003
Annexing property located at 2659 Shepherdsville
Road
15-2005 June 20, 2005
* Annexing property located at 2682 Shepherdsville
Road
16-2005 June 20, 2005
* Annexing property located on New Glendale Road 29-2005 Oct. 17, 2005
* Annexing property located on Tunnel Hill Road 02-2006 Jan. 3, 2006
* Repealed Ord. No. 02-2006 & annexed property
located on Tunnel Hill Road
08-2006 Mar. 20, 2006
Intent to annex property along Hayden School Road 11-2006 June 5, 2006
* Annexing an 85 acre tract located along Hutcherson
Lane
17-2006 Aug. 21, 2006
* Annexing property along Hayden School Road 18-2006 Sept. 5, 2006
* Annexing property located at 1411 St. John Road 25-2006 Oct. 16, 2006
* Annexing property located at the intersection of St.
John Road & Stratmoor Drive
30-2006 Dec. 4, 2006
* Annexing 399.062 acres along Ring Road
(Ratliff/Lewis/Cox)
20-2007 Apr. 16, 2007
* Annexing property located at 2886 & 2950
Shepherdsville Road
26-2009 Dec. 21, 2001
* Contains portion of description for current corporate boundary.
2018-S-1
* Annexing property located in the 700 block of Ring
Road
01-2010 Feb. 16, 2010
* Rineyville Road (Fox Lair Properties) 18-2010 Dec. 20, 2010
* Hutcherson Lane (James & Melissa Jenkins & H2H
Properties & Development)
19-2010 Dec. 20, 2010
* 40 Burr Oak Court 11-2011 June 6, 2011
* Right-of-way of Hayden School Road 26-2012 Dec. 03, 2012
* Annexing 2635 Rineyville Road 04-2013 April 15, 2013
* Annexing 71 Fontaine Drive 05-2013 April 15, 2013
* Annexing 211 Jackie Street 08-2013 June 3, 2013
* Annexing 1323 St. John Road 13-2013 August 19, 2013
* Annexing 2875 Shepherdsville Road 23-2013 Nov. 18, 2013
* Annexing 1305 Pear Orchard Road & 2320 Ring
Road
26-2013 Dec. 2, 2013
* Annexing property located along Patriot Parkway 11-2014 May 19, 2014
* Annexing property located at 2011 Bardstown Road
and adjacent to US 62 East
21-2014 October 20, 2014
* Annexing property located at Ring Road and
Western Kentucky Parkway
24-2014 Dec. 1, 2014
* Annexing property located at 4101 North Dixie
Avenue
04-2015 May 4, 2015
* Annexing 132 acres located at the intersection of
South Ring Road and Western Kentucky Parkway
11-2015 Sept. 8, 2015
* Annexing property located at 2617 Stonemill Drive 22-2015 Dec. 14, 2015
* Annexing property located at 2580 Bardstown Road 11-2018 April 24, 2018
* Annexing property located along 4200 to 440 block
of Leitchfield Road
15-2018 June 8, 2018
2018-S-1
LIST OF STREET NAME CHANGES
DESCRIPTION ORD. # DATE
Changing Main Cross Street to Dixie Avenue --- July 1928
Naming Every Street --- Dec. 1929
Naming Certain Streets --- May 1946
Naming Washington Streets --- Aug. 1950
Naming Strawberry Lane --- Sept. 1950
Naming Beech Street --- Mar. 1955
Naming Cardin Street --- Aug. 1955
Naming Westview Avenue --- Sept. 1955
Naming Cox Lane --- Oct. 1955
Naming Crestwood Street & Churchill Alley --- Nov. 1955
Naming French Street --- Nov. 1955
Naming Pike Street --- Dec. 1959
Changing name of Kennedy Street, Locust Grove Road and
Valley Creek Road (Springfield Road, Locust Grove Road
and Valley Creek Road)
--- Nov. 1969
Naming Industrial Drive --- Sept. 1971
Naming Gloria Dei Lane --- May 1974
Naming Streets off North Dixie Avenue and Pear Orchard
Road (Pear Valley Drive, North View Avenue, Sundown
Street and Sky Blue Avenue)
3-1976 Jan. 1976
Naming Bush Lane 29-1976 Nov. 1976
Renaming Memorial Drive in Highlands 4 (Lakeside Drive) 40-1980 Oct. 1980
Changing name of Billy Creek Road to Peterson Drive 47-1980 Nov. 1980
Naming Rocky Loop (off 31W North) 13-1982 Apr. 1982
Changing name of Jenkins Lane to Dogwood 14-1982 Apr. 1982
Changing name of Crutcher Lane to Short Street 16-1984 Aug. 1984
Changing name of Faye Avenue to Fairview Drive 6-1985 Mar. 1985
Changing name of New Cox Lane, Edwin Street and Lawson
Court (Commerce Drive, Windview Place and Cliff Ridge
Court)
6-1986 Feb. 1986
Naming Sutton Lane 7-1986 Feb. 1986
Changing name of Northeast First Street to Towne Drive 11-1986 Feb. 1986
Naming Magnet Drive (Crucible Steel Drive) 12-1986 Feb. 1986
2018-S-1
DESCRIPTION ORD. # DATE
Changing name of Cathy Street in Mohammed Estates to
Ruby Drive
16-1986 Apr. 1986
Municipal Order renaming Dixie Drive to Bankview Drive --- Dec. 1989
Municipal Order renaming White Oak Lane to Hawthorne
Court
--- Dec. 1989
Naming & numbering of streets in the City 20-1991 May 1991
Changing name of Clifton Avenue to Hobson Way 9-1992 May 18, 1992
Changing name of Taylor Avenue to Clifton Avenue 12-1992 June 15, 1992
Changing name of Cherry Street to Cherry Drive 23-1992 Dec. 21, 1992
Changing name of Shane Lane to Oriole Drive 5-1993 Mar. 1, 1993
Changing name of Clark Drive to Murphy Drive 10-1993 Apr. 19, 1993
Changing name of Goss Drive to Howell Court 13-1993 Apr. 26, 1993
Changing name of Vista Drive to Horizon Drive 24-1993 Oct. 18, 1993
Naming alley “Airline Alley” 11-1994 April 4, 1994
Changing street names in Rolling Acres Subdivision to Pine
Crest Drive and Winterberry Drive
12-1994 Apr. 4, 1994
Changing name of Hisham Court to Helmwood Plaza Drive 16-1994 May 2, 1994
Naming street Hidden Lane 6-1995 May 1, 1995
Changing name of Lawson Court to Gerrard Court 3-1996 Feb. 19, 1996
Changing name of Market Street to Josale Drive 16-1997 July 7, 1997
Renaming 100 Block of Moore Drive to Abby Court 27-1998 Oct. 23, 1998
Changing Brimstone to Rhinestone Court 8-1999 Feb. 1, 1999
Changing Kennedy Street to Springfield Road 18-1999 June 21, 1999
Changing street name of Routt Drive (located off US62) to
Window Lane
36-1999 Oct. 18, 1999
Changing Old New Glendale Road (between New Glendale
Road and East Dixie Avenue) to Bishop Lane
37-1999 Nov. 1, 1999
Naming the unnamed right-of-way (formerly old 447) in
front of Mouser Kitchen – Cabinet Lane
03-2001 Feb. 9, 2001
Changing Street name of Dogwood to Dogwood Place 07-2002 June 3, 2002
Changing name of a portion of Hawkins Drive to Gallery
Place
23-2002 Nov. 18, 2002
Changing name of a portion of Gates Road (between College
Street Road and the current intersection of Gates Road and
Hickory Lane) to Hickory Lane
06-2003 Feb. 18, 2003
2018-S-1
DESCRIPTION ORD. # DATE
Naming an unnamed street off College Street Road as
Catalog Drive
38-2003 Dec. 15, 2003
Changing the name of Phillips Circle to Philip Circle 04-2004 Apr. 5, 2004
Naming the new roadway located behind Towne Mall
Veterans Way
13-2004 July 19, 2004
Changing the street name for a portion of ElDorado Drive to
Greenwood Drive
27-2005 Oct. 17, 2005
Renaming Mayapple Street to Mayapple Lane 14-2007 Apr. 2, 2007
Changing the street name for a portion of Nicholas Street
(800 Block) to Nicholas Springs Court
19-2008 Dec. 22, 2008
Changing the street name for a portion of Nicholas Street
(900 Block) to Water Works Drive
09-2009 July 20, 2009
Renaming a portion of Strawberry Lane to Floe Bowles Way 06-2011 March 07, 2011
Renaming Hicks Lane to Cricket Lane 22-2012 Oct. 01, 2012
Naming KY 361 as Patriot Parkway (approved by Municipal
Order)
09-2013 Feb. 4, 2013
Naming the access roads along Patriot Parkway 22-2013 Oct. 21, 2013
Renaming Strawberry Alley and Thomas Street 17-2017 Nov. 10, 2018
2018-S-1
LIST OF STREET CLOSINGS
DESCRIPTION ORD. # DATE
Closing Poplar Street over L&N RR Tracks 05-12-50
Closing Warfield between Peachtree & Maple 08-07-50
Closing street on the W. Side of L&N RR between Crutcher &
Poplar Streets (West Railroad Avenue)
10-01-51
Closing alley between Mantle & Sycamore about 225' Northwest
of Poplar Street.
03-03-52
Closing parts of Crutcher Lane & Mallory Street 05-16-55
Closing a portion of Wilson Avenue 05-16-55
Closing a portion of Fair Avenue 05-20-57
Closing Marion Court & Cherry Alley 06-16-69
Closing alley on N. Side of Athletic Court 03-05-73
Closing part of Plum Alley 22 09-04-79
Closing Wathen Alley 15 05-04-81
Closing unnamed street adjacent to Fair Avenue 30 08-03-81
Closing unnamed alleyway adjacent to Skyline Drive 41 09-08-81
Closing RR crossing at Williams Street & East RR Avenue and
Nicholas Street adjacent to Knight Chemical Company.
34 09-07-82
Closing streets, public ways and unnamed alleyways on Glendale
Hill.
43 10-18-82
Closing unnamed street, public way or alleyway in Thomas
Heights Subdivision on Glendale Hill.
50 12-06-82
Closing a portion of Nicholas Street 24 06-20-83
Closing unnamed alleys (one between 508-510 East Dixie & two
between 407-409 Pierce Street).
28 08-15-83
Closing Governor’s Drive 10 04-18-85
Closing portion or Cathy Street 23 07-01-85
Closing portions of NE Second Avenue & NE First Avenue and
all NE Second Street
10 02-17-86
Closing Ehert Avenue 33 12-15-86
Closing unnamed street contained in lots numbered 182 & 183
Oak Grove Manor Subdivision.
24 09-17-87
Closing a portion of Pear Orchard Road 5 03-07-88
Closing Gerrard Court in Glendale Hill Neighborhood
Subdivision
6 02-06-89
2018-S-1
Closing a portion of Hagans Alley lying between W. Dixie and
Mock Alley
7 02-06-89
Closing two unnamed passageways in Franklin Heights 18 07-03-89
Closing a portion of Birch Drive & Red Bud Drive in
Foxborough Estates Subdivision.
36 12-04-89
Closing Cromer Court in THE VILLAGE, Section 1 in Pine
Valley Country Club.
16 05-21-90
Closing Pembrooke Circle & an unnamed right-of-way in
Wellington Place Subdivision.
19 06-04-90
Closing portion of Glencrest Avenue 26 09-17-90
Closing portion of Towne Drive 12 02-18-91
Closing Valley View Avenue 15 03-04-91
Closing parts of French Street, Pear Orchard Road and Bon Aire
Drive
24 06-03-91
Closing alley running from South Main Street to South Mulberry
Street
25 05-20-91
Closing Woodfield Drive located on W. Side of E-town and on
North Side of U.S. Highway 62.
29 08-05-91
Repealed ordinance closing a portion of Towne Drive and
enacting new ordinance closing a portion of Towne Drive.
30 08-17-91
Closing College Avenue Alley 39 12-04-91
Closing Hunter Drive off St. John Road. 15 08-17-92
Closing a part of Black Branch Road 17 09-13-93
Closing portion of Hisham Court (AKA Helmwood Plaza Drive) 16 05-02-94
Closing right of way of Anniston Drive in Pine Valley
Subdivision
22 09-06-94
Closing unnamed streets in Thomas Heights Subdivision 16 06-26-95
Closing unnamed alley in Haycraft’s addition 19 09-18-95
Closing several rights of way in the Northridge Development on
Dolphin Hills Subdivision
23 10-02-95
Closing a section of Nicholas Street 27 11-06-95
Closing rights of way in Skyline Heights Subdivision 18 08-19-96
Closing portion of right of way of Regency Way in the Crowne
Point Section of Dolphin Hills
23 11-04-96
Closing a portion of Strawberry Alley 7 03-17-97
Closing undeveloped street-Concorde Circle in Wellington Place
Subdivision.
9 04-07-97
2018-S-1
Closing a part of the right of way of Heartland Drive 12 04-21-97
Closing undeveloped portion of Birch Drive 27 11-17-97
Closing a portion of Quince Alley 30 12-1-97
Closing a portion of right-of-way of Corporate Drive in Madison
Park Subdivision
05-1998 03-16-98
Closing a portion of right-of-way for Heartland Drive as
requested by Atria
26-1998 10-19-98
Closing Northeast Second Terrace and Northeast Sixth Street in
Skyline Heights Subdivision
04-1999 01-04-99
Closing a portion of Savannah Avenue 11-1999 03-01-99
Closing a portion of the right-of-way of Pear Orchard Road 12-1999 03-15-99
Closing a portion of the right-of-way known as Cottrell Lane 13-1999 05-17-99
Closing a portion of right-of-way known as Brown Street Alley
#2
14-1999 04-05-99
Closing a portion of right-of-way known as University Drive 03-2000 02-11-00
Closing CSX railroad crossings on North Crestwood Street,
Selbert Drive and Hawkins Drive
11-2000 07-18-00
Closing a portion of Black Branch Road 12-2000 08-07-00
Closing a portion of Helm Avenue between West Dixie Avenue
and Strawberry Alley
23-2000 10-16-00
Closing the unimproved right-of-way of Lakeside Drive in
Lakeview Subdivision (off Pear Orchard Road)
06-2001 03-19-01
Closing a portion of right-of-way known as North Black Road 12-2001 06-18-01
Closing a portion of right-of-way known as Cardin Street (Never
Published)
15-2002 08-19-02
Closing a portion of right-of-way known as Cardin Street 22-2002 11-04-02
Closing a portion of right-of-way known as Cambridge Way in
Winchester Park Subdivision
24-2002 11-18-02
Closing a portion of right-of-way known as Fort Knox National
Company Drive
03-2003 01-06-03
Closing a portion of right-of-way known as South Park Road 21-2003 08-04-03
Closing a portion of right-of-way known as Buffalo Creek Drive 14-2004 07-19-04
Closing a portion of right-of-way known as Window Lane 23-2005 09-19-05
Closing an unimproved alley off Park Avenue 26-2005 10-03-05
Closing a portion of Helm Alley 30-2005 11-07-05
Closing a portion of right-of-way off Veterans Way (access road
to Wise Lane)
08-2007 02-20-07
2018-S-1
Closing a portion of Henry Street 09-2007 02-20-07
Closing a portion of right-of-way of Iqbal Drive 11-2007 03-05-07
Closing a portion of right-of-way of Fairview Avenue 02-2008 04-07-08
Closing Woodfield Drive 04-2008 04-07-08
Closing New Alley 02-2009 02-02-09
Closing Old College Street Road 03-2009 02-17-09
Closing former right-of-way of Saint John Road 07-2009 06-15-09
Closing a portion of Right-of-way known as Frontage Road No.
1-L
24-2009 12-07-09
Closing the unimproved right-of-way of West Park Road 08-2011 03-21-11
Closing right-of-way of Towne Drive and Waterford Place 19-2011 09-19-11
Closing a portion of right-of-way of Brittany Avenue 21-2011 11-07-11
Closing a portion of Vega Alley 17-2012 08-20-12
Closing a portion of Headquarters Court 21-2012 09-17-12
Closing the right-of-way of Green Lane 01-2013 01-22-13
Closing a portion of unimproved right-of-way of Altec Drive 07-2013 05-06-13
Closing the unimproved right-of-way of Nelson Drive 01-2014 01-06-14
Closing a portion of Access Road No. 2 15-2014 08-18-14
Closing Scholar Drive 20-2014 10-13-14
Closing a portion of Nicholas Street 27-2014 12-15-14
Closing Sandlewood Court 06-2015 05-18-15
Closing a portion of Woodland Drive 08-2015 07-20-15
Closing Helm Court 09-2015 08-17-15
Closing a portion of Waterworks Drive 19-2016 09-19-16
Closing the right-of-wayof Strawberry Alley (Lane) and the
unnamed alley off Thomas Street
22-2016 11-25-16
Closing a portion of right-of-way known as Washington Street 03-2017 05-19-17
Closing a portion of right-of-way known as Long Avenue 01-2018 01-12-18
Closing a portion of right-of-way known as Woodland Drive 02-2018 01-12-18
SEWER ALLOCATION LIST
Location Ordinance No. Date Approved
North Dixie/Pine Valley 28-1997 12-15-97
North Dixie/Pear Orchard Road NW 33-1998 12-21-98
North Boundary 29-1999 09-07-99
White Oak Drive/Ring Road/Pear Orchard Road 02-2004 02-24-04
Rineyville Road 20-2004 10-04-04
Addington Field/Hayden School Road 10-2006 05-15-06
Sells-Robbins 15-2007 04-16-07
Pear Orchard Road 1200 Block 16-2007 05-07-07
Brittany Avenue 21-2007 05-07-07
White Oak/Brett Drive 33-2007 11-05-07
Billy Creek Sewer, Phase I 02-2011 02-22-11
STORMWATER ALLOCATION LIST
Location Ordinance No. Date Approved
Shaw Creek Tributary Stormwater Detention
Basin
18-2013 09-16-2013
2013-S-1
PARALLEL REFERENCES
Referencnes to Kentucky Revised Statutes
References to 1973 Code
References to Ordinances
1
2 Elizabethtown - Parallel References
REFERENCES TO KENTUCKY REVISED STATUTES
KRS Section Code Section
18A 113.02
18A.225 (2) 113.02
18A.228 113.02
61 32.21
61.810 33.52
61.870 – 61.884 33.56
61.872 – 61.884 33.18
62.020 31.01
65.067 31.01
65.120 Ch. 72
65.230 33.03
82.082 33.03
82.600 - 82.640 72.56
82.625 72.56
83A 32.20
83A.010 (5) 10.02
83A.010 (6) 10.02
83A.010 (7) 10.02
83A.010 (8) 10.02
83A.010 (9) 10.02
83A.010 (10) 10.02
83A.010 (11) 10.02
83A.030 (1) 30.02
83A.040 (1) 31.21
83A.040 (4) 32.01
83A.050 31.20
83A.060 (5) 10.17
83A.060 (6) 32.22
83A.065 10.02
83A.070 31.02
83A.075 31.02
83A.080 33.04
83A.080 (1) 31.35
83A.080 (2) 31.35
83A.080 (3) 31.20
83A.080 (4) 31.20
83A.130 (1) 30.01
83A.130 (2) 30.02
3
2001 S-4
4 Elizabethtown - Parallel References
KRS Section Code Section
83A.130 (3) 31.21
83A.130 (4) 31.21
83A.130 (5) 32.20
83A.130 (7) 31.21
83A.130 (8) 31.21
83A.130 (9) 31.21
83A.130 (10) 31.21
83A.130 (11) 32.03, 32.21
83A.130 (12) 32.03
83A.130 (13) 32.03
83A.175 32.02
90.300 - 90.390 37.15
91A.010 (8) 10.02
91A.360 et seq. 117.11
91A.390 117.01
95.761 37.15
100 151.01, 153.01, 153.02
100.133 et seq. 153.02
100.193 153.01
100.217 155.02
118 31.20
131.010 (6) 113.04
183 34.06
183.132 34.06
183.133 34.06
189.010 (19) 70.01
189.270 74.02
189.338 70.15
189.394 Ch. 75, Sched. II
189.450 (5) 72.03
189.450 (6) 72.03
189.725 72.08
189.990 (1) 72.99
198B.070 (3) 34.28
198B.070 (4) 34.30
198B.990 (1) 150.99
226.010 112.01
227.320 72.12
227.990 (1) 150.99
257.100 (4) 90.01
318.990 150.99
2001 S-4
References to Kentucky Revised Statutes 5
KRS Section Code Section
344.704 96.15, 96.17
446.010 (1) 10.02
446.010 (2) 10.02
446.010 (6) 10.02
446.010 (7) 10.02
446.010 (10) 10.02
446.010 (11) 10.02
446.010 (12) 10.02
446.010 (13) 10.02
446.010 (14) 10.02
446.010 (18) 10.02
446.010 (22) 10.02
446.010 (24) 10.02
446.010 (26) 10.02
446.010 (28) 10.02
446.010 (32) 10.02
446.010 (34) 10.02
446.010 (35) 10.02
446.010 (37) 10.02
446.020 (1) 10.03
446.020 (2) 10.03
446.030 10.04
446.060 10.06
446.080 (1) 10.03
446.080 (3) 10.03
446.080 (4) 10.03
446.100 10.08
446.110 10.09
446.140 10.01
532.090 (1) 10.02
534.040 (2)(a) 10.02
534.040 (2)(c) 10.02
610 130.01
610.180 130.01
610.200 130.01
2001 S-4
6 Elizabethtown - Parallel References
REFERENCES TO 1973 CODE
1973 Code Section 1994 Code Section
1-1.1 10.03
1-4 10.12
1-7 10.99
2-1 32.21
2-1.1 32.20
2-9 153.02
2-10 155.02
2-13 37.02
4-21 90.15
4-22 90.16, 90.17
5-1 150.15
5-1.1 150.15
5-1.2 150.15
5-1.3 150.15
5-1.4 150.15
5-1.5 150.15
5-1.7 150.01
5-1.8(C) 150.17, 150.99
5-2 150.03
5-6 32.23
7-14 95.01
7-15 95.02
7-16 95.03
7-17 95.04
7-18 95.05
7-19 95.06
7-20 95.07
7-21 95.08
7-22 95.09
7-23 95.10
7-24 95.11
7-25 95.12
7-26 95.13
10-3 150.99
10-10 93.01
10-11 93.04
10-12 93.05
13-21 152.01
13-22 152.02
13-23 152.03
7
8 Elizabethtown - Parallel References
1973 Code Section 1994 Code Section
13-24 152.04
14-1 110.01
14-2 110.02
14-3 110.03
14-4 110.04
14-5 110.05
14-6 110.06
14-7 110.07
14-8 110.08
14-9 110.09
14-10 110.10
14-11 110.11
14-12 110.12
14-13 110.13
14-14 110.14
14-15 110.15
14-16 110.16
14-17 110.17, 110.99
14-18 110.17, 110.99
14-19 110.18
14-20 110.99
14-20(1) 110.18
14-21 110.19
14-30 113.01
14-31 113.02
14-32 113.03
14-33 113.04
14-34 113.05
14-35 113.06
14-40 111.01
14-40(a) 111.02
14-40(b) 111.03
14-40(c) 111.04
14-40(d) 111.05
14-40(e) 111.06
14-40(f) 111.07
14-51 115.01
14-52 115.02
14-53 115.03
14-54 115.04
14-55 115.05
14-56 115.06
14-57 115.07
14-70 116.01
14-71 116.02
14-72 116.03
15-5 130.02
References to 1973 Code 9
1973 Code Section 1994 Code Section
15-6.1 130.03
15-7 37.01
15-8 37.01
15-12 97.02
15-13 97.02
15-14 97.03
15-15 97.01
15-30 96.01
15-31 96.02
15-32 96.03
15-33 96.04
15-34 96.05
15-35 96.15
15-37 96.16, 96.17
15-41 114.01
15-42 114.02
15-45 114.03
15-46 114.04
16-3.1 98.01
16-4 98.02
16-6 98.03
16-7 98.04
16-8 98.05
16-9 98.06
16-10 98.07
17-101 37.15
17-108.1 37.10
17½-1 153.01
17½-11 155.01
18-6 91.045
18-8 91.046
18-51 91.060
18-52 91.061
18-53 91.062
18-54 91.063
18-55 91.064
18-56 91.065
18-57 91.066
18-61 91.067
18-62 91.067
18-63 91.067
18-64 91.067
18-71 91.068
18-72 91.068
18-73 91.068
18-74 91.068
18-80 91.069
1995 S-1 Repl.
10 Elizabethtown - Parallel References
1973 Code Section 1994 Code Section
18-81 91.069
18-82 91.069
18-83 91.069
18-84 91.069
18-91 91.070
18-92 91.070
18-101 91.71
18-102 91.71
18-103 91.71
18-104 91.71
18-111 91.072
18-112 91.072
18-113 91.072
18-114 91.072
18-115 91.072
19-1.3 74.05
19-2 74.05
19-3 74.05
19-4 74.05
19-5 74.05
19-5.1 74.05
19-7 74.05
19-7.1 74.05
19-8 74.05
19-9 74.01
19-10 74.02
19-13 73.02
19-14 74.05
19-14.1 74.05
19-15 72.70
19-16 74.05
19-17 73.01
19-26 72.03
19-27 72.99
19-31 74.03
19-32 74.03
19-35 72.11
19-36 72.12
19-38(a) 72.03
19-39 72.70
19-46 72.50
19-49 72.51
19-50 72.52
19-51 72.53
19-52 72.54
19-80 71.20
1995 S-1
References to 1973 Code 11
1973 Code Section 1994 Code Section
19-81 71.21
19-82 71.22
19-83 71.23
19-84 71.24
19-85 71.25
19-86 71.26
19-87 71.27
19-88 71.28
19-89 71.29
19-90(a) 71.30
19-91 71.31
20-2 50.01
20-11 51.01
20-12 51.15
20-13 51.16
20-14 51.17
20-15 51.18
20-15.1 51.19
20-16 51.20
20-16.1 51.21
20-17 51.03
20-18 51.02
20-19 51.04
20-20 51.05
20-21 51.06
20-32.1 52.23
20-39 52.06
20-40 52.20
20-41 52.21
20-42 52.22
20-97 52.99
21-3 118.01
12 Elizabethtown - Parallel References
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
- 9-4-22 91.046
- 2-1-26 118.01
- 11-6-39 97.02, 97.03
- 7-7-41 91.045
- 6-1-42 97.01
- 6-3-46 72.11
- 12-2-46 72.50 – 72.52
- 11-6-50 Ch. 75, Sched. I
- 7-2-51 Ch. 75, Sched. I
- 1-1-52 32.21
- 4-7-52 74.01, 74.02
- 7-21-52 74.03
- 9-20-54 72.54
- 1-16-56 Ch. 75, Sched III
- 2-20-56 72.50
- 6-4-56 72.50
- 8-20-56 74.03
- 10-1-56 Ch. 75, Sched. I
- 11-19-56 130.02
- 4-1-57 51.01 – 51.03, 51.20
- 4-20-59 51.04, 51.05
- 5-18-59 111.01 – 111.07
- 8-17-59 73.02
- 3-21-60 95.01 – 95.13
- 2-17-64 93.02
- 12-17-64 93.02
- 5-1-67 98.05
- 6-19-67 72.54
- 8-21-67 71.20 – 71.31
- 12-2-68 Ch. 75, Sched. I
- 1-6-69 98.04
- 4-21-69 50.01
- 6-16-69 Ch. 75, Sched III
- 8-4-69 52.06
- 1-19-70 51.15 – 51.18
- 3-2-70 98.03
- 7-6-70 153.02, 155.02
- 11-2-70 110.01, 110.04, 110.09
- 11-9-70 110.07
- 11-16-70 37.01
13
1995 S-1 Repl.
14 Elizabethtown - Parallel References
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
- 12-7-70 150.03, 150.15
- 1-18-71 110.04, 110.07, 110.09
- 2-1-71 98.03
- 3-15-71 Ch. 75, Sched III
- 6-21-71 98.02
- 1-3-72 110.02 – 110.19, 110.99
- 3-6-72 72.53
- 4-3-72 51.03, 93.01, 150.01, 150.15, 150.17, 150.99
- 5-5-72 Ch. 75, Sched II
- 5-15-72 Ch. 75, Sched II, Ch. 75, Sched IV
- 7-17-72 96.01 – 96.17
- 10-17-72 37.15
- 9-17-73 Ch. 75, Sched. I
- 10-1-73 72.53, Ch. 75, Sched III
- 12-3-73 72.12
- 3-18-74 72.70
- 4-15-74 Ch. 75, Sched III
- 6-17-74 37.10, 38.01
- 10-21-74 74.05
- 12-18-74 93.01
- 3-17-75 51.20
- 6-2-75 90.15 – 90.17
28 12-4-95 90.15 - 90.16
- 11-17-75 155.02
- 2-23-76 115.01 – 115.07
- 1-3-77 51.21
- 3-21-77 152.01 – 152.04
- 6-6-77 98.01, 98.02, 98.04, 98.05
- 6-5-78 93.01, 150.03
- 11-6-78 130.03
- 11-20-78 52.20 – 51.22
- 4-2-79 Ch. 75, Sched. I
- 10-8-79 114.01 – 114.04
- 6-16-80 72.11, 72.53, 72.99, Ch. 75, Sched III,
116.01 – 116.03
- 10-6-80 72.55
- 12-8-80 52.20
- 12-22-80 73.01, 98.06
- 6-1-81 Ch. 75, Sched II
- 6-15-81 Ch. 75, Sched II
- 8-3-81 52.22
- 10-19-81 72.11
- 4-19-82 52.20 – 52.22
- 7-19-82 32.20
- 10-25-82 32.21
- 2-7-83 150.03
- 6-20-83 153.02
1995 S-1 Repl.
References to Ordinances 15
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
- 12-5-83 111.01 – 111.07
- 6-20-84 10.99
- 12-17-84 98.03, 150.17, 150.99
- 4-15-85 113.01 – 113.06, 155.02
- 5-20-85 71.05
- 7-1-85 72.71
- 9-3-85 91.060 – 91.072
- 12-2-85 Ch. 75, Sched II
- 12-16-85 Ch. 75, Sched II
- 1-20-86 93.01, 150.86
- 4-7-86 Ch. 75, Sched. III
- 5-5-86 93.04
- 5-19-86 Ch. 75, Sched III
- 6-5-86 93.05
- 9-15-86 Ch. 75, Sched IV
- 10-6-86 74.05
- 11-2-87 51.15 – 51.19
- 6-6-88 10.03
- 12-18-89 32.23
- 4-27-92 52.22
- 8-27-93 Ch. 75, Sched III
- 9-20-93 Ch. 75, Sched III
- 11-22-93 51.15, 51.16, 51.17, 51.18, 51.20
2 1-7-91 155.01
2 1-3-94 72.71
3 2-5-90 32.21
3 1-3-94 72.56
4 1-7-91 74.04
4 2-8-93 116.03, 117.02 - 117.13
5 1-21-91 Ch. 75, Sched III
6 1-21-91 150.01
7 4-27-92 52.02
7 3-22-93 34.70, 34.71
7 5-1-95 Ch. 99
8 3-5-90 72.71
8 2-4-91 52.20, 52.21
8 4-27-92 52.03
8 2-21-94 151.01 - 151.12, 151.25, 151.26, 151.27, 151.28,
151.40 - 151.44, 10.99
9 3-21-88 51.15 - 51.20
9 3-6-89 Ch. 75, Sched III
9 2-4-91 154.01
10 3-6-89 72.71
10 3-19-90 37.02
10 5-18-92 Ch. 75, Sched. I
14 5-20-85 52.04, 52.05
1995 S-2
16 Elizabethtown - Parallel References
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
15 5-21-90 74.05
15 3-4-91 10.99
18 6-4-90 51.06
18 5-6-91 155.01
18 11-16-92 34.01
18 5-9-94 119.01 - 119.14, 119.99
20 5-20-91 91.001, 91.085, 91.086, 91.087, 91.089, 91.090,
91.091, 91.88
21 5-20-91 155.01
21 7-18-94 Ch. 99
23 9-6-94 91.002
24 12-3-84 155.01
24 6-6-88 98.07
24 12-21-92 34.50 - 34.55, 91.105 - 91.117
24 1-2-96 34.50-34.55, 91.105-91.117
25 10-2-95 72.71
26 11-1-93 72.56
27 7-1-91 150.01, 150.17, 150.99
28 7-15-91 34.25 - 34.29
28 10-24-94 Ch. 33
30 8-15-88 153.01
31 8-19-91 32.21
32 12-19-94 72.71
33 1-19-90 74.05
34 10-21-91 72.56
35 11-7-88 150.17, 150.99
36 11-8-88 72.71
37 11-4-91 92.001, 92.010, 92.011, 92.012, 92.013, 92.025,
92.026, 92.035 - 92.039, 92.050, 92.051, 92.052,
92.065, 92.066, 92.075, 92.076, 92.077, 92.090 -
92.097, 92.110 - 92.114
274A 7-2-73 10.99
1995 S-2
INDEX
2018-S-1 1
2 Elizabethtown - Index
2018-S-1
INDEX
ABANDONED; INOPERABLE VEHICLES AND MACHINERY
Declaration of nuisance, 92.035
Dismantling or overhauling vehicle on private property prohibited; exceptions, 92.037
Parking inoperable vehicle where it can be viewed from public highway, other city streets, 92.036
Parking vehicle in front yard prohibited; exceptions, 92.038
Storing any appliance outside or where accessible to children prohibited, 92.039
AGENCIES, BOARDS AND COMMITTEES
Airport Board, (See AIRPORT BOARD)
Cable Communications Authority, (See CABLE COMMUNICATIONS AUTHORITY)
Code Enforcement Appeals Board, (See CODE ENFORCEMENT APPEALS BOARD)
Meeting times, 34.01
Terms of office, 34.01
Tree Board, (See TREE BOARD)
AIRPORT BOARD
Establishment; nature, 34.05
Purpose and duties, 34.06
ALARMS, REGULATING THE USE OF FIRE AND OR POLICE
Definitions, 132.01
Fines/Civil Action, 132.03
Severability, 132.04
Unlawful false alarms, notice and duty to inspect; repair and initiate training after five preventable false alarms,
132.02
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL
Adoption of State Law, 122.04
Application/License, 122.08
Approval of Premises, 122.20
Books, Records and Reports, 122.22
Certain Special Licenses Defined, 122.07
Change of Information, 122.18
Conditions, Prohibitions and Restrictions, 122.24
Creation of the Office of the City Alcoholic Beverage Control Administrator, 122.05
Definitions, 122.02
Delinquent Taxes or Fees, 122.121
Dormancy, 122.19
Enforcement, 122.28
Hours for sale and delivery; Restrictions, 122.23
Information Deemed Confidential; Penalty for Disclosure; Exceptions, 122.27
License Fees, 122.06
Lost or Destroyed Licenses, 122.10
Malt Beverage Keg Registration, 122.26
Mandatory Responsible Alcoholic Beverage Service Training, 122.25
Notice to Licensee; Surrender of License; Hearing, 122.13
Penalties, 122.29
Purpose, 122.01
Refund of License Fees, 122.09
3
2018-S-1
4 Elizabethtown - Index
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL (Cont’d)
Refusal of License, 122.15
Regulatory License Fee, 122.17
Review of License, 122.16
Revocation or Suspension, 122.12
Scope, 122.03
Severability, 122.30
Temporary Closing, 122.11
Transfer or Assignment, 122.14
ANIMALS
Definitions, 90.01
Dogs, (See DOGS)
BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES
Bicycle facilities plan adopted, 73.01
Clinging to vehicles, 73.04
Operation of bicycles, motorcycles, and the like, 73.02
Skating and coasting, 73.03
BLASTING, (See FIRE PREVENTION)
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT, (See ZONING CODE)
BUILDING OFFICIAL, (See BUILDING REGULATIONS)
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Administration and Enforcement
Building Official, 150.15
Noncompliance with permit requirements, 150.17
Permit and application fees, 150.16
Penalty, 150.99
Standard Codes
Adoption of Kentucky Building Code and Standards of Safety; enforcement agents, 150.01
Application, 150.02
Other standard codes adopted by reference, 150.03
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS AUTHORITY
Establishment, 34.70
Functions and powers, 34.71
2018-S-1
Index 5
CABLE TELEVISION
Approval of city necessary, 119.05
Certification of compliance, 119.10
Decision, 119.14
Inflation and external cost adjustments, 119.12
Information to be provided, 119.07
Notice of commencement of regulations, 119.02
Penalty, 119.99
Proprietary information, 119.13
Public hearings, 119.11
Rate filings by operator, 119.03
Rate subject to refunds, 119.09
Schedule of action by the city, 119.08
Scope and intent, 119.01
Support for rate filings; burden of proof, 119.04
Timing of rate filing, 119.06
Tolling periods, 119.08
CELLULAR TOWER APPLICATION FEES
Fees & Review, 156.02
Purpose, 156.01
CEMETERIES
Perpetual Care Trust Fund
Annual trustee report and audit, 95.08
City to annually report and account with trustee, 95.12
Deficiency in operation of cemetery to be met by emergency account, 95.11
Designation; appointment of trustee, 95.04
Establishment, 95.01
Income payments to city, 95.09
Powers or trustee, 95.05
Scope and effect of provisions; amendments, 95.13
Sources of money, 95.02
Term of trustee, 95.07
Trustee's compensation, 95.06
Use of funds for upkeep and maintenance expenditures, 95.10
Use of income only, 95.03
CITY COUNCIL
Members; election, qualifications, compensation, 32.01
Powers and duties, 32.03
Rules of Procedure
Mayor as Presiding Officer, 32.20
Meetings, 32.21
Quorum, 32.22
Smoking in Council chamber, 32.23
Vacancies, 32.02
2018-S-1
6 Elizabethtown - Index
CITY OFFICIALS
Compensation, 31.02
Elected Officials
Council members, 31.22
Election procedure, 31.20
Mayor; the term of office, 31.21
Nonelected City Officials
Establishment of nonelected city offices, 31.35
Oath; bond, 31.01
CITY POLICIES
Equal Opportunity
Federal and state compliance, 35.01
CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD
Administration, 34.92
Appeals, Final Judgement, 34.102
Appointment of Members; terms of office; removal from office; oath and compensation, 34.94
Conflict of Interest, 34.96
Creation and Membership, 34.91
Definitions, 34.90
Enforcement Proceedings, 34.99
Hearing; Notice and Final Order, 34.100
Jurisdiction, 34.97
Lienholder Notification System, 34.105
Liens, 34.106
Liens, Fines, Charges and Fees, 34.104
Ordinance Fine Schedule, 34.103
Organization of Board; Meetings; Quorum and Alternate Board Members, 34.95
Presentation of Cases, 34.101
Powers, 34.93
Powers of the Code Enforcement Board, 34.98
Severability, 34.107
CODE OF ETHICS
Declaration, 33.02
Definitions, 33.04
Enforcement
Advisory opinions, 33.55
Appeals, 33.53
County Board of Ethics, 33.50
Filing and investigation of complaints, 33.51
Hearings, 33.52
Limitations of actions, 33.54
Reprisals prohibited against persons disclosing violations, 33.56
2018-S-1
Index 7
CODE OF ETHICS (Cont’d)
Financial Disclosure
Amended statement, 33.31
Control of financial statements, 33.32
Public viewing, 33.34
Requirements; contents, 33.33
When to file, 33.31
Who must file, 33.30
Nepotism, 33.40
Purpose and authority, 33.03
Standards of Conduct
Conflicts of interest, 33.15
Honoraria, 33.19
Misuse of confidential information, 33.18
Receipt of gifts, 33.16
Use of city or county resources, 33.17
COMMERCIAL BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS; RESTAURANTS
Causing loud noise prohibited, 114.02
Consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages, 114.06
Cruising through lot prohibited, 114.05
Definitions, 114.01
Leaving vehicle unoccupied; towing, 114.03
Operator of business establishment to post notice of prohibitions, 114.04
CURFEW, 130.01
DETECTIVE AND SECURITY AGENCIES
Bond required, 115.03
Liability insurance required, 115.04
Permit and requirements in addition to other permits, 115.06
Permit required; bond, 115.01
Permit to cover agency and employees, 115.05
Proof of good character, 115.02
Revocation of permits, 115.07
DISCONNECTION POLICY
City not liable for interruption of service, 50.02
Disconnection for nonpayment, 50.01
Restrictions and charges on reconnection, 50.01
DOGS
Abandonment, 90.22
Alternate Opinion, 90.15
Confiscation of Victimized Animal, 90.29
Control of Dogs, 90.16
Control of Vicious Dogs, 90.17
Cruelty or Exhibition Fighting Prohibited, 90.24
Cruelty to Animals, 90.23
2018-S-1
8 Elizabethtown - Index
DOGS (Cont’d)
Definitions, 90.01
Enforcement of Restrictions on Vicious Dogs, 90.18
Impoundment, 90.19
Killing Dogs, Cats for Food or Fur Prohibited, 90.25
Mutilation of Animals, 90.26
Penalties, 90.99
Provision of Necessities, 90.20
Removal of Animal in Immediate Danger, 90.28
Restraint by Leash or Chain; Specifications, 90.21
Sexual Acts with Animals, 90.27
EROSION PREVENTION & SEDIMENT CONTROL
Definitions, 157.02
Design Requirements, 157.06
Effective Date, 157.10
Enforcement, 157.08
Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control Plan, 157.05
Inspection, 157.07
Introduction/Purpose, 157.01
Permits, 157.03
Review and Issuance, 157.04
Severability, 157.09
FAIR HOUSING
Administration and Enforcement
Citizens Advisory Committee; duties, 96.15
Grievance; enforcement procedures, 96.16
Injunctive relief; prosecution, 96.17
City policy, 96.01
Definitions, 96.02
Exemptions, 96.05
Unlawful financial practices, 96.04
Unlawful housing practices, 96.03
FIRE DEPARTMENT
User Fees, 37.20
Work shifts; salary; overtime pay, 37.10
FIRE PREVENTION
Minimum fire protection requirements to be completed prior to issuance of building permits, 93.05
Minimum fire protection requirements; water supply and fire hydrants, 93.04
National fire codes adopted by reference, 93.01
Standards of Safety adopted by reference, 93.02
FIREWORKS
Age Restrictions – Purchasing, Possession, Transport, 133.02
Age Restrictions – Selling, Handling, 133.03
Contraband (KRS 227.750), 133.07
Penalties, 133.09
Public Fireworks Display, 133.05
2018-S-1
Index 9
FIREWORKS (Cont’d)
Sale of Fireworks, 133.01
Sales Restricted to Retail Only, 133.04
Severability, 133.10
State Law Affirmed, 133.08
Training, 133.06
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Abrogation and greater restrictions, 151.10
Administration
Designation of local administrator, 151.25
Duties and responsibilities of the local administrator, 151.27
Establishment of Development Permit, 151.26
Basis for establishing the special flood hazard areas, 151.07
Compliance, 151.09
Definitions, 151.05
Establishment of development permit, 151.08
Enforcement, Violation Notice and Penalties, 151.13
Findings of fact, 151.02
Interpretation, 151.11
Lands to which this chapter applies, 151.06
Objectives, 151.04
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
Appeals and variance procedures, 151.47
Critical Facilities, 151.46
General construction standards, 151.40
Severability, 151.48
Specific standards, 151.41
Standards for accessory structures in all zones beginning with the letter “A:, 151.45
Standards for streams without established base flood elevation (unnumbered A zones) and/or floodways,
151.42
Standards for subdivision proposals, 151.44
Standards for areas of shallow flooding, 151.43
Statement of purpose, 151.03
Statutory authorization, 151.01
Warning and disclaimer of liability, 151.12
GARBAGE, DEBRIS AND RUBBISH
Declaration of nuisance, 92.025
Violations concerning garbage, debris and rubbish, 92.026
GAS
Conditions to provision of gas service, 51.02
Connection permit required; tap-on fees, 51.03
Definitions, 51.01
Reconnection after voluntary turn-off; fee, 51.04
Reconnection of meter; fee, 51.05
Requirements and fees for gas tap and extensions for subdivision and private developments; rebate policy, 51.06
2018-S-1
10 Elizabethtown - Index
Gas (Cont’d)
Service Rate Schedules
Adjustment for Increase in Rate, 51.23
Curtailment Notice and Charge for Failure to Obey, 51.22
Firm Transportation Service, 51.20
General Rate, 51.15
Heat Rate, 51.16
High Load Rate, 51.17
Interruptible Fixed Price Service, 51.21
Interruptible Industrial Service, 51.18
Interruptible Industrial Service with Standby, 51.19
Overcharges and Undercharges; Adjustment of Errors in Billing, 51.24
GRASS AND WEEDS
Declaration of nuisance, 92.050
Exemption for woodlands and trees, 92.052
Grass, weeds and vegetation to be trimmed regularly; maximum height, 92.051
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Administering Agency, 121.05
Affirmative Defenses, 121.11
Appeals Board, 121.10
Applicability, 121.02
Confidential Information and Trade Secrets, 121.07
Definitions, 121.03
Determination, 121.04
Disclaimer of Liability, 121.12
Enforcement; Notice of Violation, 121.08
Notification to Fire Communications & Dispatch, 121.06
Penalties, 121.09
Purpose, 121.01
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
Certificates of Appropriateness, 34.124
Definitions, 34.118
Historic District and Landmarks, 34.123
Historic Preservation Commission; Establishment, 34.119
Intent and Declaration of Public Policy, 34.116
Meetings, 34.120
Purpose, 34.117
Purposes & Duties, 34.121
Staffing, Right to Receive and Spend Funds, 34.122
HOODS AND MASK IN PUBLIC PLACES, PROHIBITING
Definitions, 131.02
Exemptions, 131.04
Penalties, 131.05
Purpose and Findings, 131.01
Wearing Hoods or Masks in a Public Place, 131.03
2018-S-1
Index 11
INSURANCE COMPANIES
Amount of fee for companies issuing policies other than life insurance, 113.02
Collection fee, 113.03
Disposition of funds, 113.06
Due date; interest, 113.04
Imposition of license fee, 113.01
Written breakdown of collections, 113.05
ITINERANT ENTREPRENEURS, (See PEDDLERS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS, AND SOLICITORS)
LITTERING
Hauling loose material, 94.02
Litter on private property, 94.04
Sweeping litter into gutters, 94.03
Tracking foreign matter on streets, 94.01
MAYOR-COUNCIL PLAN
Form of government, 30.01
Governing officers, 30.02
Salaries of elected officers, 30.03
MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
Compliance with standards as prerequisite to supplying of utilities, 152.03
Compliance; inspection required, 152.02
Failure to comply deemed nuisance, 152.04
Procedure for abatement, 152.04
Standards for placement of mobile homes on lot, 152.01
MOTORCYCLES, (See BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES)
NOISE
Loudspeakers; permit required; issuance, 97.02
Private use of loudspeakers, 97.03
Useless or unnecessary noise prohibited; declared a nuisance, 97.01
NUISANCES
Abandoned; Inoperable Vehicles and Machinery, (See ABANDONED; INOPERABLE VEHICLES AND
MACHINERY)
Administration and Enforcement
Abatement procedure, 92.111
Appeal to Code Enforcement Appeals Board, 92.114
Director of Planning and Development to investigate complaints; notify owner of premises in
violation; exception, 92.110
Records of complaints, actions and violations to be available to the public, 92.113
Termination of utilities, 92.112
Animals, Fowl and Reptiles
Declaration of nuisance, 92.010
Keeping of animal, fowl or reptile which becomes a nuisance prohibited, 92.011
Certain violations concerning animals, fowl and reptiles, 92.012
Slaughtering prohibited, 92.013
2018-S-1
12 Elizabethtown - Index
NUISANCES (Cont’d)
Definitions, 92.001
Erosion Control
Declaration of nuisance, 92.065
Removal of vegetation; replacement, 92.066
Garbage, Debris and Rubbish, (See GARBAGE, DEBRIS AND RUBBISH)
Grass and Weeds, (See GRASS AND WEEDS)
Maintenance of Public Ways
Declaration of nuisance, 92.090
Failure to comply, 92.099
Inspection and notice, 92.098
Maintenance; repair of sidewalks, 92.097
Obstructing fire hydrant prohibited, 92.093
Obstructing streets and sidewalks prohibited, 92.096
Obstructing view of motorists prohibited, 92.094
Owner to keep property cleared to traveled portion of street, 92.092
Owner to maintain public way; keep compatible with adjacent pavement, 92.091
Owners to maintain drainageway on private property; obstruction prohibited, 92.095
Performance by city, 92.100
Prohibiting Illicit Discharges and Illicit Connections to the City’s Stormwater System (See STORMWATER)
Sewage Discharge, (See SEWER DISCHARGE)
OCCUPATIONAL LICENSES
Administrative Provisions, 110.10
Apportionment, 110.04
Definitions, 110.01
Duties of Finance Director, 110.13
Effective Date, 110.16
Employers to Withhold, 110.05
Extensions, 110.07
Federal Audit Provisions, 110.09
Information to Remain Confidential, 110.11
Minimum and Maximum Liability, 110.15
Occupational License Application Required, 110.02
Occupational License Tax Payment Required, 110.03
Penalties, 110.12
Refunds, 110.08
Return Required, 110.06
Severability, 110.14
OFFENSES AGAINST MUNICIPAL REGULATIONS
Air or spring guns, 130.02
Curfew, 130.01
Flourishing; firing deadly weapon, 130.03
ONE-WAY STREETS, Ch. 75, Sched. I
2018-S-1
Index 13
OPERATION OF GOLF CARTS ON PUBLIC ROADWAYS
Definition, 77.01
Golf Cart Exemptions, 77.07
Golf Cart Not Subject to this Section, 77.03
Identification of Roadways, 77.02
Insurance, 77.05
Operators, 77.04
Other Statutes and Ordinances, 77.13
Penalties & Fines, 77.12
Permit Fees, 77.11
PODs, 77.10
Prohibitions on certain Public Roadways, 77.08
Traffic Regulations, 77.06
OUTDOOR CAFES
General, 127.07
Permit Application Process, 127.02
Permit Fee and Applicability, 127.03
Permit Required, 127.01
Requirements Not Covered, 127.06
Severability, 127.08
Standards and Conditions, 127.04
Violations and Penalties, 127.05
PARADES
Alternative permit, 71.26
Appeal procedure when permit denied, 71.25
Application for permit, 71.22
Contents of permit, 71.28
Definitions, 71.20
Duties of permittee, 71.29
Notice of rejection of permit, 71.24
Notice to city and other officials when permit issued, 71.27
Permit required, 71.21
Public conduct during parades, 71.30
Revocation of permit, 71.31
Standards for issuance of permit, 71.23
PARKING REGULATIONS
Metered Parking
Deposit of slugs, 72.52
Duty of operator to deposit coins; remaining longer than allotted time prohibited, 72.51
Enforcement; citation, 72.54
Hitching animal to meter prohibited, 72.52
Hours of operation, 72.53
Parking meter zone, 72.50
Parking violations; public parking lots, 72.56
Tampering with meter, 72.52
Use of funds from parking meters, 72.57
2018-S-1
14 Elizabethtown - Index
PARKING REGULATIONS (Cont’d)
Parking Generally
Fire lanes, 72.12
Limitations of stopping and parking, 72.03
Manner of parking, 72.02
Obstructional parking; double parking, 72.01
Owner responsibility, 72.09
Parking in excess of certain number of hours prohibited; towing authorized, 72.06
Parking in parks, 72.10
Parking on off-street facility, 72.08
Parking on parade route, 72.07
Parking restricted to allow street cleaning, 72.05
Parking restrictions on Public Square; on long vehicles, 72.11
Restrictions and prohibitions on designated streets, 72.04
Parking Prohibited
Loading and unloading zones, 72.70
Parking prohibited, 72.71
Penalty, 72.99
Snow Emergency, (See SNOW EMERGENCY)
PARKS AND RECREATION
Closing hours at Freeman Lake Park; American Legion Field, 98.01
Fees for recreational facility, 98.08
Fishing in city impoundments and lakes, 98.06
Fishing on Freeman Lake, 98.03
Maintenance of certain city-owned property in natural state, 98.07
Motor vehicle use in recreational areas, 98.02
Swimming in city-owned or occupied reservoirs, 98.04
Use of impoundment or reservoir without permission prohibited, 98.05
PAWNBROKERS
Effective Date, 112.02
Entity Designated, 112.03
Ordinance in Conflict, 112.05
Pawnbrokers, 112.01
Penalty, 112.04
Severability
PEDDLERS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS, AND SOLICITORS
Itinerant Entrepreneurs
Bond to be posted, 111.04
Compliance required, 111.01
Exemptions, 111.07
Levy of fee; placement in general fund, 111.06
List of articles sold to be filed with Director of Finance, 111.03
Refund of bond; use to finance unpaid taxes; forfeiture, 111.05
Solicitor to fill out questionnaire, 111.02
PERPETUAL CARE TRUST FUND, (See CEMETERIES)
2018-S-1
Index 15
PERSONNEL POLICIES
Retirement and Pension Plan
Establishment, 36.01
PLANNING
Comprehensive plan adopted by reference, 153.01
Planning Commission, 153.02
POLICE DEPARTMENT
Civil Service
Commission established, 37.15
Police Department
Carrying concealed weapon authorized, 37.01
Disposition of fees for arrests; subpoenas and the like, 37.02
PRIVATE FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS, REQUIREMENTS FOR MAINTENANCE
Installation of Private Fire Protection Systems, 134.01
Maintenance of Fire Protection Systems Required, 134.02
Repairs to Fire Protection Systems, Required, 134.04
Testing of Fire Protection Systems Required, 134.03
Violations and Penalties, 134.05
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE, 154.01
RESTAURANT TAX
Collection and Enforcement, 126.06
Definitions, 126.01
Duties, Director of Finance, 126.09
Failure to File Return: Failure to Pay the Restaurant Tax Withheld: Underpayment of Amount Due, 126.11
Information Deemed Confidential: Penalty for Disclosure; Exceptions, 126.08
Interest and Penalties, 126.07
Procedure for Applying for Refund and Overpayment, 126.10
Other Ordinances Not Repealed, 126.13
Reporting Procedures for Restaurants, 126.04
Reporting Procedures to City Council, 126.03
Restaurant Tax, 126.02
Severability, 126.12
Transfer of Funds to Elizabethtown Tourism & Convention Bureau, 126.05
2018-S-1
16 Elizabethtown - Index
RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Adoption of standard codes by reference, 10.17
Amendments to code; amendatory language, 10.13
Computation of time, 10.04
Construction of section references, 10.10
Definitions, 10.02
Errors and omissions, 10.15
Historical and statutory references, 10.16
Ordinances repealed, 10.11
Ordinances unaffected, 10.12
Penalty, 10.99
Reference to offices, 10.14
Reviver, 10.08
Rights and liabilities accruing before repeal of ordinance, 10.09
Rules of construction, 10.03
Severability, 10.07
Short titles of ordinances, 10.01
Writings and signatures, 10.06
SCRAP DEALERS
Compliance, 116.02
Dealers to require identification from sellers; records to be kept, 116.04
Definition, 116.01
Examination of Books, 116.07
License required, 116.03
Penalties, 116.09
Regulated Property Sale Limitations, 116.08
Transaction Business with Minors, 116.06
Transaction Record of Purchases, 116.05
SEWER DISCHARGE
Declaration of nuisance, 92.075
Discharge of runoff or groundwater to sanitary public sewer prohibited, 92.077
Discharge to city sewage system required, 92.076
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Administration, 120.03
Construction Requirements, 120.09
Definitions, 120.02
Effect and Limitation, 120.04
Employee Age Requirement, 120.07
Employee License Required, 120.19
Failure of Official to Meet Time Frame not to Risk Applicant or License Rights, 120.22
Findings, Declarations of Public Policy and Purpose, 120.01
Information to be Current; Director to be Notified of Changes, 120.14
Inspections, 120.16
Issuance of License, 120.15
License Application; Contents, 120.13
License Denial; Suspension, Revocation; Hearing and Appeal, 120.20
License Year; License Fees, 120.18
2018-S-1
Index 17
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES (Cont’d)
Location Restrictions, 120.10
Material Not to be Subject to Public View, 120.06
Penalty, 120.23
Prohibited Activities, 120.17
Restricted Hours, 120.08
Sale of Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited, 120.11
Scienter Necessary to Prove Liability, 120.21
Signage, 120.05
Unlawful Activities, 120.12
SMOKE DETECTOR INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE IN RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY
Definitions, 100.02
Enforcement, 100.04
Installation and Maintenance, 100.01
Penalty, 100.99
Smoke Detectors Required; Type and Placement, 100.03
SMOKING REGULATIONS IN PUBLIC PLACES AND PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT
Application of Ordinance to City-owned and County-owned Facilities, 125.03
Code Enforcement Board, 125.14
Construction, 125.17
Declaration of Establishment as Nonsmoking, 125.09
Definitions, 125.02
Effective Date, 125.19
Enforcement, 125.12
Findings & Intent, 125.01
Governmental Agency Cooperation, 125.15
Non-retaliation and Non-waiver of Rights, 125.11
Posting of Signs, 125.10
Prohibition of Smoking in Enclosed Public Places, 125.04
Prohibition of Smoking in Places of Employment. 125.05
Prohibition of Smoking in Outdoor Arenas ad Stadiums, 125.06
Other Applicable Laws, 125.16
Reasonable Distance, 125.07
Severability, 125.18
Violations and Penalties, 125.13
Where Smoking Not Regulated, 125.08
SNOW EMERGENCY
Announcement of snow emergency, 72.25
Snow emergency routes, 72.27
Termination of emergency, 72.26
SPEED LIMITS, Ch. 75, Sched. II
2018-S-1
18 Elizabethtown - Index
STORMWATER, PROHIBITING ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND ILLICIT CONNECTION TO THE CITY’S
STORMWATER SYSTEM
Article Supplemental to other Regulations, 92.158
Definitions, 92.151
Enforcement and Penalties, 92.157
General Provisions, 92.152
Illicit Discharges and Illicit Connections and declared to be a public nuisance, 92.154
Inspections, Monitoring and Remediation, 92.156
Prohibition of Discharges and Illicit Connections; Exceptions, 92.153
Purpose and Scope, 92.150
Rules and Regulations, 92.155
Severability, 92.159
STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT
As-Built Requirements; 158.08
Authority and Right of Entry; 158.04
Definitions and Acronyms, 158.02
Enforcement; 158.09
Post-Construction Qualified Professional; 158.07
Post-Construction Stormwater Management; 158.05
Program Objectives and General Approach; 158.03
Stormwater Quality Management Plan Permit Inspections; 158.06
Title, Purpose and General Provisions, 158.01
STOP INTERSECTIONS, Ch. 75, Sched. III
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Entrance and Encroachments
Area of Jurisdiction, 91.062
Authority and Administration Standards, 91.061
Compliance with Other Codes, Statutes and Regulations Required, 91.063
Complaints regarding Violations, 91.066
Disclaimer of Liability, 91.065
Encroachment Construction Standards, 91.072
Encroachment Permits, 91.069
Entrance Construction Standards, 91.071
Entrance Permits, 91.068
General Permit Standards, 91.070
Penalty, 91.067
Purpose, 91.060
Special Design Standards, 91.073
Variances, 91.064
Excavations and Construction
Application and cash deposit, 91.016
Barriers around excavations, 91.018
Opening permit required, 91.015
Restoration of pavement, 91.017
Warning lights, 91.019
2018-S-1
Index 19
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS (Cont’d)
Obstructions
Barbed wire fences, 91.046
Exhibition of merchandise on street or sidewalks, 91.045
Removal of ice and snow, 91.047
Skateboards, Skates and Other Non-Motorized Transportation Devices, Restricted Use
Confiscation, 91.204
Definitions, 91.201
Operation Prohibited, 91.202
Penalty, 91.203
Street and House Numbering
Department of Planning and Development to assign street numbers, 91.086
Display of street address required, 91.087
Noncompliance, 91.091
Specifications for numerals indicating street address, 91.088
Street numbering system, 91.085
Street numbers to be obtained and displayed before issuance of building permit or certificate of occupancy,
91.089
Tampering with; defacing street numbers prohibited, 91.090
Street maintenance, 91.002
Street names, 91.001
Trees on Public Property
Arborists license and bond, 91.116
Dead or diseased tree removal on private property, 91.113
Distance from curb to sidewalk, 91.107
Distance from street corners and fire hydrant, 91.108
Interference with city tree board, 91.115
Pruning, corner clearance, 91.112
Public tree care, 91.110
Removal of stumps, 91.114
Review by city council, 91.117
Spacing, 91.106
Street tree species to be planted, 91.105
Tree topping, 91.111
Utilities, 91.109
TOURIST AND CONVENTION COMMISSION
Accounting, 117.09
Amount of tax, 117.03
Appointments to bureau, 117.11
Audits; civil actions, 117.10
Bonding; reports, 117.06
Commission established, 117.01
Confidentiality, 117.13
Costs of litigation and audits, 117.12
Depository, 117.07
Enforcement of provisions, 117.09
Liability for tax, 117.04
Payment of tax, 117.02
Powers of commission; fiscal year; effective date, 117.08
Scope of tax, 117.05
Tax levied, 117.01
2018-S-1
20 Elizabethtown - Index
TRAFFIC CODE
Authority for enforcement, 70.04
Definitions, 70.01
Powers and duties of Police Department, 70.03
Required obedience to traffic directions, 70.02
Temporary regulations, 70.05
TRAFFIC RULES
Operation Generally
Obstructing traffic, 71.01
Rail traffic, 71.05
Vehicles crossing sidewalks, 71.04
Parades, (See PARADES)
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
Establishment and maintenance of traffic-control devices, 70.16
Interference with signals, 70.18
Obedience to signals, 70.17
Signal legends, 70.15
Unauthorized signals or markings, 70.19
TURNING RESTRICTED, Ch. 75, Sched. IV
VEHICLES FOR HIRE
Permit required for operation, 118.01
WATER AND SEWER
Annual rate for standby fire protection taps, 52.20
Discharge of surface or stormwater or groundwater into the sanitary sewer system of the city is prohibited, 52.30
Emergency surcharges for water and sewer customers, 52.07
Existing provisions reaffirmed, 52.22
Meter deposits, 52.22
Penalties, 52.31
Private fire hydrants outside city, 52.21
Prohibited water usage, 52.06
Purpose, 52.01
Severability, 52.32
Sewer use ordinance adopted by reference, 52.02
Tapping fees for water and sewer, 52.05
Tapping or connection permit, 52.04
Water and sewer rates adopted by reference, 52.03
YARD SALES
Definition, 99.01
Enforcement, 99.04
Placement of merchandise, 99.03
Restrictions, 99.02
ZONING CODE
Board of Adjustment, 155.02
Zoning ordinance adopted by reference, 155.01
2018-S-1

ZONING ORDINANCE 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

City Council Approval Date: June 16, 2008 (Ordinance 06-2008) 

Amended: November 17, 2008 (Ordinance 14-2008) December 3, 2012 (Ordinance 27-2012) 
May 18, 2009 (Ordinance 05-2009) April 7, 2014 (Ordinance 10-2014) 
July 6, 2009 (Ordinance 08-2009) December 15, 2014 (Ordinance 28-2014) 
September 8, 2009 (Ordinance 12-2009) May 4, 2015 (Ordinance 05-2015) 
November 16, 2009 (Ordinance 23-2009) December 19, 2016 (Ordinance 24-2016) 
February 7, 2011 (Ordinance 05-2011) June 5, 2017 (Ordinance 05-2017) 
September 6, 2011 (Ordinance 15-2011) September 5, 2017 (Ordinance 11-2017) 
October 17, 2011 (Ordinance 20-2011) September 19, 2017 (Ordinance 15-2017) 
November 21, 2011 (Ordinance 26-2011) 
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION, GENERAL PROVISIONS PAGE NUMBER 
1.0 Preamble 1 
1.1 Adoption 1 
1.2 Short Title 1 
1.3 Purpose 1 
1.4 Interpretation 1 
1.5 Conflict of Ordinance 1 
1.6 Plans and Construction in Progress 2 
1.7 Separability 2 
1.8 Definitions 2 
1.9 Administration 18 
1.10 Permit Requirements 18 
1.11 Compliance with other Codes, Statutes and Regulations 19 
1.12 Certificate of Occupancy 19 
1.13 Authorized Use 19 
1.14 Complaints Regarding Violations 19 
1.15 Penalties for Violations 19 
1.16 Planning Commission 19 
1.17 Board of Zoning Adjustment 20 
1.18 Map Amendment Procedures 20 
1.19 Zoning Text Amendments 
21 
1.20 Zoning District for Annexed Territory 
21 
CHAPTER 2: ZONING REGULATIONS PAGE NUMBER 
2.0 Zoning Map 23 
2.1 23 
Map Amendment Identification 
2.2 23 
Interpretation of Zoning District Boundaries 
2.3 23 
Application of Zoning District Regulations 
2.4 24 
Conversion of Dwelling Structures 
iii 

ZONING ORDINANCE 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
2.5 24 
Agricultural Land Use Exemption 
2.6 24 
Governmental Land Use Exemption 
2.7 24 
Zoning Districts 
2.8 27 
Zone Descriptions and Permitted Uses 
2.8.1 R-1 Suburban Residential-1 27 
2.8.2 R-2 Suburban Residential-2 31 
2.8.3 R-3 Urban Residential-3 35 
2.8.4 R-4 Urban Residential-4 39 
2.8.5 R-5 Urban Residential Mixed 43 
2.8.6 R-6 High Density Residential 49 
2.8.7 C-1 Neighborhood Office 55 
2.8.8 C-2 Neighborhood Commercial 59 
2.8.9 C-3 Regional Commercial 65 
2.8.10 C-4 General Service Commercial 73 
2.8.11 C-5 Downtown Mixed Use 79 
2.8.12 I-1 General Industrial 85 
2.8.13 I-2 Regional Industrial 89 
2.8.14 PNR-1Planned Neighborhood Residential-1 93 
2.8.15 PNR-2 Planned Neighborhood Residential-2 97 
2.8.16 PNC Planned Neighborhood Commercial 99 
2.8.17 WCD-1, WCD-2 Woodland Corridor District 105 
2.8.18 MAZ Municipal Airport Zone 109 
2.8.19 AGB Agri-Business15 113 2.8.2015 FDH Future Development Holding 115 
2.9 Over zones 117 
2.9.1 Interstate Highway Service Business (IHSB) 117 
2.9.2 Floodplain Over zone 117 
2.9.3 Freeman Lake Over zone 118 
2.9.4 National Register Historic District Overlay Zone 119 
2.9.5 Commercial Transition Over zone 119 
2.10 Prohibited Uses 120 
CHAPTER 3: DEVELOPMENT PLAN PAGE NUMBER 
3.0 Intent and Purpose 121 
3.1 121 
Development Plan Required 
3.2 121 
Development Plan Procedures 
3.3 122 
Certification of Approval 
3.4 122 
Construction Commencement 
3.5 122 
Approval of Development Plan Before Building Permit 
3.6 123 
Completion of Site Improvements Before Occupancy 
3.7 123 
Content of Development Plan 
3.8 124 
Content of Conceptual Development Plan 
ZONING ORDINANCE 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
3.9 Amendments to Development Plans 	125 
3.10 Master Plan, Planned District 	125 
3.11 Substitution of Subdivision Plat for Development Plan 	127 
CHAPTER 4: COMMERCIAL DESIGN GUIDELINES 	PAGE NUMBER 
4.0 Intent and Purpose 	129 
4.1 Definitions 	129 
4.2 Applicability 	130 
4.3 Required Plan Submission 	130 
4.4 Design Guidelines, Buildings 	130 
4.5 Design Guidelines, Site Design 	132 
4.6 Waiver Procedure 	135 
CHAPTER 5: GENERAL LANDSCAPE STANDARDS 	PAGE NUMBER 
5.0 Intent and Purpose 	137 
5.1 Sites Affected 	137 
5.2 Change in Use 	137 
5.3 Landscaping Requirements 	137 
5.4 Waiver for Development Projects 	137 
5.5 Planting Locations 	137 
5.6 Pervious Areas 	138 
5.7 Encroachments 	138 
5.8 Existing Trees/Landscaping 	138 
5.9 Perimeter Landscaping Requirements 	138 
5.10 Interior and Vehicular Use Area (VUA) Landscaping 	138 
5.11 Plan Submission 	140 
5.12 	Planting Manual and Plant Materials List 140 
5.13 	RESERVED 140 
5.14 	Screening Requirements (Service Structures, Basins and Satellite Dishes) 140 
CHAPTER 6: GENERAL PARKING STANDARDS 	PAGE NUMBER 
6.0 Intent and Purpose 	143 
6.1 Parking/Loading Established Prior to Adoption of Ordinance 143 
6.2 Parking Requirements for Change in Principal Use 	143 
6.3 Special Access, Surface and Location Requirements 	143 
6.4 Stacking Areas 	143 
6.5 Location and Distribution of Parking 	143 
6.6 Minimum Design and Maintenance Requirements 	144 
6.7 Parking Area Design Standards 	144 
6.8 Single Parking Areas for Multiple Uses 	144 
6.9 Joint Use of Parking Areas 	144 
6.10 Parking, Loading and Unloading, Residential Zones 	145 
6.11 Parking, Loading and Unloading, Non Residential Zones 145 
ZONING ORDINANCE 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
6.12 Loading and Unloading Spaces 
145 
6.13 Vehicular Storage Areas 
145 
6.14 Off Street Parking Requirements 
145 
6.15 Large Vehicle Parking in IHSB Over zone 
146 
6.16 Bicycle Parking 
146 
CHAPTER 7: GENERAL SIGN STANDARDS PAGE NUMBER 
7.0 Intent and Purpose 149 
7.1 Sign Permit Procedures 149 
7.2 General Provisions 149 
7.3 Signs Exempt From Permit 150 
7.4 Prohibited Signs, All Zones 150 
7.5 Permitted Signs, All Zones 151 
7.6 Temporary Banner Signs 151 
7.7 Scenic Parkway Signage 151 
7.8 Interstate Off Premise Signs 151 
7.9 Construction and Maintenance 152 
7.10 Non-Conforming Signs 152 
7.11 Discontinuation, Non-Conforming Signs 152 
7.12 Sign Types 153 
CHAPTER 8: FENCE AND WALL REGULATIONS PAGE NUMBER 
8.0 Intent and Purpose 157 
8.1 Fences and Walls 157 
8.2 Subdivision Identification Sign/Signature Entrance 158 
CHAPTER 9: GENERAL DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS PAGE NUMBER 
9.0 Intent and Purpose 159 
9.1 Minimum Lot Area 159 
9.2 Yards 159 
9.3 Height of Structures 160 
9.4 Environmentally Sensitive and Geologic Hazard Areas 160 
9.5 Public Facilities 161 
9.6 Sight Triangle 163 
9.7 163 
Entrance Standards 
CHAPTER 10: ACCESSORY STRUCTURES/BUILDING PROJECTIONS PAGE NUMBER 
10.0 Intent and Purpose 165 
10.1 Accessory Structure Location Requirements 
165 
10.2 Porches, Stairways and Terraces 
165 
10.3 Chimneys, Eaves, Ornamental Features, Etc. 
165 
10.4 Handicap Ramps 
165 
10.5 Canopies 
165 
10.6 Temporary Structure Setbacks 
165 
ZONING ORDINANCE 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
10.7 Neighborhood Structures 166 
CHAPTER 11: NON CONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS PAGE NUMBER 
11.0 Non-Conforming Use Provisions 167 
11.1 Kentucky Revised Statutes Requirements 167 
11.2 Regulation of Non-Conforming Uses 167 
11.3 Regulation of Non-Conforming Structures 167 
11.4 Regulation of Non-Conforming Lots 167 
11.5 Conditional Uses are not Non-Conforming Uses 168 
11.6 Procedure for Determination of Non-Conforming Use 168 
FIGURES PAGE NUMBER 
1.0 Basement 4 
1.1 Berm 5 
1.2 Lot Styles 10 
1.3 Area of Sign 14 
1.4 Sign Types 15 
1.5 Yards 17 
2.0 National Register Historical District Over Zone 119 
4.0 Structural Bay Layout 131 
6.0 Accessible Parking Space Layouts 148 
6.1 Accessible Parking Signage 148 
6.2 Parking Aisle Widths 148 
7.0 Sign Types 153 
TABLES PAGE NUMBER 
2.0 R-1 Signs 28 
2.1 R-1 Parking 29 
2.2 R-2 Signs 32 
2.3 R-2 Parking 33 
2.4 R-3 Signs 36 
2.5 R-3 Parking 37 
2.6 R-3 Perimeter Landscape Buffer Area 38 
2.7 R-3 Buffering Requirement 38 
2.8 Perimeter Planting Density 38 
2.9 R-4 Signs 41 
2.10 R-4 Parking 41 
2.11 R-4 Perimeter Landscape Buffer Area 42 
2.12 R-4 Buffering Requirement 42 
2.13 Perimeter Planting Density 42 
2.14 R-5 Signs 45 
2.15 R-5 Parking 45 
2.16 R-5 Perimeter Landscape Buffer Area 46 
2.17 R-5 Buffering Requirement 46 
ZONING ORDINANCE 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
2.18 Perimeter Planting Density 47 
2.19 R-6 Signs 51 
2.20 R-6 Parking 52 
2.21 R-6 Perimeter Landscape Buffer Area 52 
2.22 R-6 Buffering Requirement 53 
2.23 Perimeter Planting Density 53 
2.24 C-1 Signs 56 
2.25 C-1 Parking 57 
2.26 C-1 Perimeter Landscape Buffer Area 58 
2.27 C-1 Buffering Requirement 58 
2.28 Perimeter Planting Density 58 
2.29 C-2 Signs 60 
2.30 C-2 Parking 61 
2.31 C-2 Perimeter Landscape Buffer Area 63 
2.32 C-2 Buffering Requirement 63 
2.33 Perimeter Planting Density 63 
2.34 C-3 Signs 67 
2.35 C-3 Parking 69 
2.36 C-3 Perimeter Landscape Buffer Area 71 
2.37 C-3 Buffering Requirement 71 
2.38 Perimeter Planting Density 71 
2.39 C-4 Signs 75 
2.40 C-4 Parking 75 
2.41 C-4 Perimeter Landscape Buffer Area 77 
2.42 C-4 Buffering Requirement 77 
2.43 Perimeter Planting Density 77 
2.44 C-5 Signs 80 
2.45 C-5 Parking 81 
2.46 C-5 Perimeter Landscape Buffer Area 83 
2.47 C-5 Buffering Requirement 83 
2.48 Perimeter Planting Density 83 
2.49 I-1 Signs 87 
2.50 I-1 Parking 87 
2.51 I-1 Perimeter Landscape Buffer Area 88 
2.52 I-1 Buffering Requirement 88 
2.53 Perimeter Planting Density 88 
2.54 I-2 Signs 90 
2.55 I-2 Parking 91 
2.56 I-2 Perimeter Landscape Buffer Area 92 
2.57 I-2 Buffering Requirement 92 
2.58 Perimeter Planting Density 92 
2.59 PNR-1 Parking 95 
ZONING ORDINANCE TABLE OF CONTENTS 
2.60 PNR-2 Parking 	98 
2.61 PNC Parking 	101 
2.62 WCD Signs 	107 
2.63 WCD Parking 	107 
2.64 WCD Perimeter Landscape Buffer Area 	108 
2.65 WCD Buffering Requirement 	108 
2.66 Perimeter Planting Density 	108 
2.67 MAZ Signs 	111 
2.68 MAZ Parking 	111 
2.69 MAZ Perimeter Landscape Buffer Area 	112 
2.70 MAZ Buffering Requirement 	112 
2.71 Perimeter Planting Density 	112 
5.0 Vehicular Use Area Interior Landscape Area Requirements 142 
5.1 Maximum Landscape Island 	142 
5.2 Species Mix 	142 
5.3 Deciduous Trees 	142 
5.4 Evergreen Trees 	142 
5.5 Shrubs 	142 
5.6 RESERVED 	142 
5.7 Landscape Area Equivalents 	142 
6.0 Parking Spaces (Angle/Aisle Width) 	147 
6.1 Minimum/Maximum Parking Allowed 	147 
6.2 Accessible Parking Space Requirements 	147 
7.0 Other Sign Types 	153 
7.1 Off Premise Sign 	155 
7.2 Interstate Highway Service Business (IHSB) Sign 	155 
APPENDICES 	PLANTING MANUAL 165 ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS 170 
CHAPTER 1 
INTRODUCTION AND GENERAL PROVISIONS 

1.0 PREAMBLE 

By adoption of this ordinance, the City of Elizabethtown wishes to exercise all its power and confer upon the Planning Commission and Board of Zoning Adjustment, all authority allowed under the United States and Kentucky Constitutions and Chapter 100 of the Kentucky Revised Statutes. 

1.1 ADOPTION 
This zoning ordinance is enacted by the City of Elizabethtown, is confirmed, adopted and reads as herein after set out. 

1.2 SHORT TITLE 
This ordinance shall be known as the Elizabethtown Zoning Ordinance and may be cited as the “Zoning Ordinance”. 

1.3 PURPOSE 
The purpose of the “Zoning Ordinance” is to implement the adopted Comprehensive Plan and other plans of the City of Elizabethtown; to promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare; to facilitate orderly and harmonious development in the visual and historic character of Elizabethtown; to regulate the density of population and intensity of land use in order to provide for adequate light and air; to provide for vehicle parking and loading space; to improve the appearance of vehicular use areas and property abutting public rights-of-way; to require buffering between non-compatible land uses; to protect, preserve and promote the aesthetic appeal, character and value of the city’s neighborhoods; to promote public health and safety through the reduction of noise pollution, air pollution, visual pollution, air temperature and artificial light glare; to facilitate fire and police protection; to prevent the overcrowding of land, blight, and congestion in the circulation of people and commodities; to prevent the loss of life, health or property from fire, flood or other dangers; to protect airports, highways and other transportation facilities, public facilities, including schools and public grounds, historic districts, the central business district, natural resources and other areas of the city which need special protection; to encourage the development of residential, commercial and industrial subdivisions according to recognized standards which provide for sound, efficient and economic development; to coordinate land development to ensure that future growth will be orderly and conducive to the provision of a minimum outlay of public and private expenditures in providing services to developing areas; and to provide sound and efficient guidelines for the overall development of the areas in which these regulations shall be enforced. Implementation is to be by the Department of Planning and Development, hereinafter referred to as the “Department” or its designated agent. 

1.4 INTERPRETATION 
The provisions herein shall be interpreted broadly and liberally so as to implement and protect the purposes for which they are enacted. In the interpretation and application of the “Zoning Ordinance”, the provisions herein shall be held to be the minimum or maximum requirements (as stated); adopted for the promotion of the health, safety, morals, comfort prosperity and general welfare. It is not intended by the “Zoning Ordinance” to repeal, abdicate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with any private restrictions placed upon property such as covenants, deeds or recorded plats; provided, however, where this “Zoning Ordinance” imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises, or upon the height of buildings, or requires greater lot areas, larger yards or other open spaces, than are imposed by such private restrictions, the provisions of the “Zoning Ordinance” shall control. 

1.5 CONFLICT OF ORDINANCE 
Whenever the “Zoning Ordinance”, or subdivision plats or development plans approved in conformance with these regulations, are in conflict with applicable Kentucky Revised Statutes, or other local ordinances, regulations or laws, the more restrictive statute, ordinance, regulation, plat or plan shall govern and shall be enforced by the appropriate agency. When subdivision and development plans approved by the “Commission” or its appointed representative, contain 
1 

setbacks or other features in excess of the minimum “Zoning Ordinance” requirements, such features as shown on the approved plan shall govern and be enforced by the “Department”. Private deed restrictions or private covenants for a subdivision do not fall within the jurisdiction of enforcement by any local agency and cannot be enforced by the City of Elizabethtown. 

1.6 PLANS AND CONSTRUCTION IN PROGRESS 
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in the “Zoning Ordinance” shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building or premises on which an application for a development plan or construction permit was filed with the “Department” prior to the date of adoption of the “Zoning Ordinance” or amendment thereto, provided that the application meets all zoning and other requirements in effect on the date of said application. The development plan approval or construction permit issued pursuant to applications made before the date of adoption of the “Zoning Ordinance”, which is July 1, 2008, shall be valid only if it is exercised within one (1) year of the date of the effective date of the ordinance.1 “Exercised,” as set forth in this section, shall mean that a binding contract for the construction of the main building or other main improvements is executed, or that prerequisite conditions involving substantial investments shall be under contract, in development or completed, including but not limited to, applications for financing, posting of a surety with the appropriate agencies for the improvements or that the main building(s) are under construction.2 
Additional period of time to “exercise” approval may be granted under the following conditions. 
1.6.1 Setbacks The Department is authorized to issue construction permits conforming to building setbacks established for lots of record created by preliminary subdivision plats and record plats approved between January 1, 2004 and the effective date of the Zoning Ordinance.2 
1.6.2 Multi-family Phase Projects The Department is authorized to issue construction permits for multi-family projects that are being developed in phases conforming to the density established on any development plan approved between January 1, 2006 and the effective date of the Zoning Ordinance. Any construction permit issued under this authority must be issued prior to July 1, 2012.2 

1.7 SEPARABILITY 
If any clause, sentence, subdivision, paragraph, section or part of the “Zoning Ordinance” be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof, but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, subdivision, paragraph, section or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which said judgment shall have been rendered. 

1.8 DEFINITIONS 
For the purpose of the “Zoning Ordinance”, certain terms are herein defined. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the singular number include the plural, words in the plural number include the singular; the word “person” includes association, firm, partnership, trust, governmental body, corporation, organization, as well as an individual; the word “structure” includes building; the word “occupied” includes arranged, designed or intended to be used; the word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely directive; the word “may” is permissive; and the word “lot” includes plat or parcel. For words or terms not defined in the following list, the following documents, or subsequent editions are hereby adopted by reference and may be used: 1) The New Illustrated Book of Development Definitions, by Harvey S. Moskowitz and Carl G. Lindbloom, and; 2) A Glossary of Zoning, Development and Planning Terms, edited by Michael Davidson & Fay Dolnick, Planning Advisory Service Report Number 491-492. Other words or terms shall have the following respective meanings: 
Abandonment To stop the use of property intentionally. When the use of the property has ceased and the property has been vacant for twelve (12) months, abandonment will be presumed unless the owner can show a diligent effort has been made to sell, rent, or use the property for a legally permissible use. 
Abutting Having a common border with, or being separated from such a common border by a right­of-way, alley or easement. 
Access Management The process of providing and managing access to land development while preserving the flow of traffic in terms of safety, capacity and speed. 
Accessory Apartment A dwelling unit that has been added onto, or created within, a single family home. 
Accessory Structure A subordinate structure, detached from, but located on the same lot as a principal building. Accessory structures include garages, decks, and similar structures. 
Accessory Use A use of land or building or portion thereof customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building and located on the same lot with the principal use. 
Adult Day Care Facility A facility providing care for elderly and/or functionally impaired adults in a protective setting for a portion of a 24 hour day. 
Adult Entertainment Forms of entertainment, including but not limited to the following uses: Adult Book Stores, Adult Motion Picture Theaters and Adult Dancing Establishments. These uses are hereby more specifically defined. 
Adult Book Store—An establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, video tapes, motion pictures or audio tapes and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to “Specified Sexual Activities” or “Specified Anatomical Areas,” (as defined below). Adult Motion Picture Theater—An enclosed building or open area used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to “Specified Sexual Activities” or “Specified Anatomical Areas,” (as defined below) for observation by patrons therein. Adult Dancing Establishment—A public or private establishment, which is licensed to serve food and or beverages, which feature topless or bottomless dancers, strippers or similar entertainers where “Specified Anatomical Areas” (as defined below) are visible. 
For purposes of this definition, “Specified Sexual Activities” is defined as: Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast. 
And “Specified Anatomical Areas” is defined as: Less than completely and opaquely covered: a) human genitals, pubic region, b) buttock, and c) female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Agricultural Market The seasonal selling or offering for sale, at retail, of homegrown vegetables, produce or fruit, dairy products, and other consumables, occurring in a designated area, outside of a public right-of-way, where the vendors are generally individuals who have raised the produce or accepted the same on consignment for retail sale. 
Agricultural Use "Agricultural use" means the use of: 
(a) 
The use of a tract of land of at least five (5) contiguous acres for the production of agricultural or horticultural crops, including but not limited to livestock, livestock products, poultry, poultry products, grain, hay, pastures, soybeans, tobacco, timber, orchard fruits, vegetables, flowers or ornamental plants, wineries, including provisions for dwellings for persons and their families who are engaged in the above agricultural use on the tract, but not including residential building development for sale or lease to the public. 

(b) 
Regardless of the size of the tract of land used, small wineries licensed under KRS 243.155;9 

(c) 
A tract of at least five (5) contiguous acres used for the following activities involving horses: 

(1) 
Riding lessons; 

(2) 
Rides; 


3 

(3) 
Training; 

(4) 
Projects for educational purposes; 

(5) 
Boarding and related care; or 

(6) 
Shows, competitions, sporting events, and similar activities that are associated with youth and amateur programs, none of which are regulated by KRS Chapter 230, involving seventy (70) or less participants. Shows, competitions, sporting events, and similar activities that are associated with youth and amateur programs, none of which are regulated by KRS Chapter 230, involving more than seventy (70) participants shall be subject to local applicable zoning regulations; or 

(d) 
A tract of land used for the following activities involving horses: 

(1) 
Riding lessons; 

(2) 
Rides; 

(3) 
Training; 

(4) 
Projects for educational purposes; 

(5) 
Boarding and related care; or 

(6) 
Shows, competitions, sporting events, and similar activities that are associated with youth and amateur programs, none of which are regulated by KRS Chapter 230, involving seventy (70) or less participants. Shows, competitions, sporting events, and similar activities that are associated with youth and amateur programs, none of which are regulated by KRS Chapter 230, involving more than seventy (70) participants shall be subject to local applicable zoning regulations. This paragraph shall only apply to acreage that was being used for these activities before the effective date of this act. (July 13, 2004)3 


Agricultural use shall also include the keeping or breeding of any animal for the purpose of human consumption. 15 
Airport A place where aircraft can land and take off, usually equipped with hangars, facilities for refueling and repair and various accommodations for passengers. 
Alley A public or private vehicular way which affords a means of access to the rear or side of properties adjacent to it and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
Aquaculture The hatching, raising and breeding of fish or other aquatic plants or animals for sale or personal use. 
Artisan Workshop An establishment for the preparation, display and sale of individually crafted artwork, jewelry, furniture, sculpture, pottery, leather craft, hand woven articles and related items. 
Assisted Living Facility A structure or structures with sleeping rooms for unrelated individuals, requiring minimal medical supervision, usually with communal living space and kitchen. Where cooking equipment or provisions for the same are included in a sleeping room, such rooms shall be deemed a dwelling unit. Facilities may also include office and sleeping rooms for staff members. 
Average Setback The mean setback from a property line to building(s) on a lot. The average setback is determined by measuring the setbacks of all principal structures within a specified distance, as set out elsewhere in this ordinance, of the site. 8 
Banner Any sign applied to cloth, paper, flexible plastic or fabric of any kind, with only such material as a backing and containing no framework other than any supporting pole or poles.3 
Basement That portion of a building, between the floor and the ceiling, which is partly or wholly below grade but so located that the vertical distance from the average grade to the floor is greater than the vertical distance from the average grade to the ceiling. A basement shall not be counted as a story.8 


Bed and Breakfast An establishment providing lodging and meals in a residential setting for not more than six (6) overnight guests. Employees shall be limited to residents of the structure. 
Berm A mound of earth, a minimum of two (2’) feet in height, used to shield, screen and buffer undesirable views and to separate incompatible land uses. 
Bikeway A pathway, often paved and separated from streets and sidewalks, designed to be used by bicyclists. 
Boarding House A dwelling unit or part thereof in which, for compensation, lodging and meals are provided; personal and financial services may be offered as well. 
Brewery Any place or premises where malt beverages are manufactured for sale, including all offices, granaries, mash rooms, cooling rooms, vaults, yards and storerooms connected with the premises; or where any part of the process of the manufacture of malt beverages is carried on; or where any apparatus connected with the manufacture is kept or used; or where any of the products of brewing or fermentation are stored or kept. 9 
Buffer Area A strip of land which is located along the perimeter of a piece of property and is a minimum of five (5’) feet wide and contains all perimeter landscaping as specified in this Zoning Ordinance. 
Building A structure having a roof, affixed to the land intended to be used for sheltering people, animals, property or business activity. 
Building Height The vertical distance from finished grade to the top of the highest roof beams on a flat or shed roof, the deck level on a mansard roof, and the average distance between the eaves and the ridge level for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. 
Building Setback Line A line in the interior of a lot, which is generally parallel to, and a specified distance from, the street right-of-way line or property lines. No building shall then be placed in the space between the building setback line and right-of-way. 
Bulletin Board A sign which allows the manual or electronic changing of the copy material and is used to notify the public of noncommercial events or occurrences such as church services, political rallies, civic meetings or similar events. 
Business, Technology & Research Center A working environment for research and development institutions, offices and certain specialized production and assembly establishments along with other specialized uses, all of a non nuisance type. 
Candlepower Luminous intensity expressed in candelas. 
Canopy A roof-like structure intended to temporarily protect automobiles and their occupants while pumping gasoline or entering and exiting a building. 6 
Cemetery Land used for the burial of the dead, including mausoleums, necessary sales buildings and maintenance facilities. 
Certificate of Occupancy A document issued by the “Department” allowing the occupancy or use of a building and certifying that the structure or use has been constructed or will be used in compliance with applicable codes and ordinances. 
5 

Childcare Center A facility providing regular shelter, care, activity and supervision (with or without academic instruction) for minor children in compliance with KRS . Facilities are classified by type as follows: 
Type 1: a) A building other than a dwelling unit which regularly receives four (4) or more children; 
or b) Including a dwelling unit, which regularly provides care for thirteen (13) or more children. 
Type 2: a) A dwelling unit that is the full time residence of the licensee; and b) Regularly provides 
care apart from the parents for seven (7), but not more than twelve (12) children. 
Childcare, In Home A private dwelling unit, that is the full time residence of the provider, in which not more than six (6) minor children are given care and supervision for periods of less than twenty-four 
(24) hours a day. EXCEPTION: Children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage or adoption. 
Church A building wherein persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship, together with all accessory uses and buildings such as multi-purpose centers, childcare centers, customarily associated with the primary purpose. Church includes synagogues, temples, mosques, sanctuaries or other such places for worship and religious activities. 
Club, Private Buildings and facilities, the purpose of which is to render a social, educational or recreational service to members and their guests and not primarily to render a service customarily carried on as a business or to render a profit. Private club shall include country club. Private clubs must supply an approved copy of articles of incorporation, by-laws and other appropriate documentation to the Department. 
Coffee House An informal restaurant primarily offering coffee, tea and other beverages, and where light refreshments and limited menu meals may also be sold. 
Commercial Warehouse A building or portion thereof, used for storage of any property not permitted in a residential storage warehouse. This shall not be deemed to include the storage area in connection with a purely retail business when located on the same property. 
Community Residence A building or part thereof, with sleeping rooms available for more than six (6) unrelated individuals, with or without compensation. Where cooking equipment or provisions for the same are included in a sleeping room, such room shall be deemed a dwelling unit. Halfway houses are not to be considered as community residences.12 
Condominium The ownership of individual dwelling units located on a lot or lots which are owned in common by individual unit owners, or any division of the interest in real property, including easements, that have the effect of permitting more than one dwelling unit on a lot without the division of the fee simple interest in said lot. 
Correctional Facility A facility providing custodial care and treatment in a protective living environment for persons residing voluntarily or by court placement, including, without limitation, correctional and post correctional facilities, juvenile detention facilities and temporary detention facilities. 
Covenant, Private An agreement binding and restricting the land of present owners and subsequent purchasers. They are enforced only by the land owners involved and not by the city or other public agency. 
Data Processing Facility A facility where electronic data is processed by employees, including, without limitation, data entry, storage, conversion or analysis, subscription and credit card transaction processing, telephone sales and order collection, mail order and catalog sales and mailing list preparation. 
Density The number of dwelling units per acre. 
Density Bonus The granting of the allowance of additional density in a development in exchange for the provision, by the developer, of other desirable amenities from a public perspective (e.g. public open spaces, plazas, art, landscaping, parks, walkways and similar amenities). 
Density, Gross The numerical value obtained by dividing the total number of dwelling units in a development by the area within the boundaries of a particular development, excluding nothing. 
Density, Net The numerical value obtained by dividing the total number of dwelling units in a development by the area of the actual tract of land (in acres) upon which the dwelling units are proposed to be located not including common open space, other land uses and associated recreational facilities within the area; the result being the number of dwelling units per net residential acre of land. Net density calculations exclude rights-of-way of publicly dedicated streets and private streets. 
Department The Department of Planning and Development for the City of Elizabethtown, Kentucky. 
Development Plan A drawing containing written and graphic material for the provision of a development, including any or all of the following: location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity of use, density of development, streets, driveways, parking facilities, signs, drainage or surface water, access points, a plan for screening or buffering, utilities, existing manmade and natural conditions, and all other conditions agreed to by the applicant. 
Distillery Any place or premises where distilled spirits are manufactured for sale, and which are registered in the office of any collector of internal revenue for the United States. It includes any United States government bonded warehouse. 9 
Dormitory A building used as group living quarters for a student body or religious order as an accessory use for a college, university, boarding school, convent, monastery or other similar institutional use. 
Dumpster A container that has a hooking or similar mechanism that permits it to be raised and the contents deposited into a waste hauling vehicle. 
Two Family A building containing two (2) single family dwelling units, under one roof, totally separated from each other by an un-pierced wall extending from ground to roof, or an un-pierced floor in the case of stacked units and located on one parcel.11 
Dwelling Unit A room or rooms, connected together, constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment for a family (for owner occupancy or rental, lease or other occupancy on weekly or longer terms), physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units that may be in the same structure and containing its own independent kitchen and sleeping facilities. 
Easement A grant by a property owner to the use of land by the public, a corporation or persons, for specific purposes such as the construction of utilities, drainage ways and roadways. 
Easement, Access An easement created for the purpose of providing vehicular or pedestrian access to or across a property. 
Easement, Conservation The grant of a property right stipulating that the described land will remain in its natural state and precluding future or additional development. 
Encroachment Any obstruction or illegal or unauthorized intrusion in a delineated floodway, right-of­way or on adjacent land. 
Events Center The use of a property for the conduct of special events of a limited size and number. Special events are defined as wedding receptions, luncheons, meetings, fundraising proceedings for not-for-profit organizations or similar activities. 1 
7 

Family One or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit, as a single housekeeping unit, provided that unless all members are related by blood, marriage or adoption, no such family shall contain over six (6) persons, including any roomers, boarders and or domestic servants. A home for independent living with support personnel that provides room and board, personal care and habilitation services in a family environment as a single housekeeping unit for not more than six resident elderly or disabled persons (mentally and/or physically impaired) with at least one, but not more than two resident staff persons shall be considered a family. 
Feedlot A lot or building or combination of lots and buildings intended for the confined breeding, raising or holding of animals and specifically designed as a confinement area in which manure may accumulate, or where the concentration of animals is such that a vegetative cover cannot be maintained within the enclosure. For purposes of this Ordinance, open lots used for the feeding and rearing of poultry (poultry ranges) shall be considered to be animal feedlots. Pastures shall not be considered animal feedlots under these rules. Manure storage areas on or off the site of the feedlot will be considered as a feedlot. 
Fence A continuous barrier intended to prevent escape or intrusion or to mark a boundary, but not including hedges, shrubs, trees or other natural growth. 
Flea Market An outdoor commercial activity, not including shopping centers, individual retail operations, or sales conducted by a nonprofit or charitable organization, that is open to the general public and composed of semi-enclosed or outdoor stalls, rooms, stands, or spaces used for the purpose of display and sale, exchange or barter of merchandise.3 
Floor Area The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of wall separating two buildings, but not including: 
1. 
Attic space providing headroom of less than seven feet. 

2. 
Basement space. 


Garage, Private A space or structure, including a carport, on the same lot with or in the building to which it is accessory, primarily for the storage of automobiles of the residents of the premises. 
Golf Course A facility other than a miniature golf course for the playing of golf at which there may be a clubhouse including restrooms, locker rooms and a pro shop. A golf course may provide additional services customarily furnished such as swimming, outdoor recreation and golf related retail sales that may include a restaurant and lounge if approved as a part of the development. 
Golf Course, Miniature A theme oriented recreational facility, typically comprised of nine or eighteen putting greens, each with a cup or a hole, where patrons pay a fee to play. 
Golf Driving Range A limited area on which golf players do not walk, but onto which they drive golf balls from a central tee area. 
Grocery Food markets or combination food markets and department stores greater than 5,000 square feet in floor area. 
Halfway House A facility, licensed or unlicensed, for persons on release from more restrictive custodial confinement or initially placed in lieu of such more restrictive custodial confinement, where supervision, rehabilitation and counseling are provided to mainstream said persons back into society, enabling them to live independently.12 
Health Club An establishment that provides facilities for aerobic and anaerobic exercises, running and jogging, exercise equipment, game courts, swimming facilities, saunas, showers, massage rooms and lockers and other similar services. 
Height The vertical distance of a structure measured from the average elevation of the finished grade surrounding the structure to the highest point of the structure. 
Home Occupation An occupation or professional service operated from a dwelling unit, excluding barber shops and beauty shops with more than one station/chair, but only when said occupations are performed under all of the following conditions: 1) The use is clearly incidental and secondary to use for dwelling purposes; 2) The use is conducted entirely within the dwelling unit or enclosed accessory structure; 3) The use does not require external alteration of the dwelling unit; 4) The use is carried on only by residents of the dwelling unit; May have employees but they may not work from the dwelling unit; 5) The use does not entail any exterior display of merchandise or product; 6) The use does not generate traffic in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a neighborhood; 7) The use creates no nuisance, offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, glare or electrical disturbance. 8) One commercial vehicle, less than 7500 GVW, associated with the business use, may be located at the residence.12 
Homeless Shelter A facility providing temporary housing to indigent, needy, homeless or transient persons; may also provide ancillary services such as counseling, vocational training and similar services. 
Homeowners Association A community association, other than a condominium association, that is organized in a development in which individual owners share common interests and responsibilities for costs and upkeep of common open space or facilities. 
Hospital An institution where sick or injured persons are provided medical care and in the course of same are housed overnight and provided nursing and related services. This definition shall not include drug rehabilitation facilities, halfway houses, convalescent or nursing homes, institutions for mentally ill individuals, or other similar facilities. 
Impervious Surface Any hard surfaced, man-made area that does not readily absorb or retain water, including, but not limited to building roofs, parking and driveway areas, graveled areas, sidewalks and other paved areas. 
Impervious Surface Ratio All impervious surfaces such as buildings, roads, parking areas and patios that increase storm water runoff divided by total lot area. (I.S.R.) = Total Impervious Surface Area Total Lot Area 
Incidental Use Subordinate and minor in significance and bearing a reasonable relationship with the primary use. 
Institutional Use A nonprofit, religious, or public use, such as a church, library, public or private school, hospital, or government owned or operated building, structure, or land used for public purpose.3 
Juvenile Detention Facility A public facility or institution exclusively for the incarceration of non adults awaiting trial or sentencing or serving a court imposed sentence. 
Kennel An establishment for the commercial breeding and/or boarding of six (6) or more domestic animals for profit. Domestic animals include dogs, cats, rabbits, etc. Animals commonly defined as livestock, horses, cattle, goats, pigs etc. are not defined as domestic animals. The establishments may consist of indoor or outdoor facilities including, but not limited to pens, runs and fenced areas. 
KRS Kentucky Revised Statues, Chapter 100 is the state enabling legislation relating to Planning Commissions, Board of Zoning Adjustments, zoning ordinances and subdivision regulations. 
9 

Laundry A facility where clothing and similar textiles are washed, dried or dry cleaned. 
Laundry, Self Service A facility where patrons wash and dry clothing or other textiles in machines operated by the patron. 
Library A public facility for the use, but not sale, of literary, musical, artistic or reference materials. 
Livestock 1) All cattle or animals of the bovine species; 2) all horses, mules, burros, and asses or animals of the equine species; 3) all goats or animals of the caprine species; 4) all swine or animals of the porcine species; and 5) all sheep or animals of the ovine species. 
Lot A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for transfer of ownership or for building development. Generally “lots” are the basic unit of a subdivision plan, i.e., the smallest division of a plan designed to be owned by one person. 
Lot, Corner A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets or abutting upon two (2) adjoining and deflected lines of the same street and thereby forming an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. Corner lots shall be construed to have front yards along each abutting street, one rear yard and one side yard. 
Lot, Depth The average horizontal distance between the front and rear property line of a lot. 
Lot Line The lines bounding a lot as defined herein. 
Lot Line, Front The property line dividing a lot from a street. 
Lot Line, Rear The line opposite the front lot line. 
Lot Line, Secondary Front The property line on a corner lot dividing the side exposure of a principal structure from a street or the rear of the principal structure in the case of a lot with three (3) front yards. 
Figure 1.2 
Lot Line, Side Any lot line, other than a front or a rear lot line. 
Lot, Through A lot having frontage on two nonintersecting streets, as distinguished from a corner lot. 
Lot Width Generally, the distance, measured along the building setback line, between the two 
(2) side property lines of a lot—although, at times the measurement will be along the right-of-way or rear property line. 
Manufactured Housing A factory built, single family authority of 42 U.S.C. Section 5401, the National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act, is transportable in one or more sections, is built on a permanent chassis, and is used as a place of human habitation; but which is not constructed with a permanent hitch or other device allowing transport of the unit other than for the purpose of delivery to a permanent site, and which does not have wheels or axles permanently attached to its body or frame. Manufactured housing is further divided into two (2) sub types: 
Type 1: Structures meeting the above definition of manufactured housing. 
Type 2: A transportable structure suitable for year round single family occupancy and having water, electrical and sewage connections similar to those of conventional dwellings and 
structure that is manufactured under the 

having a permanent hitch and axle integral to the chassis structure. The removal of the hitch and axle does not render the structure a Type 1 structure. 
Manufactured Housing Development A parcel of land, containing spaces with required improvements and utilities for the long term placement of Type 2 manufactured housing for non transient use that may include services and facilities for the residents. The spaces may be rented, owned individually or sold as condominiums. Recreational vehicles, campers and trailers are not permitted to be uses as housing. 
Master Site Plan A conceptual site plan indicating the physical and functional interrelationships between uses and facilities on a site for those projects, series of projects, phased developments or developments occurring over a period of years, or which are of such a size or complexity or duration so as to make independent site plan review lead to segmented and inconsistent conditions or approvals. 
Microbrewery Any place or premises where malt beverages are manufactured for sale, either on premises or off premises, in quantities not to exceed twenty-five thousand (25,000) barrels in one (1) year. 9 
Multi Family Dwelling A building or buildings containing three (3) or more units, including units that are located adjacent to or one over the other and on the same parcel. 11 
Mural A graphic displayed on the exterior of a building or other structure, fence or wall, generally for the purposes of decoration or artistic expression, including, but not limited to paintings, frescos or mosaics.8 
Museum A building having public significance by reason of its architecture or former use or occupancy or a building serving as a repository for a collection of natural, scientific, or literary curiosities or objects of interest, or works of art, arranged, intended and designed to be used by member of the public for viewing, with or without an admission charge, and which may include as an accessory use the sale of goods to the public as gifts or for their own use. 
Neighborhood Center A structure where people living in the same subdivision development may carry on cultural, recreational or social activities. The center may contain private pools, tennis courts or similar features. It may not be rented out to non-residents. 11 
Nonconforming Lot A lot, the area, dimensions, or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of the Zoning Ordinance but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district. 
Nonconforming Sign Any sign lawfully erected and maintained prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of the Zoning Ordinance but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment to conform to the present requirements of this ordinance or amendment thereto. 
Nonconforming Structure A structure or building, the size, dimensions, or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment to the Zoning Ordinance but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district. 
Nonconforming Use An activity which lawfully existed before the adoption, revision or amendment of the Zoning Ordinance, but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district. 
Nursing Home A facility established for profit or nonprofit, which provides nursing care and related medical services on a 24-hour per day basis to two or more individuals because of illness, disease, physical or mental infirmity. Provides care for those persons not in need of hospital care. 
11 

Office A building whose use is for businesses, professional associations, governmental agencies, civic, social and fraternal groups, political, religious and charitable organizations, medical, dental, veterinary practices and similar uses. 
Office Building A building used primarily for offices that may include ancillary services for office workers, such as a restaurant, coffee shop, newspaper or food service area. 
Office Park A development that contains a number of separate office buildings, supporting uses and open space designed, planned, constructed and managed on an integrated and coordinated basis. 
Open Space Any land or area, the preservation of which in its present use would: 
1. 	
Conserve and enhance natural or scenic resources; 

2. 	
Protect streams or water supply; 

3. 	
Promote conservation of soils, wetlands, woodlands or forested areas; 

4. 	
Enhance the value to the public of abutting or neighboring parks, forests, wildlife preserves, nature reservations or sanctuaries; and 

5. 	
Enhance recreation opportunities. 


Out Parcel A parcel reserved for the development of a freestanding commercial use that shares parking, ingress/egress and/or other business activities with a shopping center or regional enclosed shopping center (mall). 
Outdoor Display Area The placement of goods for sale or advertisement, outside of the building or structure, including but not limited to vehicles, garden supplies, gas, tires, motor oil, food, beverages, boats, farm equipment, motor homes and clothing. 
Park A noncommercial, not for profit facility designed to serve the recreation needs of the residents of the community. Facilities include subdivision recreation facilities (neighborhood parks) community parks, regional parks and special use facilities. Such facilities may also include but are not limited to school and religious institution facilities such as playgrounds, softball fields, baseball fields, football fields, soccer field and similar uses. 
Parking Lot/Area An off street area used for the parking of any type of vehicle, including but not limited to, parking lots, loading and unloading areas and service areas. Driveways, access ways, aisles and maneuvering areas are also considered a part of the parking lots or areas. 
Parking Space A space on private land, accessible from a street or alley, not less than nine (9’) feet wide and eighteen (18’) feet long, exclusive of passageways. 
Person with a Disability A person with a physical, emotional or mental disability including but not limited to mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, autism, deafness or hard of hearing, sight impairments, and orthopedic impairments, but not including convicted felons or misdemeanors on probation or parole or receiving supervision or rehabilitation services as a result of their prior conviction, or mentally ill persons who have pled guilty but mentally ill to a crime or not guilty by reason of insanity to a crime. “Person with a Disability” does not include persons with current illegal use of or addiction to alcohol or any controlled substance as regulated under KRS Chapter 219A. 
Pervious Surface A surface that presents an opportunity for precipitation to infiltrate into the ground. 
Porch A covered but unenclosed projection from the wall of a building that may or may not use columns or other ground supports for structural purposes. Screening does not constitute enclosure. 
Principal Structure A building in which is conducted a principal or conditional use. In any residential zone, any structure containing a dwelling unit shall be deemed a principal structure on the lot on which the same is located. Where a nonconforming use is the primary use on the property, the building in which it is located shall be deemed a principal structure. 
Professional Service An occupation that provides technical information, managerial or financial assistance, secretarial and similar or other related office work. 
Quarry An open pit from which building stone, sand, gravel, mineral or fill is taken to be processed for commercial purposes. 
Recreation, Active Recreation requiring some constructed facilities and organized activities. 
Recreation, Passive Recreation that involves existing natural resources and has a minimal impact on the environment. 
Recreational Vehicle (RV) Park A commercial use providing space and facilities for two or more motor homes or other recreational vehicles for recreational use or transient lodging. 11 
Recycling Center A lot or parcel of land, with or without buildings, upon which used materials are separated and processed for shipment for eventual reuse in new products. 
Recycling Collection Point An enclosed structure, container or trailer, used for the collection, storage and preparation for shipping, but not the processing of aluminum, glass, paper, plastic and other similar items. The collection, storage or processing in any manner or form of inoperable vehicles is strictly prohibited under the terms and intent of this definition. All storage and preparation of collected materials shall be within the enclosed structure, container or trailer. 
Regional Enclosed Shopping Center (Mall) A structure that when entered shall provide access to all retail establishments within while not requiring exiting the structure. 
Residential Care Facility A residence operated and maintained by a sponsoring private or governmental agency to provide “services” in a homelike setting for persons with disabilities. “Services” means, but is not limited to, supervision, shelter, protection, rehabilitation, personal development and attendant care. 
Residential Storage Facility A building or portion thereof, designed or used exclusively for storing the excess personal property of an individual or family when such is not located on the lot with their residence, such as passenger motor vehicles, house trailers, motorcycles, boats, campers and other items of personal property generally stored in residential accessory structures. This shall not include the storage of any merchandise, stock furnishings or vehicles of a business of any kind. 
Retail Drink Liquor Establishment An establishment used primarily for the serving of alcoholic beverages by the drink to the general public and where food or packaged alcoholic beverages may be served or sold only as accessory to the primary use.13 
Retail Malt Beverage Establishment Any place or premises where malt beverages are sold to consumers for consumption on premises or off premises. 9 
Retail Package Liquor Sales Any place or premises where brewed, fermented or distilled spirits in their original containers are sold to consumers for consumption off premises and not for consumption on site. 9 
Salvage Yard A facility or area for storing, keeping, selling, dismantling, shredding, compressing or salvaging scrap or discarded material or equipment. 
Security House A structure used as pedestrian or vehicular control points for a private development and occupied by watchman, caretakers or mechanical devices. The location of the structure may 
13 

be determined by the Board of Adjustment, but under no conditions shall the structure or any appurtenance be located within or projecting into the public right-of-way. 
Sexually Oriented Business Means an adult entertainment business, adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, escort agency, nude model studio or sexual encounter center. Further definition of these terms can be found in the Elizabethtown Code of Ordinances, Chapter 120. 
Shopping Center A group of commercial establishments planned constructed and managed as a total entity, with customer and employee parking provided on site, and signage in accordance with an approved plan. Shopping centers are separated into the following categories: 
Convenience Center – Contains light retail and service establishments offering goods necessary 
to meet daily needs of the immediate area and contains 15,000 square feet or less of lease 
space, including out parcel spaces. 
Neighborhood Shopping Center – Contains light retail and service establishments offering goods necessary to meet daily needs and contains between 15,000 – 50,000 square feet or less of lease space, including out parcel spaces. 
Community Shopping Center – Contains retail and service establishments, has one or more anchor tenants and contains between 50,000 – 250,000 square feet of lease space, including out parcel spaces. 
Regional Shopping Center: Contains a wide range of retail and service establishments, has one 
(1) or more anchor tenants and contains more than 250,000 square feet of lease space, including out parcel spaces. 
Sight Triangle A triangular shaped portion of land established at street intersections in which nothing is erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the sight distance of motorists entering or leaving the intersection. Triangle dimensions are based street classifications. 
Sign Any writing, pictorial representation, form, emblem, trademark, flag, banner, decoration (including material used to differentiate the sign copy from the background) or any figure which is written, printed, projected, painted, constructed or otherwise displayed upon or designed into a building, board, plate, canopy, awning, window, vehicle or upon any object or device which by reason of form, color, wording, symbol, design, illumination, motion or other characteristic or designed to attract attention to the subject thereof or is used as a means of identification, advertisement, announcement or of illustrating products. 
Sign, Abandoned A sign, the use for which it represents having been discontinued for a period of 30 consecutive days. 6 
S
ign 
Figure 1.3 
Sign, Area of The total area of the sign face, when faces are placed back to back or in a “V” configuration and only one face is visible to passersby at any time, which is used to display a message or attract attention, not including its supporting structures. Should a sign contain 3 or 4 faces the area is determined by summing the area of all sides of the sign face and dividing by 2.3 
Sign, Auction A sign announcing the sale of property (real estate) and may be located upon the premises of the property for which the sale will be conducted or may be located off premises of the sale. If located off premises the signs may not be erected more than 30 days prior to the sale and must be removed within 3 days after the sale. 
Sign, Commercial Signs, whose language is intended to advertise goods, products or services located on the premises where the sign is installed. 
Sign, Construction A sign identifying the project name, architect, engineer, contractor, financing company, material supplier or others engaged in work on the construction site on which the sign is located. Leasing information, renderings and similar copy shall also be permitted. 
Sign, Directional A non-commercial sign of an instructional nature, such as “parking”, “exit” or “entrance”, displayed solely for the convenience of the public. Such signs shall contain no business advertising, product trade name identification of listing of any product sold or offered on the premises. Signs may include a logo. 
Sign, Height The vertical distance measured from the highest point of the sign including the frame and any embellishments and the established grade at the sign or the adjacent street, whichever is greater. 
Sign, Incidental A small sign, limited to information and directions related to the permitted use on the lot or building on which the sign is located and containing no direct illumination. Examples of incidental signs would include “no smoking”, “restroom”, “no solicitors”, “no trespassing”, “self-service”, “vacancy”, credit card acceptance signs, signs attached to gasoline pumps, A-frame and similar signs when located no closer than 20’ from any public right-of-way and no further than 10’ from the building or occupied space to which the advertising pertains, signs designed into or placed on vending devices, signs indicating hours of business and similar information.3/6 
Sign, Informational A sign for which changing copy gives such information as time, temperature and other information through an electronic message display system. 
Sign, Message Board A sign with a fixed or changing display/message. Display area may be both manual change copy or electronic. 
Sign, Mobile A sign which is affixed to a frame having wheels or capable of being moved, or otherwise portable, which does not have a permanent foundation. The mere removal of wheels or temporary securing of a sign to a surface of real estate shall not prevent its being a mobile sign within this definition. 
Sign, Monument A freestanding sign with a base width of at least eighty (80%) per cent of the width of the sign cabinet or sign face. 
Sign, Non Commercial Any sign whose language is not intended to advertise goods, products or services. 
Sign, Off Premise A sign that advertises goods, products, services or facilities or directs persons to a different location from where the sign is installed. 
Sign, Off Site Real Estate A readily removable sign announcing the proposed sale or rental of property other than the property upon which the sign is located and providing directions to the subject property. 
Sign, On Premise Any sign identifying or advertising a business, person, activity, goods, products or services located on the premises where the sign is installed and maintained. 
Sign, On Site Real Estate A sign announcing the sale or rental of the property upon which the sign is located. 
Sign, Pole A freestanding sign that is affixed, attached or erected on a pole that is not itself an integral part of or attached to a building or structure. 

15 

Sign, Portable A sign capable of being moved and not permanently attached to the ground, building or similar structure. 
Sign, Projecting A sign attached to and projecting out from a building face or wall, generally at right angles to the building. 
Sign, Roof A sign that is mounted on the roof of a building or that is wholly dependent upon a building for support and that projects above the top wall or edge of a building with a flat roof, the eave line of a building with a gambrel, gable or hip roof, or the deck line of a building with a mansard roof.3 
Sign, Special Event A sign advertising or announcing a special communitywide event or activity conducted by, or sponsored by, or on behalf of a unit of local government, a charitable organization, or a not-for-profit corporation. A special communitywide event or activity is one that occurs not more than twice in any 12 month period and seeks to attract donations, participants or customers throughout the city. 
Sign, Tag An on or off premise sign, temporary in nature, used to direct persons to a business location, special sale or commercial event. 6 
Sign, Temporary Any sign, pennant, tag, inflatable or flag, used as advertising display for a limited time period and not permanently affixed to any structure or the ground. EXCEPTION: Banner signs as identified in Chapter 7, 7.6.3 
Sign, Tract A sign advertising the original sale of property in a subdivision. 
Sign, Travelers’ Directional A sign directing travelers to commercial or other locations within the corporate limits of Elizabethtown. Sign will be erected by the City with applicant purchasing spaces on sign structure. City will have control over locations, and design standards. 
Sign, Vehicle A sign on a vehicle customarily and regularly used to transport persons, product or property in the normal operation of the business. 
Sign, Wall A sign fastened to the wall of a building or structure in such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure for, or forms the background surface of the sign, and that does not project more than eighteen (18”) inches from the building or structure. 
Single-family Attached Dwelling A building containing two (2) or more single family dwelling units, under one roof, totally separated from each other by an un-pierced wall extending from ground to roof, and each being located on a separate parcel. 11 
Specialty Retail Retail operations that specialize in one type or line of merchandise. Such stores may include, but are not limited to, apparel stores, jewelry stores, bookstores, shoe stores, stationary stores, antique stores and similar establishments. These stores may be no larger than five-thousand (5,000) square feet in area. 10 
Street Any public vehicular way—a general term used to describe right-of-way which provides a channel for vehicular and pedestrian movement between certain points in the community, which may provide for vehicular and pedestrian access to properties adjacent to it, and which may also provide space for the location of under or above ground utilities. 
Structure Anything constructed, the use of which requires permanent location to the ground or attached to something having permanent location on the ground. 
Subdivision The division of a parcel of land into two (2) or more lots or parcels for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, lease or building development, or if a new street is involved, any subdivision of a parcel of land; provided that a division of land for agricultural use and not involving a new street shall not be deemed a subdivision. The term includes re-subdivision and when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdivision or to the land subdivided; any division or re-division of land into parcels of less than one (1) acre occurring within twelve (12) months following a division of the same land shall be deemed a subdivision within the meaning of this section. 
Swimming Pool A structure, public or private, whether above or below grade level, designed to hold in depth, eighteen (18”) inches or more of water and used for recreational purposes. 
Temporary Structure A structure without any foundation or footings that is removed when the designated time period, activity or use, for which the temporary structure was erected has ceased. 
Temporary Use A use established for a limited duration with the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of the time period. These uses include but are not limited to fireworks stands, tent sales, special promotion sales and similar uses. 
Two Family A building containing two (2) single family dwelling units, under one roof, totally separated from each other by an un-pierced wall extending from ground to roof, or an un-pierced floor in the case of stacked units and located on one parcel. 11 
Use, Principal The primary use of any lot or parcel.8 
Variance A departure from the terms of the Zoning Ordinance pertaining to height or width of structures and size of yards and open spaces. Variances are granted in conformance with KRS 100. 
Vehicular Use Area A vehicular use area (VUA) is any open or enclosed area containing more than 1,800 square feet of area and/or used by five (5) or more of any type vehicle, whether moving or at rest, including but not limited to, parking lots, loading and unloading areas, mobile home parks and sales and service areas. Driveways, when associated with uses other than single family and two family, are considered to be vehicular use areas. 
Wall One of the sides of a room or building connecting the floor and ceiling or foundation and roof. 
Wetland Those areas that are inundated and saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. 
Winery Any place or premises in which wine is manufactured from any fruit, or brandies are distilled as a by-product of wine or other fruit, or cordials are compounded. 9 
Winery, Small Farm A winery producing wines, in an amount not to exceed fifty thousand (50,000) gallons in a calendar year. 9 
Yard, Front An open space extending the full width of the lot between a principal structure and the front lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward. The depth of a front yard is the shortest distance measured perpendicularly between any part of a building and the front lot line. 
Yard, Rear An open space extending the full width of a lot between a principal structure and the rear lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward. The 
Figure 1.5 

17 

depth of a rear yard is the shortest distance measured perpendicularly between any part of a building and the rear lot line. 
Yard, Secondary Front An open space extending the full width of the lot between a principal structure and the secondary front lot line of a corner lot, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward. The secondary front yard will be that front yard that is parallel to the side exposure of the principal structure or the rear exposure of the principal structure in the case of a lot with three 
(3) front yards. The depth of the secondary front yard is the shortest distance measured perpendicularly between any part of a building and the nearest lot line. 
Yard, Side An open space extending the full width of a lot between a principal structure and the side lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward. The depth of a side yard is the shortest distance measured perpendicularly between any part of a building and any side lot line. 
Zoning The division of the City, by legislative regulations, into areas or zones, which specify allowable uses for real property and size restrictions for buildings within these areas. Zoning is also a program that implements policies of the Comprehensive Plan. 
Zoning Map The map, adopted as part of an ordinance by the legislative body that delineates the extent of each district or zone established in the Zoning Ordinance. 
Zoning Ordinance The Elizabethtown Zoning Ordinance. The laws and regulations as set forth and adopted by the City of Elizabethtown. 
Zoo An area, building or structures which contain wild animals on exhibition for viewing by the public. 
1.9 ADMINISTRATION 
The Director of the Department and his authorized designee shall administer and enforce the Zoning Ordinance. 
The Director or his authorized designee shall promptly investigate all complaints of violation and report all findings and action in the official records which shall be available in the office of the Department. If the Director or his authorized designee finds any of the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance are being violated, the Director or his authorized designee may cite the violator, may seek a restraining order or injunctive relief or may order the action necessary to correct the violation and to enforce the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. 
The Director or his authorized designee shall make records of all official actions relating to the administration and enforcement of the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance available to the public, including but not limited to, written records of all complaints and actions taken with regard thereto, all violations discovered with actions thereto and the final disposition of such matters. 

1.10 PERMITS REQUIRED 
Permits shall be required for the following activities and shall be issued by the Department in conformance with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. Any permit issued shall become invalid if the authorized work is suspended or abandoned for a period of six (6) months after the time of commencing the work. 
1.10.1 Construction Permit No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to or structurally altered, nor shall said activities be commenced without a construction permit. 
1.10.2 Demolition Permit No building or other structure shall be razed, demolished or removed, either entirely or in part, nor shall any of said activities be commenced without a demolition permit. 
1.10.3 Sign Permit No sign shall be created, erected, moved, added to or structurally altered except in accordance with standards contained in the Zoning Ordinance, nor shall any of said activities be commenced without a permit. 
1.10.4 Permits Authorized by the Board of Zoning Adjustment The Department shall issue permits in conformance with the written direction and authorization of the Board of Zoning Adjustment concerning administrative review appeals, conditional use permits, variances or other actions as authorized in the Zoning Ordinance. 

1.11 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER CODES, STATUTES AND REGULATIONS 
Nothing in this Section or other sections of the Zoning Ordinance shall be construed to exempt any applicant for a permit from compliance with all local, state and federal codes, statutes and regulations. 

1.12 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY 
No person shall use or permit the use of any structure or premises or part thereof, hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, enlarged or moved, wholly or partly, until a Certificate of Occupancy has been issued by the Department. Such certificate shall show that the structure or use, or both, or the premises, or the affected part thereof, are in conformance with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. It shall be the duty of the Department to issue such certificates if it is found that all provisions of the Zoning Ordinance have been met, and to withhold such certificate unless the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance have been met. 
1.12.1 No Occupancy Permit No person shall allow occupancy of any building until the Department has been notified by the appropriate agencies that the private details of water, electricity, and where applicable, sanitary sewer and natural gas are completed in such a fashion that such private utilities are available for use on the property in question. 
1.12.2 Temporary Certificate of Occupancy Temporary Certificate(s) of Occupancy may be issued by the Department for a period not exceeding six (6) months during alteration or partial occupancy of a building pending it’s completion in accordance with general rules and regulations concerning such temporary certificate and with such additional conditions or safeguards as are necessary in the circumstances of the case to protect the safety of the general public. 
1.12.3 Certificate of Occupancy for Existing Uses or Structures Upon request from the owner or tenant, and upon inspection, the Department shall issue a Certificate of Occupancy for any building, premises or use that is in conformity with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance or that a legal nonconformity exists as specified in the certificate. 

1.13 AUTHORIZED USE 
Construction permits or Certificates of Occupancy issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the Department authorize only the use, or arrangement and construction set forth in such permits, plans and certificates and no other. The use, arrangement or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of the Zoning Ordinance. 

1.14 COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS 
Any person may file a written complaint alleging violation of the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. Such complaint shall state fully the cause and basis thereof and shall be filed with the Director of the Department. The Director or his agent shall properly record such complaint and investigate and take action thereon as provided by the Zoning Ordinance to cite the violator to the appropriate jurisdiction. 

1.15 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION 
Violation of the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violation of the conditions and safeguards established in connection with granting of a map amendment, development plan approval, variance or conditional use permit) shall constitute a violation. 
Any person who so violates the Zoning Ordinance or fails to comply with any of its requirements or fails to comply with any official notice of violation issued under its requirements shall be subject to a fine as detailed in the City of Elizabethtown Code of Ordinances. The Department may choose to seek enforcement for any violations through the Elizabethtown Code Enforcement Board enacted by Ordinance #09-2003. 

1.16 PLANNING COMMISSION 
The Planning Commission (hereinafter referred to as “Commission”) as constituted at the time of the Zoning Ordinance shall continue in power. There shall be five (5) members appointed by the 
19 

Mayor with the approval of the Elizabethtown City Council (hereinafter referred to as “City Council”) for four-year terms ending on June 20th of the designated year. Terms shall be staggered so that the terms of no more than two (2) members expire in a year. Vacancies on the Commission shall be filled in accordance with KRS 100. 
1.16.1 Staff The staff of the Commission shall be the Department. The Commission office shall be located at the Department’s office location and all records, minutes, proceedings, regulations, transactions, findings and determinations shall be filed there. The Director of the Department shall act as the Secretary for the Commission. 
1.16.2 Proceedings The Commission shall conduct regular meetings in accordance with the rules and regulations of its by-laws and KRS 100. 
1.16.3 General Powers The Commission shall have all the powers as allowed under the United States and Kentucky Constitutions and Chapter 100 of the Kentucky Revised Statutes, including, but not limited to: 
• 	
THE RIGHT TO EMPLOY OR CONTRACT WITH PLANNERS OR OTHER PERSONS AS IT DEEMS NECESSARY TO ACCOMPLISH ITS ASSIGNED DUTIES. 

• 	
TO RECEIVE, HOLD AND SPEND FUNDS WHICH SHALL SERVE AS A GUIDE FOR PUBLIC AND PRIVATE ACTIONS IN DECISIONS TO ASSURE THE DEVELOPMENT OF PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY IN THE MOST APPROPRIATE RELATIONSHIPS. 

• 	
TO PREPARE THE TEXT AND MAP OF ALL ZONING REGULATIONS WHICH SHALL DIVIDE THE CITY INTO ZONES ON AN INTERIM OR PERMANENT BASIS. 

• 	
TO PROMOTE THE PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY, MORALS AND GENERAL WELFARE OF THE CITY, TO FACILITATE ORDERLY AND HARMONIOUS DEVELOPMENT IN THE VISUAL OR HISTORIC CHARACTER OF THE UNIT, TO REGULATE THE DENSITY OF POPULATION AND INTENSITY OF LAND USE IN ORDER TO PROVIDE FOR ADEQUATE LIGHT AND AIR. 

• 	
TO ADOPT REGULATIONS FOR THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND WITHIN THE CITY’S BOUNDARIES. 

• 	
TO REVIEW PROPOSALS FOR AMENDMENTS TO THE ZONING REGULATION. 

• 	
TO HEAR APPLICATIONS FOR CONDITIONAL USES OR VARIANCES WHEN PART OF A MAP AMENDMENT REQUEST. 



1.17 BOARD OF ZONING ADJUSTMENT 
The Board of Zoning Adjustment (hereinafter referred to as “Board”) as constituted at the time of the adoption of the Zoning Ordinance shall continue in power. There shall be five (5) members appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council for four-year terms ending on December 31st of the designated year. The terms shall be staggered so that the terms of no more than two (2) members expire in any year. Vacancies on the Board shall be filled in accordance with KRS 100. 
1.17.1 Staff The staff of the Board shall be the Department. The Board office shall be located at the Department’s office location and all records, minutes, proceedings, regulations, transactions, findings and determinations shall be filed there. The Director of the Department shall act as the Secretary for the Board. 
1.17.2 Proceedings The Board shall conduct regular meetings in accordance with the rules and regulations of its by-laws and KRS 100. 
1.17.3 General Powers The Board shall have all the powers as allowed under the United States and Kentucky Constitutions and Chapter 100 of the Kentucky Revised Statutes, including, but not limited to: 
• 	
THE RIGHT TO EMPLOY OR CONTRACT WITH PLANNERS OR OTHER PERSONS AS IT DEEMS NECESSARY TO ACCOMPLISH ITS ASSIGNED DUTIES. 

• 	
TO RECEIVE, HOLD AND SPEND FUNDS WHICH IT MAY LEGALLY RECEIVE FROM ANY AND EVERY SOURCE IN AND OUT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY. 

• 	
TO ISSUE SUBPOENAS, AND TO HEAR AND DECIDE APPLICATIONS FOR CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS, VARIANCES AND NONCONFORMING USES. 

• 	
TO REVIEW ADMINISTRATIVE ACTION IN ENFORCEMENT OF THE ZONING ORDINANCE. 



1.18 MAP AMENDMENT PROCEDURES 
A proposal for amendment to the Zoning Map may originate with the Commission, the City Council, the owner of the subject property or a person having written authorization from the owner of the subject property. Regardless of the origin of the proposed amendment, an application must be filed with the Department for the proposed amendment, accompanied by information as required by KRS 100, the Zoning Ordinance and the by-laws of the Commission. At the time of filing an application for zoning map amendment, a non-refundable filing fee shall be paid as set forth by City Ordinances; however, there shall be no filing fee for an amendment requested by the City Council, Commission or any other governmental body. If the hearing procedure is initiated by a party other than the owner, the Department shall promptly notify the owner of the subject property as required by KRS Chapter 100. 
1.18.1 Pre-Application Conference Prior to filing an application for a zoning map amendment, the applicant shall meet with the Department to discuss the proposed amendment. The purpose of this conference is to discuss, at the earliest stages, the requirements, procedures and issues related to the proposed amendment request. It is intended that this conference will help to alleviate possible conflicts by early recognition of existing conditions, necessary facilities, recommendations of the adopted Comprehensive Plan and other issues related to the proposed amendment. The Department shall arrange the conference which shall be held not less than five (5) working days nor greater than three (3) months prior to the filing date. The Department shall keep a record of the conference date and include the information in the record of the map amendment application. The Department shall not accept an application for a map amendment for which a pre-application conference has not been held. 
1.18.2 Commission Procedure Upon the filing of an application for an amendment to the Zoning Map, the Department shall review the application, make whatever studies the Commission deems necessary and report its findings at a public hearing. In addition, the Commission may require the applicant to submit further information subsequent to the filing of an application as provided by KRS Chapter 100 and the by-laws of the Commission. 
1.18.3 Notice of Public Hearing Notice of the time, place and reason for holding a public hearing shall be given by one publication of the newspaper of general circulation in Hardin County, Kentucky, not earlier than 21 days or later than 14 days before the public hearing. 
1.18.4 Posting Subject Property The Department shall post a sign as defined in KRS Chapter 100 on the property of a map amendment request at least 14 days prior to the hearing date. The sign shall be located in a conspicuous location. 
1.18.5 Public Hearing Upon receipt of a completed application, receipt of the required fee, notice of map amendment on the subject property and notification of interested parties, the Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment. 
1.18.6 Recommendation of Commission for Zoning Map Amendment Before making recommendations to the City Council on a proposed map amendment, the Commission shall make findings as required in KRS Chapter 100. The Findings of Fact made by the Commission shall be recorded in the minutes and records of the Commission. After voting to recommend that an application for an amendment to the zoning map be granted or denied, the Commission shall forward its Findings of Fact and recommendation in writing to the City Council. 

1.19 ZONING TEXT AMENDMENTS 
Amendments to the text of the Zoning Ordinance shall be handled in the same manner as adoption of the original Zoning Ordinance and in conformance with KRS Chapter 100. 

1.20 ZONING DISTRICT FOR ANNEXED TERRITORY 
After the City Council has established territory to be annexed, and has published an ordinance of intent to annex, or prior to adoption of an annexation by consent ordinance, the Commission shall hold a public hearing to determine the applicable zoning district(s) for the territory to be annexed. The Commission shall transmit its report containing the Findings of Fact, Summary of Evidence and recommendation for zoning district classification(s) to the City Council for inclusion in the Ordinance of Annexation. 
21 

CHAPTER 2 

ZONING REGULATIONS 

2.0 ZONING MAP 

The City of Elizabethtown is hereby divided into zones and districts as provided herein and as shown on the Zoning Map dated July 1, 2008, which together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of the Zoning Ordinance. The Zoning Map shall be the official record of zoning status of all land in the City of Elizabethtown and be kept on file in the office of the Department and shall be known herein as the “Zoning Map.” 

2.1 MAP AMENDMENT IDENTIFICATION 
Amendments to the Zoning Map shall be promptly posted by the Department. Each amendment shall be identified on the map by a numerical designation referring to the Commission record of the amendment proceedings. 

2.2 INTERPRETATION OF ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES 
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of zones and districts as shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules apply: 
1. 	
Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerline. 

2. 	
Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lines. 

3. 	
Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to follow the centerline of the railroad right-of-way. 

4. 	
Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be construed to follow such shore lines, and in the event of change in the shore line, shall be construed as moving with the actual shore line. 

5. 	
Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of streams, rivers or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 

6. 	
Should a centerline of a street, highway, alley, stream, river or other body of water move, the zoning line shall be construed as moving with the actual centerline. 

7. 	
Boundaries indicated as parallel to the above features shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 

8. 	
Boundaries indicated as an extension of the above features shall be construed as an extension of such features. 

9. 	
Where the zone boundaries in question are a result of a map amendment request, the plat and legal description filed in conjunction with the map amendment request as approved by the City Council shall be deemed the official boundaries of the zone. 

10. 	
When the above stated rules do not indicate the exact location of the zone or district boundaries, then said boundaries shall be determined by appeal before the Board as provided by the Zoning Ordinance. 



2.3 APPLICATION OF ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
The regulations set by the Zoning Ordinance within each zone shall be the minimum or maximum limitations as appropriate to the case and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land, except as hereinafter provided. 
1. 	
No building, structure or land shall hereinafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof, shall hereinafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the zone and district in which it is located unless otherwise specifically permitted in the Zoning Ordinance. 

2. 	
No building or structure shall hereinafter be erected or altered: 


• 	
To exceed the height, bulk or floor area ratio; 

• 	
To accommodate or house a greater number of families; 

• 	
To occupy a greater percentage of lot area; 

• 	
To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards or other open spaces, unless specifically authorized or permitted in the Zoning Ordinance; 

• 	
To have less perimeter and interior lot landscaping for vehicular use area and non-compatible land uses than herein required, or in any other manner contrary to the provisions of these zoning regulations. 


23 

3. 	
No part of a yard, open space, off-street parking, loading space or other special use area required about or in conjunction with any building or land for the purpose of complying with the Zoning Ordinance shall be included as a part of a yard, open space, off-street parking, loading space or other special use area similarly required for any other building or land use unless otherwise specifically permitted in the Zoning Ordinance. 

4. 	
No yard or lot existing at the time of the adoption of the Zoning Ordinance shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the adoption of these zoning regulations shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by the Zoning Ordinance unless specifically permitted. 

5. 	
Except as hereinafter permitted, there shall be no more than one (1) principal structure on any lot or parcel of land unless a development plan is approved by the Commission as provided in Chapter 3. 

6. 	
Only those uses specifically named as principal, accessory or conditional uses or substantially similar to principal, accessory or conditional uses are permitted in each zone or district and all uses not specifically permitted or substantially similar to permitted uses are prohibited. Prohibited uses shall include but not be limited to those specifically named as prohibited. 



2.4 CONVERSION OF DWELLING STRUCTURES 
The conversion of any structure or structures either residential or non-residential so as to accommodate an increased number of dwelling units or families, or another permitted use, shall be permitted only within the zone in which a new building for similar occupancy would be permitted under the Zoning Ordinance. The resulting occupancy shall comply with all requirements governing new construction in such zone including, but not limited to, floor area, dimension of yards, open space, landscaping and off-street parking. The aforesaid requirements with respect to yards and other open spaces shall not apply if the conversion involves no exterior structural changes to a principal building but shall apply if any accessory building is converted to a principal building. 

2.5 AGRICULTURAL LAND USE 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, land which is used solely for agricultural use as defined herein shall be regulated in conformance with KRS Chapter 100. 

2.6 GOVERNMENTAL USE EXEMPTIONS 
Notwithstanding any other requirements of KRS Chapter 100, the Commonwealth of Kentucky and its political subdivisions shall be exempt from complying with any and all requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. 

2.7 ZONING DISTRICTS 
These regulations establish the following zoning districts as a means to implement the stated purpose of the Zoning Ordinance: 
Residential Zones 
Suburban Residential, Limited R-1 
Suburban Residential, General R-2 
Urban Residential, Limited R-3 
Urban Residential, General R-4 
Urban Residential, Mixed R-5 
High Density Residential R-6 

Commercial Zones 
Neighborhood Office C-1 
Neighborhood Commercial C-2 
Regional Commercial C-3 
General Service Commercial C-4 
Downtown Mixed Use C-5 

Industrial Zones 

General Industrial  I-1  
Regional Industrial  I-2  
Specialized Use Zones  
Planned Neighborhood Residential 1  PNR-1  
Planned Neighborhood Residential 2  PNR-2  
Planned Neighborhood Commercial  PNC  
Woodland Corridor District  WCD  
Municipal Airport Zone  MAZ  
Agri-Business15  AGB  
Future Development Holding  FDH  
Over Zones  
Interstate Highway Service and Business Overzone  IHSB  
Floodplain Overzone  FP  
Freeman Lake Overzone  FLO  
National Register Historic District  NRHD5  
Commercial Transition Overzone  CTO10  

The boundaries of each zone are located on the Zoning Map. All development within these zones shall be planned and constructed in accordance with the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. 
25 


2.8 ZONE DESCRIPTIONS AND PERMITTED USES 

2.8.1 R-1 Suburban Residential, Limited This district is composed of single family low density, up to two 
(2) dwelling units per acre. This district should be limited in scope of implementation to those areas that are environmentally sensitive, have areas of substantial slope or by the absence of adequate infrastructure should be developed at the lowest density possible. This zone is primarily applied to areas away from the town center and open space areas. 
2.8.1.1 Principal Uses Uses substantially similar to those listed herein shall also be permitted, in light of the purposes of this zoning district and the Comprehensive Plan. 
Assembly Uses: 
1. 	
Churches and associated facilities. 

2. 	
Neighborhood Center. 11 


Commercial Uses: 
1. 	
Golf course. 

2. 	
Government operated parks. 

3. 	
Communications towers/poles or collocations of equipment for the same, when erected by or on property owned by a public entity or public utility. 6 



Residential Uses: 
1. 	
Agricultural uses excluding open or enclosed commercial feedlot operations. 

2. 	
Residential Care Facility. 

3. 	
Single family detached residences. 


2.8.1.2 Accessory Uses Uses and structures which are customarily accessory, clearly incidental and subordinate to principal uses. 

Residential Uses: 
1. 	
Childcare centers, in home. Centers shall comply with all requirements as regulated by the Commonwealth of Kentucky, Department of Families and Children. 

2. 	
Home Occupations. 

3. 	
Keeping of not more than two (2) roomers or boarders without kitchen facilities. 

4. 	
Living quarters with cooking facilities and not rented for guests and employees of the premises. 

5. 	
Private garages, private storage sheds and private parking areas. 

6. 	
Private swimming pools and tennis courts, private non-commercial parks and open spaces. 


2.8.1.3 Conditional Uses Uses permitted only with Board approval after consideration of the intent and purpose of these regulations and consideration of the guidelines in the Comprehensive Plan. 
Assembly Uses: 
1. 	
Private Club.13 

2. 	
Events Center. 15 



Commercial Uses: 
1. 	
Cemetery. 

2. 	
Outdoor commercial recreation facilities such as zoos, riding stables, fishing lakes, swimming pools, tennis courts and campgrounds. 

3. 	
Resort Hotels and Restaurants when associated with a golf course. 

4. 	
Temporary real estate sales office for the sale of lots located only within the subdivision, to be removed or converted to a principal use when all lots are sold, but not for use as a general real estate sales or rentals. 


2.8.1.4 Special Provisions 
1. 	
More than one (1) principal structure per lot or parcel of land shall not be permitted. 

2. 	
When new construction is undertaken or additions are made to an existing structure, the structure or addition may be located on the lot with setbacks the same as other similar residential structures on parcels within five-hundred feet (500’). 

3. 	
Structures are encouraged to place the front façade of the building facing the primary street frontage. 

4. 	
No subdivision or re-subdivision of a lot that results in a lot fronting on a right-of-way of less than thirty (30’) feet in width shall be permitted. 

5. 	
The minimum frontage for corner lots may be reduced to the minimum lot frontage criteria when access is restricted along the street frontage of the lot.14 

6. 	
Events Centers are defined as a restricted use of a residential property for the conduct of special events of a limited size and number. Special events are defined as wedding receptions, luncheons, meetings, fundraising proceedings for not-for-profit organizations or similar activities. The space utilized in a residential dwelling unit shall not exceed 3,500 square feet. The number of events held may not exceed 75 per year. To qualify as an event center use, the residential dwelling unit must be located within the Downtown Neighborhood Sub-Area as identified in the Comprehensive Plan. 15 


27 


2.8.1.5 Lot Criteria 
1. 	
Minimum Lot Frontage – 150’; EXCEPTION: Corner Lots, Minimum Frontage – 175’ each street frontage.8 

2. 	
Minimum Lot Area – 21,780 S.F. 

3. 	
Minimum Front Yard Setback – 40’ 

4. 	
Minimum Side Yard Setback – 15’ 

5. 	
Minimum Side Yard Setback, Assembly & Commercial – 30’9 

6. 	
Minimum Rear Yard Setback – 25’ 

7. 	
Minimum Rear Yard Setback, Assembly & Commercial – 30’9 

8. 	
Maximum Building Height, Residential – 35’8 


7. 	Maximum Building Height, Commercial & Assembly – 75’8 
9. Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio (I.S.R.) Commercial & Assembly Uses – .708 NOTE: For the purposes of this ordinance abutting shall address each lot line to determine applicable lot frontage, lot area and setbacks for each yard. 
2.8.1.6 Signs, R-1 Zone Additional information and standards for signs as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 7. 
Table 2.0 R-1 Signs 
USE  ALLOWED TYPES  MAXIMUM NUMBER  MAXIMUM SIGN AREA  MAXIMUM HEIGHT  LOCATION REQUIREMENTS  LIGHTING ALLOWED  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS  
Assembly Use  Wall, Monument Pole  Wall 1/wall13 Mon. 1/street Pole 1/street  Wall 15% Mon. 100 s.f. Pole 50 s.f.  Mon. 8’ Pole 8’  10’ off paved surface  Yes  Wall sign 15% or 32s.f., whichever is greater  
Commercial Use  Wall, Monument Pole  Wall 1/wall13 Mon. 1 Pole 1  Wall 15% Mon. 50 s.f. Pole 36 s.f.  Mon. 8’ Pole 8’  10’ off paved surface  Yes  Wall sign 15% or 32s.f., whichever is greater  
Residential Use  Wall, Monument Pole  Wall 1 Mon. 1 Pole 1  Wall 5%; Mon. 4 s.f. Pole 4 s.f.  Mon. 4’ Pole 4’  10’ off paved surface  External  One wall only  
USE GROUPS  
Assembly Uses: Churches Commercial Uses: Cemetery. Golf Course, Outdoor Commercial, Parks, Resort Hotel, Temporary Real Estate Office Residential Uses: Agricultural Uses, Child care, Home Occupation, Keeping of roomers, Living quarters, Private garages, private pools, Residential care facility, Single family  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS  
1. Churches located on lots in excess of 20 acres may increase monument and pole sign size by a factor of two. 2. Message boards may be illuminated but may only contain manually changeable copy, when located along local or residential collector streets. 10  

2.8.1.7 Parking, R-1 Zone Additional information and standards for parking as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 6. 
Table 2.1 R-1 Parking 
PARKING STANDARDS  
Land Use  Parking Required  Notes  
Agricultural Use  1 space/employee  
Cemetery  1 space/employee  1 space/each vehicle owned by the facility  
Childcare, In home  N/A  Provide onsite area for drop off/pick up, wholly on site  
Church  1 space/3 seats  Based on seating in main sanctuary, min. of 5 spaces  
Events Center  1 space/400 s.f. 15  
Golf course  3 spaces/hole  Additional parking required if other uses present  
Home Occupation  N/A  No on street parking allowed for commercial vehicles owned by the use  
Neighborhood Center  5 spaces11  
Outdoor Commercial  5 spaces + 1/employee  Lakes, Campgrounds, Zoos, Riding Stables, Batting cages  
Parks  1 space/acre  Other uses present require parking based on use.  
Private Club  1 space/200 s.f. 13  
Real Estate Office, Temporary  1 space/400 s.f.  
Residential care facility  1 space/3 beds  
Residential, Single family  2 spaces/D. U.  

29 

2.8.2 	R-2 Suburban Residential, General This district is composed of single family, with a maximum density of five (5) dwelling units per acre. This zone is primarily applied to areas away from the town center. 
2.8.2.1 Principal Uses Uses substantially similar to those listed herein shall also be permitted, in light of the purposes of this zoning district and the Comprehensive Plan. 
Assembly Uses: 
1. 	
Churches and associated facilities. 

2. 	
Neighborhood Center. 11 

3. 	
Schools for academic instruction and associated facilities. 




Commercial Uses: 
1. 	
Golf course. 

2. 	
Government operated parks. 

3. 	
Communications towers/poles or collocations of equipment for the same, when erected by or on property owned by a public entity or public utility. 6 



Residential Uses: 
1. 	
Agricultural uses excluding open or enclosed commercial feedlot operations. 

2. 	
Residential care facility. 

3. 	
Single family detached residences. 


2.8.2.2 Accessory Uses Uses which are customarily accessory, clearly incidental and subordinate to principal uses. 

Residential Uses: 
1. 	
Childcare centers, in home. Centers shall comply with all requirements as regulated by the Commonwealth of Kentucky, Department of Families and Children. 

2. 	
Home Occupations. 

3. 	
Keeping of not more than two (2) roomers or boarders without kitchen facilities. 

4. 	
Living quarters with cooking facilities and not rented for guests and employees of the premises. 

5. 	
Private garages, private storage sheds and private parking areas. 

6. 	
Private swimming pools and tennis courts, private noncommercial parks and open spaces. 


2.8.2.3 Conditional Uses Uses permitted only with Board approval after consideration of the intent and purpose of these regulations and consideration of the guidelines as detailed in the Comprehensive Plan. 
Assembly Uses: 
1. 	
Private Club.13 

2. 	
Events Center15 



Commercial Uses: 
1. 	
Cemetery. 

2. 	
Outdoor commercial recreation facilities such as zoos, riding stables, fishing lakes, swimming pools, tennis courts and campgrounds. 

3. 	
Resort Hotels and Restaurants when associated with a golf course. 

4. 	
Temporary real estate sales office for the sale of lots located only within the subdivision, to be removed or converted to a principal use when all lots are sold, but not for use as a general real estate sales or rentals. 


2.8.2.4 Special Provisions 
1. 	
More than one (1) principal structure per lot or parcel of land shall not be permitted. 

2. 	
When new construction or additions are made to an existing structure, the structure or addition may be located on the lot with setbacks the same as other similar residential structures on parcels within five-hundred feet (500’). 

3. 	
Structures are encouraged to place the front façade of the building facing the primary street frontage. 

4. 	
No subdivision or re-subdivision of a lot that results in a lot fronting on a right-of-way of less than thirty (30’) feet in width shall be permitted. 

5. 	
The minimum frontage for corner lots may be reduced to the minimum lot frontage criteria when access is restricted along the street frontage of the lot.14 

6. 	
Events Centers are defined as a restricted use of a residential property for the conduct of special events of a limited size and number. Special events are defined as wedding receptions, luncheons, meetings, fundraising proceedings for not-for-profit organizations or similar activities. The space utilized in a residential dwelling unit shall not exceed 3,500 square feet. The number of events held may not exceed 75 per year. To qualify as an event center use, the residential dwelling unit must be located within the Downtown Neighborhood Sub-Area as identified in the Comprehensive Plan. 15 


31 


2.8.2.5 Lot Criteria 
1. 	
Minimum Lot Frontage – 100’ when abutting R-1 zone; 85’ when abutting all other zones; EXCEPTION: Corner Lots, Minimum Frontage – 100’ each street frontage. 8 

2. 	
Minimum Lot Frontage, Assembly & Commercial – 100’. EXCEPTION: Corner Lots, Minimum Frontage – 150’ each street frontage. 9 

3. 	
Minimum Lot Area – 14,520 S.F. when abutting R-1 zone 

4. 	
Minimum Lot Area – 8,712 when abutting all other zones 

5. 	
Minimum Front Yard Setback – 30’ 

6. 	
Minimum Front Yard Setback, Assembly & Commercial – 40’. 9 

7. 	
Minimum Side Yard Setback – 10’ 

8. 	
Minimum Side Yard Setback, Assembly & Commercial – 30’. 9 

9. 	
Minimum Rear Yard Setback – 25’ 

10. 
Minimum Rear Yard Setback, Assembly & Commercial – 30’. 9 

11. 
Maximum Building Height, Residential – 35’ 8 

12. 
Maximum Building Height, Commercial & Assembly – 75’ 8 


14. Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio (I.S.R.) Commercial & Assembly Uses – .70 8 NOTE: For the purposes of this ordinance abutting shall address each lot line to determine applicable lot frontage, lot area and setbacks for each yard. 
2.8.2.6 Signs, R-2 Zone Additional information and standards for signs as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 7. 
Table 2.2 R-2 Signs 
USE  ALLOWED TYPES  MAXIMUM NUMBER  MAXIMUM SIGN AREA  MAXIMUM HEIGHT  LOCATION REQUIREMENTS  LIGHTING ALLOWED  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS  
Assembly Use  Wall, Monument Pole  Wall 1/wall13 Mon. 1/street Pole 1/street  Wall 15% Mon. 100 s.f. Pole 50 s.f.  Mon. 8’ Pole 8’  10’ off paved surface  Yes  Wall sign 15% or 32s.f., whichever is greater  
Commercial Use  Wall, Monument Pole  Wall 1/wall13 Mon. 1 Pole 1  Wall 15% Mon. 50 s.f. Pole 36 s.f.  Mon. 8’ Pole 8’  10’ off paved surface  Yes  Wall sign 15% or 32s.f., whichever is greater  
Residential Use  Wall, Monument Pole  Wall 1 Mon. 1 Pole 1  Wall 5%; Mon. 4 s.f. Pole 4 s.f.  Mon. 4’ Pole 4’  10’ off paved surface  External  One wall only  
USE GROUPS  
Assembly Uses: Churches, Schools Commercial Uses: Cemetery. Golf Course, Outdoor Commercial, Parks, Resort Hotel, Temporary Real Estate Office Residential Uses: Agricultural Uses, Child Care, Home Occupation, Keeping of Roomers, Living Quarters, Private Garages, Private Pools, Residential Care Facility, Single family  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS  
1. Churches located on lots in excess of 20 acres may increase monument and pole sign size by a factor of two. 2. Message boards may be illuminated but may only contain manually changeable copy when located along a local or residential collector street. 10  

2.8.2.7 Parking, R-2 Zone Additional information and standards for parking as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 6. 
Table 2.3 R-2 Parking 
PARKING STANDARDS  
Land Use  Parking Required  Notes  
Agricultural Use  1 space/employee  
Cemetery  1 space/employee  1 space/each vehicle owned by the facility  
Childcare, In home  N/A  Provide onsite area for drop off/pick up, wholly on site  
Church  1 space/3 seats  Based on seating in main sanctuary, min. of 5 spaces  
Events Center  1 space/400 s.f. 15  
Golf course  3 spaces/hole  Additional parking required if other uses present  
Home Occupation  N/A  No on street parking allowed for commercial vehicles owned by the use  
Neighborhood Center  5 spaces11  
Outdoor Commercial  5 spaces + 1/employee  Lakes, Campgrounds, Zoos, Riding Stables, Batting cages  
Parks  1 space/acre  Other uses present require parking based on use.  
Private Club  1 space/200 s.f. 13  
Real Estate Office, Temporary  1 space/400 s.f.  
Residential care facility  1 space/3 beds  
Residential, Single family  2 spaces/D. U.  
School, K – 8  1 space/classroom & office + 10 visitor spaces  If gymnasium or auditorium on site an additional 1 space/3 seats shall be provided  
School, 9 – 12  1 space/classroom & office + 1 space/ 5 seats in each classroom  If gymnasium or auditorium on site an additional 1 space/3 seats shall be provided  
School, Post-Secondary  1 space/classroom & office + 1 space/ 2 seats in each classroom  If gymnasium or auditorium on site an additional 1 space/3 seats shall be provided3  

33 

2.8.3 	R-3 Urban Residential, Limited This zone is composed of single family and two-family with a maximum density of eight (8) dwelling units per acre. This zone is encouraged in areas closer to the City core. 
2.8.3.1 Principal Uses Uses substantially similar to those listed herein shall also be permitted, in light of the purposes of this zoning district and the Comprehensive Plan. 
Assembly Uses: 
1. 	
Churches and associated facilities. 

2. 	
Neighborhood Center. 11 

3. 	
Schools for academic instruction and associated facilities. 




Commercial Uses: 
1. 	
Government operated parks. 

2. 	
Communications towers/poles or collocations of equipment for the same, when erected by or on property owned by a public entity or public utility. 6 



Residential Uses: 
1. 	
Agricultural uses excluding open or enclosed commercial feedlot operations. 

2. 	
Residential care facility. 

3. 	
Single family attached residences (2 residences). 11 

4. 	
Single family detached residences. 

5. 	
Two family residences.11 


2.8.3.2 Accessory Uses Uses which are customarily accessory, clearly incidental and subordinate to principal uses. 

Residential Uses: 
1. 	
Childcare centers, in home. Centers shall comply with all requirements as regulated by the Commonwealth of Kentucky, Department of Families and Children. 

2. 	
Home Occupations. 

3. 	
Keeping of not more than two (2) roomers or boarders without kitchen facilities. 

4. 	
Living quarters with cooking facilities and not rented for guests and employees of the premises. 

5. 	
Private garages, private storage sheds and private parking areas. 

6. 	
Private swimming pools and tennis courts, private noncommercial parks and open spaces. 


2.8.3.3 Conditional Uses Uses permitted only with Board approval after consideration of the intent and purpose of these regulations and consideration of the guidelines as detailed in the Comprehensive Plan. 
Assembly Uses: 
1. 	
Community Centers (YMCA, YWCA, Senior Center) 

2. 	
Private Club13 

3. 	
Events Center. 15 



Commercial Uses: 
1. 	
Cemetery. 

2. 	
Outdoor commercial recreation facilities such as zoos, riding stables, fishing lakes, swimming pools, tennis courts and campgrounds. 

3. 	
Temporary real estate sales office for the sale of lots located only within the subdivision, to be removed or converted to a principal use when all lots are sold, but not for use as a general real estate sales or rentals. 


2.8.3.4 Special Provisions 
1. 	
More than one (1) principal structure per lot or parcel of land shall not be permitted. 

2. 	
When new construction or additions are made to an existing structure, the structure or addition may be located on the lot with setbacks the same as other similar residential structures on parcels within five-hundred feet (500’). 

3. 	
Structures are encouraged to place the front façade of the building facing the primary street frontage. 

4. 	
No subdivision or re-subdivision of a lot that results in a lot fronting on a right-of-way of less than thirty (30’) feet in width shall be permitted. 

5. 	
Single family detached zero lot line developments are required to designate on the subdivision plat which side yard will have 0’ setback. All single-family detached zero lot line developments shall have maintenance/access/use easements and when necessary, drainage easements, provided on adjacent lots and at a width of not less than ten (10’) feet. Adjacent lots shall not place any building within this easement. 11 

6. 	
The minimum frontage for corner lots may be reduced to the minimum lot frontage criteria when access is restricted along the street frontage of the lot.14 

7. 	
Events Centers are defined as a restricted use of a residential property for the conduct of special events of a limited size and number. Special events are defined as wedding receptions, luncheons, meetings, fundraising proceedings for not-for-profit organizations or similar activities. The space utilized in a residential dwelling unit shall not exceed 3,500 square feet. The number of events held may not exceed 75 per year. To qualify as an event center use, the residential dwelling unit must be located within the Downtown Neighborhood Sub-Area as identified in the Comprehensive Plan. 15 


35 


2.8.3.5 Lot Criteria 
1. 	
Minimum Lot Frontage, Single Family Detached – 75’; EXCEPTION: Corner Lots, Minimum Frontage – 100’ each street frontage. 6/8/11 

2. 	
Minimum Lot Frontage, Single Family Attached (2 residences) & Two Family – 40’/DU; EXCEPTION: Corner Lots, Minimum Frontage – 65’ each street frontage. 6/8/11 

3. 	
Minimum Lot Frontage, Assembly & Commercial – 100’. EXCEPTION: Corner Lots, Minimum Frontage – 150’ each street frontage. 9 

4. 	
Minimum Lot Area, Single Family & Two Family – 8,712 S.F./D.U. when abutting R-1; 7,260 S.F. when abutting R-2; 5,445 when abutting all other zones. 

5. 	
Minimum Front Yard Setback – 25’. 

6. 	
Minimum Front Yard Setback, Assembly & Commercial – 40’. 9 

7. 	
Minimum Side Yard Setback, Single Family – 10’ each side yard. 

8. 	
Minimum Side Yard Setback, Single Family Detached Zero Lot Line – 15’ one side yard, 0’ other side yard. 11 

9. 	
Minimum Side Yard Setback, Single Family Attached (2 residences) & Two Family – 10’ for each end wall, 0’ for common wall. 11 

10. 
Minimum Side Yard Setback, Assembly & Commercial – 30’. 9 

11. 
Minimum Rear Yard Setback – 15’. 

12. 
Minimum Rear Yard Setback, Assembly & Commercial – 30’. 9 

13. 
Maximum Building Height, Single Family & Two Family – 35’.8 

14. 
Maximum Building Height, Commercial & Assembly – 75’.8 


15. Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio (I.S.R.) Commercial & Assembly Uses – .70.8 NOTE: For the purposes of this ordinance abutting shall address each lot line to determine applicable setbacks for each yard. 
2.8.3.6 Signs, R-3 Zone Additional information and standards for signs as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 7. 
Table 2.4 R-3 Signs 
USE  ALLOWED TYPES  MAXIMUM NUMBER  MAXIMUM SIGN AREA  MAXIMUM HEIGHT  LOCATION REQUIREMENTS  LIGHTING ALLOWED  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS  
Wall  
Assembly Use  Wall, Monument Pole  1/wall13 Mon. 1/street Pole  W.M. 15% Mon. 100 s.f. Pole 50 s.f.  Mon. 8’ Pole 8’  10’ off paved surface  Yes  Wall sign 15% or 32s.f., whichever is greater  
1/street  
Commercial Use  Wall, Monument Pole  Wall 1/wall13 Mon. 1 Pole 1  Wall 15% Mon. 50 s.f. Pole 36 s.f.  Mon. 8’ Pole 8’  10’ off paved surface  Yes  Wall sign 15% or 32s.f., whichever is greater  

USE  ALLOWED TYPES  MAXIMUM NUMBER  MAXIMUM SIGN AREA  MAXIMUM HEIGHT  LOCATION REQUIREMENTS  LIGHTING ALLOWED  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS  
Single Family Attached, Two Family Identification11  Monument Pole  2/entrance  32 s.f.  10’  To be approved by Engineering Department  External  Walls and fences permitted as part of overall sign design. Pole sign must contain multiple poles  
Residential Use  Wall, Monument Pole  Wall 1 Mon. 1 Pole 1  Wall 5%; Mon. 4 s.f. Pole 4 s.f.  Mon. 4’ Pole 4’  10’ off paved surface  External  One wall only  
USE GROUPS  
Assembly Uses: Churches, Schools Commercial Uses: Cemetery, Outdoor Commercial, Parks, Resort Hotel, Temporary Real Estate Office Residential Uses: Agricultural Uses, Child Care, Home Occupation, Keeping of Roomers, Living Quarters, Private Garages, Private Pools, Residential Care Facility, Single family, Two family  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS  
1. Churches located on lots in excess of 20 acres may increase monument and pole sign size by a factor of two. 2. Message boards may be illuminated but may only contain manually changeable copy when located along a local or residential collector street.10  
Table 2.5 R-3 Parking 


2.8.3.7 Parking, R-3 Zone Additional information and standards for parking as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 6. 
PARKING STANDARDS  
Land Use  Parking Required  Notes  
Agricultural Use  1 space/employee  
Cemetery  1 space/employee  1 space/each vehicle owned by the facility  
Childcare, In home  N/A  Provide onsite area for drop off/pick up, wholly on site  
Church  1 space/3 seats  Based on seating in main sanctuary, min. of 5 spaces  
Community center  1 space/600 s.f.  1 bus parking space/25 required spaces.  
Events Center  1 space/400 s.f. 15  
Home Occupation  N/A  No on street parking allowed for commercial vehicles owned by the use  
Neighborhood Center  5 spaces11  
Outdoor Commercial  5 spaces + 1/employee  Lakes, Campgrounds, Zoos, Riding Stables, Batting cages  
Parks  1 space/acre  Other uses present require parking based on use.  
Private Club  1 space/200 s.f. 13  
Real Estate Office, Temporary  1 space/400 s.f.  
Residential care facility  1 space/3 beds  
Residential, Single family  2 spaces/D. U.  
Residential, Two family  2 spaces/D. U.  
School, K – 8  1 space/classroom & office + 10 visitor spaces  If gymnasium or auditorium on site an additional 1 space/3 seats shall be provided  

37 

Land Use  Parking Required  Notes  
School, 9 – 12  1 space/classroom & office + 1 space/ 5 seats in each classroom  If gymnasium or auditorium on site an additional 1 space/3 seats shall be provided  
School, Post-Secondary  1 space/classroom & office + 1 space/ 2 seats in each classroom  If gymnasium or auditorium on site an additional 1 space/3 seats shall be provided3  

2.8.3.8 Landscaping, R-3 Zone Additional information and standards for Vehicular Use Area (VUA) Landscaping as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 5. 
Table 2.6 R-3 Perimeter Landscape Buffer Area3 
Landscape Buffer Area Category  Width Options (In Feet)  Planting Density Multiplier  
5’  1.5  
Category A  10’  1.33  
15’  1  

Table 2.7 R-3 Buffering Requirements 

Landscape Buffer Area  Buffering Use Classification  
Category  Buffered Use  Buffering Use  
Category A  R-1, R-2  R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6  

Table 2.8 Perimeter Planting Density *(OFT) Or Fraction Thereof 

Planting Density Requirement Categories  
A  B  C  D  
2 Large Trees or 1 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 3’ screening/80’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  2 Large Trees or 1 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 4’ screening/60’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  3 Large Trees or 2 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 5’ screening/60’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  3 Large Trees or 2 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 6’ screening/60’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  

2.8.4 	R-4 Urban Residential, General This zone is composed of single family, two-family with a maximum density of ten (10) dwelling units per acre. This district is primarily encouraged in area closer to the City core. 
2.8.4.1 Principal Uses Uses substantially similar to those listed herein shall also be permitted, in light of the above described purposes of this zoning district and the Comprehensive Plan. 
Assembly Uses: 
1. 	
Churches and associated facilities. 

2. 	
Neighborhood Center. 11 

3. 	
Schools for academic instruction and associated facilities. 




Commercial Uses: 
1. 	
Assisted Living Facilities when located in an existing building. 11 

2. 	
Government operated parks. 

3. 	
Communications towers/poles or collocations of equipment for the same, when erected by or on property owned by a public entity or public utility. 6 



Residential Uses: 
1. 	
Agricultural uses excluding open or enclosed feedlot operations. 

2. 	
Residential care facility. 

3. 	
Single family detached residences. 

4. 	
Single family attached residences (2 residences). 11 

5. 	
Two family residences.11 


2.8.4.2 	Accessory Uses Uses which are customarily accessory, clearly incidental & subordinate to principal uses. 

Residential Uses: 
1. 	
Childcare centers, in home. Centers shall comply with all requirements as regulated by the Commonwealth of Kentucky, Department of Families and Children. 

2. 	
Home Occupations. 

3. 	
Keeping of not more than two (2) roomers or boarders without kitchen facilities. 

4. 	
Living quarters with cooking facilities and not rented for guests and employees of the premises. 

5. 	
Private garages, private storage sheds and private parking areas. 

6. 	
Private swimming pools and tennis courts, private noncommercial parks and open spaces. 



Commercial Uses: 11 
1. 	
Assisted living facility café and food service facilities open to the public no more than eight (8) hours per day and containing seating for less than 100 persons and no alcohol sales permitted. 

2. 	
Office when located within the building of a permitted commercial use and containing no greater than 400 square feet and no separate entrance is provided. 


2.8.4.3 Conditional Uses Uses permitted only with Board approval after consideration of the intent and purpose of these regulations and consideration of the guidelines as detailed in the Comprehensive Plan. 
Assembly Uses: 
1. 	
Community Centers (YMCA, YWCA, Senior Center) 

2. 	
Private Club13 

3. 	
Events Center. 15 



Commercial Uses: 
1. 	
Cemetery. 

2. 	
Outdoor commercial recreation facilities such as zoos, riding stables, fishing lakes, swimming pools, tennis courts and campgrounds. 

3. 	
Temporary real estate sales office for the sale of lots located only within the subdivision, to be removed or converted to a principal use when all lots are sold, but not for use as a general real estate sales or rentals. 


39 

2.8.4.4 Special Provisions 

1. 	
When new construction or additions are made to an existing structure, the structure or addition may be located on the lot with setbacks the same as other similar residential structures on parcels within five-hundred feet (500’). 

2. 	
Structures are encouraged to place the front façade of the building facing the primary street frontage. 

3. 	
No subdivision or re-subdivision of a lot that results in a lot fronting on a right-of-way of less than thirty (30’) feet in width shall be permitted. 

4. 	
Single family detached zero lot line developments are required to designate on the subdivision plat which side yard will have 0’ setback. All single-family detached zero lot line developments shall have maintenance/access/use easements and when necessary, drainage easements, provided on adjacent lots and at a width of not less than ten (10’) feet. Adjacent lots shall not place any building within this easement. 11 

5. 	
The minimum frontage for corner lots may be reduced to the minimum lot frontage criteria when access is restricted along the street frontage of the lot.14 

6. 	
Events Centers are defined as a restricted use of a residential property for the conduct of special events of a limited size and number. Special events are defined as wedding receptions, luncheons, meetings, fundraising proceedings for not-for-profit organizations or similar activities. The space utilized in a residential dwelling unit shall not exceed 3,500 square feet. The number of events held may not exceed 75 per year. To qualify as an event center use, the residential dwelling unit must be located within the Downtown Neighborhood Sub-Area as identified in the Comprehensive Plan.15 



2.8.4.5 Lot Criteria 
1. 	
Minimum Lot Frontage, Single Family Detached – 60’; EXCEPTION: Corner Lots, Minimum Frontage – 100’ each street frontage. 6/8/11 

2. 	
Minimum Lot Frontage, Single Family Attached (2 residences) & Two Family – 30’ D/U; EXCEPTION: Corner Lots, Minimum Frontage – 65’ each street frontage. 6/8/11 

3. 	
Minimum Lot Frontage, Assembly & Commercial – 100’. EXCEPTION: Corner Lots, Minimum Frontage – 150’ each street frontage. 9 

4. 	
Minimum Lot Area, Per Dwelling Unit – 8,712 S.F. when abutting R-1; 5,124 S.F. when abutting R­2; 4,356 S.F. when abutting all other zones. 

5. 	
Minimum Front Yard Setback – 25’. 

6. 	
Minimum Front Yard Setback, Assembly & Commercial – 35’. 9 

7. 	
Minimum Side Yard Setback, Single Family – 10’. 

8. 	
Minimum Side Yard Setback, Single Family Detached Zero Lot Line – 15’ one side yard, 0’ other side yard. 11 

9. 	
Minimum Side Yard Setback, Single Family Attached (2 residences) & Two Family – 10’ each end wall, 0’ each common wall. 11 

10. 
Minimum Side Yard Setback, Assembly & Commercial – 25’. 9 

11. 
Minimum Rear Yard Setback, Single Family, Two Family – 15’. 

12. 
Minimum Rear Yard Setback, Assembly & Commercial – 25’. 9 

13. 
Maximum Building Height, Single Family, and Two Family – 35’. 


10. Maximum Building Height, Commercial & Assembly – 75’.8 
12. Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio (I.S.R.) Commercial & Assembly Uses – .70.8 NOTE: For the purposes of this ordinance abutting shall address each lot line to determine applicable setbacks for each yard. 
2.8.4.6 Residential Signs, R-4 Zone Additional information and standards for signs as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 7. 
Table 2.9 R-4 Signs 
USE  ALLOWED TYPES  MAXIMUM NUMBER  MAXIMUM SIGN AREA  MAXIMUM HEIGHT  LOCATION REQUIREMENTS  LIGHTING ALLOWED  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS  
Assembly Use  Wall, Monument Pole  Wall 1/wall13 Mon. 1/street Pole 1/street  Wall 15% Mon. 100 s.f. Pole 50 s.f.  Mon. 8’ Pole 8’  10’ off paved surface  Yes  Wall sign 15% or 32s.f., whichever is greater  
Commercial Use  Wall, Monument Pole  Wall 1/wall13 Mon. 1 Pole 1  Wall 15% Mon. 50 s.f. Pole 36 s.f.  Mon. 8’ Pole 8’  10’ off paved surface  Yes  Wall sign 15% or 32s.f., whichever is greater  
Single Family Attached, Two Family Identification11  Monument Pole  2/entrance  32 s.f.  10’  To be approved by Engineering Department  External  Walls and fences permitted as part of overall sign design. Pole sign must contain multiple poles.  
Residential Use  Wall, Monument Pole  Wall 1 Mon. 1 Pole 1  Wall 5%; Mon. 4 s.f. Pole 4 s.f.  Mon. 4’ Pole 4’  10’ off paved surface  External  One wall only  
USE GROUPS  
Assembly Uses: Churches, Community Center, Schools Commercial Uses: Cemetery, Outdoor Commercial, Parks, Resort Hotel, Temporary Real Estate Office Residential Uses: Agricultural Uses, Child care, Home Occupation, Keeping of roomers, Living quarters, Private garages, private pools, Residential care facility, Single family, Two family  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS  
1. Churches located on lots in excess of 20 acres may increase monument and pole sign size by a factor of two (2). 2. Message boards may be illuminated but may only contain manually changeable copy when located along a local or residential collector street. 10  
Table 2.10 R-4 Parking 


2.8.4.7 Parking, R-4 Zone Additional information and standards for parking as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 6. 
PARKING STANDARDS  
Land Use  Parking Required  Notes  
Agricultural Use  1 space/employee  
Assisted Living Facility  .5 spaces/D. U. 15  Additionally, 1 space for each employee  
Cemetery  1 space/employee  1 space/each vehicle owned by the facility  
Childcare, In home  N/A  Provide onsite area for drop off/pick up, wholly on site  
Church  1 space/3 seats  Based on seating in main sanctuary, min. of 5 spaces  
Community center  1 space/600 s.f.  1 bus parking space/25 required spaces.  
Events Center  1 space/400 s.f. 15  
Home Occupation  N/A  No on street parking allowed for commercial vehicles owned by the use  
Neighborhood Center  5 spaces11  
Outdoor Commercial  5 spaces + 1/employee  Lakes, Campgrounds, Zoos, Riding Stables, Batting cages  

41 

Land Use  Parking Required  Notes  
Parks  1 space/acre  Other uses present require parking based on use.  
Private Club  1 space/200 s.f. 13  
Real Estate Office, Temporary  1 space/400 s.f.  
Residential care facility  1 space/3 beds  
Residential, Single family  2 spaces/D. U.  
Residential, Two family  2 spaces/D. U.  + 1 space for each 4 units if more than 1 building on a parcel11  
School, K – 8  1 space/classroom & office + 10 visitor spaces  If gymnasium or auditorium on site an additional 1 space/3 seats shall be provided  
School, 9 – 12  1 space/classroom & office + 1 space/ 5 seats in each classroom  If gymnasium or auditorium on site an additional 1 space/3 seats shall be provided  
School, Post-Secondary  1 space/classroom & office + 1 space/ 2 seats in each classroom  If gymnasium or auditorium on site an additional 1 space/3 seats shall be provided3  
Table 2.11 R-4 Perimeter Landscape Buffer Area3 


2.8.4.8 Landscaping, R-4 Zone Additional information and standards for Vehicular Use Area (VUA) Landscaping as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 5. 
Landscape Buffer Area Category  Width Options (In Feet)  Planting Density Multiplier  
5’  1.5  
Category A  10’  1.33  
15’  1  
Table 2.12 R-4 Buffering Requirements 



Landscape Buffer Area  Buffering Use Classification  
Category  Buffered Use  Buffering Use  
Category A  R-1, R-2  R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6  

Table 2.13 Perimeter Planting Density *(OFT) Or Fraction Thereof 

Planting Density Requirement Categories  
A  B  C  D  
2 Large Trees or 1 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 3’ screening/80’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  2 Large Trees or 1 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 4’ screening/60’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  3 Large Trees or 2 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 5’ screening/60’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  3 Large Trees or 2 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 6’ screening/60’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  

2.8.5 	R-5 Urban Residential, Mixed This zone is composed of single family, two-family and multi-family with a maximum density of twelve (12) dwelling units per acre. This district is primarily encouraged in area closer to the City core. 
2.8.5.1 Principal Uses Uses substantially similar to those listed herein shall also be permitted, in light of the above described purposes of this zoning district and the Comprehensive Plan. 
Assembly Uses: 
1. 	
Churches and associated facilities. 

2. 	
Neighborhood Center. 11 

3. 	
Schools for academic instruction and associated facilities. 




Commercial Uses: 
1. 	
Assisted Living Facilities when located in an existing building. 11 

2. 	
Government operated parks. 

3. 	
Communications towers/poles or collocations of equipment for the same, when erected by or on property owned by a public entity or public utility. 6 



Residential Uses: 
1. 	
Agricultural uses excluding open or enclosed feedlot operations. 

2. 	
Multifamily residences. 11 

3. 	
Residential care facility. 

4. 	
Single family attached residences (2 residences). 11 

5. 	
Single family attached residences (3 or more residences). 11 

6. 	
Single family detached residences. 

7. 	
Two family residences.11 


2.8.5.2 Accessory Uses Uses which are customarily accessory, clearly incidental & subordinate to principal uses. 

Residential Uses: 
1. 	
Childcare centers, in home. Centers shall comply with all requirements as regulated by the Commonwealth of Kentucky, Department of Families and Children. 

2. 	
Home Occupations. 

3. 	
Keeping of not more than two (2) roomers or boarders without kitchen facilities. 

4. 	
Living quarters with cooking facilities and not rented for guests and employees of the premises. 

5. 	
Private garages, private storage sheds and private parking areas. 

6. 	
Private swimming pools and tennis courts, private noncommercial parks and open spaces. 



Commercial Uses: 11 
1. 	
Assisted living facility café and food service facilities open to the public no more than eight (8) hours per day and containing seating for less than 100 persons and no alcohol sales permitted. 

2. 	
Office when located within the building of a permitted commercial use and containing no greater than 400 square feet and no separate entrance is provided. 


2.8.5.3 Conditional Uses Uses permitted only with Board approval after consideration of the intent and purpose of these regulations and consideration of the guidelines as detailed in the Comprehensive Plan. 
Assembly Uses: 
1. 	
Community Centers (YMCA, YWCA, Senior Center) 

2. 	
Private Club13 

3. 	
Events Center15 



Commercial Uses: 
1. 	
Cemetery. 

2. 	
Outdoor commercial recreation facilities such as zoos, riding stables, fishing lakes, swimming pools, tennis courts and campgrounds. 

3. 	
Temporary real estate sales office for the sale of lots located only within the subdivision, to be removed or converted to a principal use when all lots are sold, but not for use as a general real estate sales or rentals. 


43 

2.8.5.4 Special Provisions 
1. 	
Single family attached & Multi Family residences shall not contain more than four (4) units per building. 11 

2. 	
When new construction or additions are made to an existing structure, the structure or addition may be located on the lot with setbacks the same as other similar residential structures on parcels within five-hundred feet (500’). 

3. 	
All multi family structures shall provide foundation plantings along areas visible from parking areas or street right-of-ways. 

4. 	
No parking for multifamily shall be allowed in the required front yard. 

5. 	
Structures are encouraged to place the front façade of the building facing the primary street frontage. 

6. 	
No subdivision or re-subdivision of a lot that results in a lot fronting on a right-of-way of less than thirty (30’) feet in width shall be permitted. 

7. 	
Single family detached zero lot line developments are required to designate on the subdivision plat which side yard will have 0’ setback. All single-family detached zero lot line developments shall have maintenance/access/use easements and when necessary, drainage easements, provided on adjacent lots and at a width of not less than ten (10’) feet. Adjacent lots shall not place any building within this easement. 11 

8. 	
If all parking and maneuvering areas are placed to the rear of the structure the front yard setback may be decreased to fifteen (15’) feet.3 

9. 	
If a multifamily development in the R-5 zone is adjacent to publicly owned open space containing a minimum of two and one half (2.5) acres then the minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be calculated to allow the maximum allowed density, disregarding the zoning of the abutting properties. 6 

10. 	
The minimum frontage for corner lots may be reduced to the minimum lot frontage criteria when access is restricted along the street frontage of the lot.14 

11. 	
Events Centers are defined as a restricted use of a residential property for the conduct of special events of a limited size and number. Special events are defined as wedding receptions, luncheons, meetings, fundraising proceedings for not-for-profit organizations or similar activities. The space utilized in a residential dwelling unit shall not exceed 3,500 square feet. The number of events held may not exceed 75 per year. To qualify as an event center use, the residential dwelling unit must be located within the Downtown Neighborhood Sub-Area as identified in the Comprehensive Plan. 15 



2.8.5.5 Lot Criteria 
1. 	
Minimum Lot Frontage, Single Family Detached – 50’; EXCEPTION: Corner Lots, Minimum Frontage – 100’ each street frontage. 6/8/11 

2. 	
Minimum Lot Frontage, Single Family Attached & Two Family– 30’ D/U; EXCEPTION: Corner Lots, Minimum Frontage – 65’ each street frontage. 6/8 

3. 	
Minimum Lot Frontage, Multi Family – 100’ EXCEPTION: Corner Lots, Minimum Frontage – 185’ each street frontage. 6/8/11 

4. 	
Minimum Lot Frontage, Single Family Attached (3 or more residences) – 20’ D/U. EXCEPTION: Corner Lots, 65’ each street frontage. 11 

5. 	
Minimum Lot Frontage, Assembly & Commercial – 100’. EXCEPTION: Corner Lots, Minimum Frontage – 150’ each street frontage. 9 

6. 	
Minimum Lot Area, Per Dwelling Unit – 8,712 S.F. when abutting R-1; 5,124 S.F. when abutting R­2; 3,630 S.F. when abutting all other zones. 

7. 	
Minimum Front Yard Setback – 25’. 

8. 	
Minimum Front Yard Setback, Assembly & Commercial – 30’. 9 

9. 	
Minimum Side Yard Setback, Single Family Detached – 10’. 11 

10. 	
Minimum Side Yard Setback, Single Family Detached Zero Lot Line – 15’ one side yard, 0’ other side yard. 11 

11. 	
Minimum Side Yard Setback, Single Family Attached (2 residences) – 10’ each end wall, 0’ each common wall. 11 

12. 	
Minimum Side Yard Setback, Multi Family & Single Family Attached (3 or more residences) – 15’ each end wall, 0’ each common wall. 11 

13. 	
Minimum Side Yard Setback, Assembly & Commercial – 20’. 9 

14. 	
Minimum Rear Yard Setback, Single Family & Single Family Attached (2 residences) – 15’. 11 

15. 	
Minimum Rear Yard Setback, Multi Family & Single Family Attached (3 or more residences) – 20’. 11 

16. 	
Minimum Rear Yard Setback, Assembly & Commercial – 20’. 9 

17. 	
Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio (ISR), Multi Family, Single Family Attached (3 or more residences), Commercial & Assembly Uses – .80.8/11 

18. 	
Maximum Building Height, Single Family, and Two Family– 35’. 

19. 	
Maximum Building Height, Multi Family – 45’. 

20. 	
Maximum Building Height, Commercial & Assembly Uses – 75’. 8 


NOTE: For the purposes of this ordinance abutting shall address each lot line to determine applicable setbacks for each yard. 
2.8.5.6 Signs, R-5 Zone Additional information and standards for signs as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 7. 
Table 2.14 R-5 Signs 
USE  ALLOWED TYPES  MAXIMUM NUMBER  MAXIMUM SIGN AREA  MAXIMUM HEIGHT  LOCATION REQUIREMENTS  LIGHTING ALLOWED  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS  
Assembly Use  Wall, Monument Pole  Wall 1/wall13 Mon. 1/street Pole 1/street  W.M. 15% Mon. 100 s.f. Pole 50 s.f.  Mon. 8’ Pole 8’  10’ off paved surface  Yes  Wall sign 15% or 32s.f., whichever is greater  
Commercial Use  Wall, Monument Pole  Wall 1/wall13 Mon. 1 Pole 1  Wall 15% Mon. 50 s.f. Pole 36 s.f.  Mon. 8’ Pole 8’  10’ off paved surface  Yes  Wall sign 15% or 32s.f., whichever is greater  
Single Family Attached, Two Family, Multifamily Identification11  Monument Pole  2/entrance  32 s.f.  10’  To be approved by Engineering Department  External  Walls and fences permitted as part of overall sign design. Pole sign must contain multiple poles.  
Residential Use  Wall, Monument Pole  Wall 1 Mon. 1 Pole 1  Wall 5%; Mon. 4 s.f. Pole 4 s.f.  Mon. 4’ Pole 4’  10’ off paved surface  External  One wall only  
USE GROUPS  
Assembly Uses: Churches, Community Center, Schools Commercial Uses: Cemetery. Outdoor Commercial, Parks, Resort Hotel, Temporary Real Estate Office Residential Uses: Agricultural Uses, Child care, Home Occupation, Keeping of roomers, Living quarters, Multi family, Private garages, private pools, Residential care facility, Single family, Two family  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS  
1. Churches located on lots in excess of 20 acres may increase monument and pole sign size by a factor of two (2). 2. Message boards may be illuminated but may only contain manually changeable copy when located along a local or residential collector street. 10  
Table 2.15 R-5 Parking 


2.8.5.7 Parking, R-5 Zone Additional information and standards for parking as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 6. 
PARKING STANDARDS  
Land Use  Parking Required  Notes  
Agricultural Use  1 space/employee  

45 

Land Use  Parking Required  Notes  
Cemetery  1 space/employee  1 space/each vehicle owned by the facility  
Assisted Living Facility  .5 spaces/D. U.  Additionally, 1 space for each employee15  
Childcare, In home  N/A  Provide onsite area for drop off/pick up, wholly on site  
Church  1 space/3 seats  Based on seating in main sanctuary, min. of 5 spaces  
Community center  1 space/600 s.f.  1 bus parking space/25 required spaces.  
Community Residence  1 space/3 occupants  
Events Center  1 space/400 s.f. 15  
Home Occupation  N/A  No on street parking allowed for commercial vehicles owned by the use  
Neighborhood Center  5 spaces11  
Outdoor Commercial  5 spaces + 1/employee  Lakes, Campgrounds, Zoos, Riding Stables, Batting cages  
Parks  1 space/acre  Other uses present require parking based on use.  
Private Club  1 space/200 s.f. 13  
Real Estate Office, Temporary  1 space/400 s.f.  
Residential care facility  1 space/3 beds  
Residential, Single family  2 spaces/D. U.  
Residential, Multi family  2 spaces/D. U.  1 additional space for each 4 D.U.  
Residential, Two family  2 spaces/D. U.  +1 space for each 4 units (OFT) if more than 1 building on a parcel11  
School, K – 8  1 space/classroom & office + 10 visitor spaces  If gymnasium or auditorium on site an additional 1 space/3 seats shall be provided  
School, 9 – 12  1 space/classroom & office + 1 space/ 5 seats in each classroom  If gymnasium or auditorium on site an additional 1 space/3 seats shall be provided  
School, Post-Secondary  1 space/classroom & office + 1 space/ 2 seats in each classroom  If gymnasium or auditorium on site an additional 1 space/3 seats shall be provided3  
Table 2.16 R-5 Perimeter Landscape Buffer Area3 


2.8.5.8 Landscaping, R-5 Zone Additional information and standards for Vehicular Use Area (VUA) Landscaping as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 5. 
Landscape Buffer Area Category  Width Options (In Feet)  Planting Density Multiplier  
5’  1.5  
Category A  10’  1.33  
15’  1  

Table 2.17 R-5 Buffering Requirements 

Landscape Buffer Area Category  Buffering Use Classification  
Buffered Use  Buffering Use  
Category A  R-1, R-2  R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6  

Table 2.18 Perimeter Planting Density *(OFT) Or Fraction Thereof 

Planting Density Requirement Categories  
A  B  C  D  
2 Large Trees or 1 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 3’ screening/80’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  2 Large Trees or 1 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 4’ screening/60’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  3 Large Trees or 2 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 5’ screening/60’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  3 Large Trees or 2 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 6’ screening/60’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  

47 

2.8.6 	R-6 High Density Residential This zone is composed of single family, two family and multifamily residences at a maximum density of twenty (20) units per acre. This zone is primarily applied to areas accessible to infrastructure, adjacent to existing similar development patterns that can serve as transitional uses from lower density and intensity uses. 
2.8.6.1 Principal Uses Uses substantially similar to those listed herein shall also be permitted, in light of the above described purposes of this zoning district and the Comprehensive Plan. 
Assembly Uses: 
1. 	
Churches and associated facilities. 

2. 	
Neighborhood Center. 11 

3. 	
Schools for academic instruction and associated facilities. 




Commercial Uses: 
1. 	
Assisted Living Facilities when located in an existing building. 11 

2. 	
Government operated parks. 

3. 	
Communications towers/poles or collocations of equipment for the same, when erected by or on property owned by a public entity or public utility. 6 



Residential Uses: 
1. 	
Agricultural uses, excluding open or enclosed feedlot operations. 

2. 	
Community residences. 

3. 	
Multifamily residences 

4. 	
Residential care facility. 

5. 	
Single family attached residences (2 residences).11 

6. 	
Single family attached residences (3 or more residences).11 

7. 	
Single family detached residences. 

8. 	
Two family residences.11 


2.8.6.2 Accessory Uses Uses which are customarily accessory, clearly incidental & subordinate to principal uses. 

Residential Uses: 
1. 	
Childcare centers, in home. Centers shall comply with all requirements as regulated by the Commonwealth of Kentucky, Department of Families and Children. 

2. 	
Home Occupations. 

3. 	
Keeping of not more than two (2) roomers or boarders without kitchen facilities. 

4. 	
Living quarters with cooking facilities and not rented for guests and employees of the premises. 

5. 	
Private garages, private storage sheds and private parking areas. 

6. 	
Private swimming pools and tennis courts, private noncommercial parks and open spaces. 



Commercial Uses: 11 
1. 	
Assisted living facility café and food service facilities open to the public no more than eight (8) hours per day and containing seating for less than 100 persons and no alcohol sales permitted. 

2. 	
Office when located within the building of a permitted commercial use and containing no greater than 400 square feet and no separate entrance is provided. 


2.8.6.3 Conditional Uses Uses permitted only with Board approval after consideration of the intent and purpose of these regulations and consideration of the guidelines as detailed in the Comprehensive Plan. 
Assembly Uses: 
1. 	
Community Centers (YMCA, YWCA, Senior Center). 

2. 	
Private Club13 

3. 	
Events Center. 15 



Commercial Uses: 
1. 	
Cemetery. 

2. 	
Outdoor commercial recreation facilities such as zoos, riding stables, fishing lakes, swimming pools, tennis courts and campgrounds. 

3. 	
Residential Storage Facility. Exterior treatments shall be of a type to closely resemble exteriors of existing housing in close proximity to the proposed development. Acceptable treatments include, but are not limited to, brick veneer, wood, vinyl, aluminum siding or stucco. Individual 


49 

building sizes shall be similar in square feet of floor area to residential structures in the general vicinity. Landscaping plans, prepared by a landscape professional must be submitted for the entire development. 
4. 	Temporary real estate sales office for the sale of lots located only within the subdivision, to be removed or converted to a principal use when all lots are sold, but not for use as a general real estate sales or rentals. 
2.8.6.4 Special Provisions 
1. 	
When new construction or additions are made to an existing structure, the structure or addition may be located on the lot with setbacks the same as other similar residential structures on parcels within five-hundred feet (500’). 

2. 	
All multifamily buildings shall provide foundation plantings along areas visible from parking areas or street right-of-ways. 

3. 	
No parking for multifamily shall be allowed in the required front yard. 

4. 	
Buildings are encouraged to place the front façade of the building facing the primary street frontage. 

5. 	
No subdivision or re-subdivision of a lot that results in a lot fronting on a right-of-way of less than thirty (30’) feet in width shall be permitted. 

6. 	
Single family detached zero lot line developments are required to designate on the subdivision plat which side yard will have 0’ setback. All single-family detached zero lot line developments shall have maintenance/access/use easements and when necessary, drainage easements, provided on adjacent lots and at a width of not less than ten (10’) feet. Adjacent lots shall not place any structure within this easement. 11 

7. 	
If all parking and maneuvering areas are placed to the rear of the structure the front yard setback may be decreased to fifteen (15’) feet.3 

8. 	
If a multifamily development in the R-6 zone is adjacent to publicly owned open space containing a minimum of two and one half (2.5) acres then the minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be calculated to allow the maximum allowed density, disregarding the zoning of the abutting properties.6 

9. 	
The minimum frontage for corner lots may be reduced to the minimum lot frontage criteria when access is restricted along the street frontage of the lot.14 

10. 	
Events Centers are defined as a restricted use of a residential property for the conduct of special events of a limited size and number. Special events are defined as wedding receptions, luncheons, meetings, fundraising proceedings for not-for-profit organizations or similar activities. The space utilized in a residential dwelling unit shall not exceed 3,500 square feet. The number of events held may not exceed 75 per year. To qualify as an event center use, the residential dwelling unit must be located within the Downtown Neighborhood Sub-Area as identified in the Comprehensive Plan. 15 



2.8.6.5 Lot Criteria 
1. 	
Minimum Lot Frontage, Single Family Detached – 50’; EXCEPTION: Corner Lots, Minimum Frontage – 100’ each street frontage. 8/11 

2. 	
Minimum Lot Frontage, Single Family Attached (2 residences) & Two Family – 30’ D/U; EXCEPTION: Corner Lots, Minimum Frontage – 65’ each street frontage. 6/8/11 

3. 	
Minimum Lot Frontage, Multi Family – 100’.3/6/8 EXCEPTION: Corner Lots, Minimum Frontage – 185’ each street frontage. 8 

4. 	
Minimum Lot Frontage, Single Family Attached (3 or more residences)– 20’ D/U.3 EXCEPTION: Corner Lots, 65’ each street frontage. 11 

5. 	
Minimum Lot Frontage, Assembly & Commercial – 100’. EXCEPTION: Corner Lots, Minimum Frontage – 150’ each street frontage. 9 

6. 	
Minimum Lot Area, Per Dwelling Unit – 8,712 S.F. when abutting R-1; 5,124 S.F. when abutting R-2; 3,960 S.F. when abutting R-3; 3,630 S.F. when abutting R-4; 2,178 when abutting all other zones. 

7. 	
Minimum Front Yard Setback – 25’. 

8. 	
Minimum Front Yard Setback, Assembly & Commercial – 30’. 9 

9. 	
Minimum Side Yard Setback, Single Family Detached – 10’. 11 

10. 	
Minimum Side Yard Setback, Single Family Detached Zero Lot Line – 15’ one side yard, 0’ other side yard. 11 

11. 	
Minimum Side Yard Setback, Single Family Attached (2 residences) & Two Family – 10’ each end wall, 0’ each common wall. 11 

12. 	
Minimum Side Yard Setback, Multi Family & Single Family Attached (3 or more residences)– 15’ each end wall, 0’ each common wall. 11 

13. 
Minimum Side Yard Setback, Assembly & Commercial – 20’. 9 

14. 	
Minimum Rear Yard Setback, Single Family, Single Family Attached (2 residences) & Two Family -15’. 11 

15. 	
Minimum Rear Yard Setback, Multi Family & Single Family Attached (3 or more residences) – 20’. 11 

16. 
Minimum Rear Yard Setback, Assembly & Commercial – 20’. 9 

17. 	
Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio (ISR), Multi Family, Single Family Attached (3 or more residences) – Commercial & Assembly Uses – .80.8/11 

18. 
Maximum Building Height, Single Family and Two Family– 35’. 

19. 
Maximum Building Height, Multi Family – 45’. 

20. 
Maximum Building Height, Commercial & Assembly – 75’.8 


NOTE: For the purposes of this ordinance abutting shall address each lot line to determine applicable setbacks for each yard. 
2.8.6.6 Signs, R-6 Zone Additional information and standards for signs as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 7. 
Table 2.19 R-6 Signs 
USE  ALLOWED TYPES  MAXIMUM NUMBER  MAXIMUM SIGN AREA  MAXIMUM HEIGHT  LOCATION REQUIREMENTS  LIGHTING ALLOWED  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS  
Assembly Use  Wall, Monument Pole  Wall 1/wall13 Mon. 1 Pole 1/street frontage  W.M. 15% Mon. 100 s.f. Pole 50 s.f.  Mon. 8’ Pole 8’  10’ off paved surface  Yes  Wall sign 15% or 32s.f., whichever is greater  
Commercial Use  Wall, Monument Pole  Wall 1/wall13 Mon. 1/street, Pole 1/street  Wall 15% Mon. 50 s.f. Pole 36 s.f.  Mon. 8’ Pole 8’  10’ off paved surface  Yes  Wall sign 15% or 32s.f., whichever is greater  
Single Family Attached, Two Family, Multifamily Identification11  Monument Pole  2/entrance  32 s.f.  10’  To be approved by Engineering Department  External  Walls and fences permitted as part of overall sign design. Pole sign must contain multiple poles.  
Residential Use  Wall, Monument Pole  Wall 1 Mon. 1 Pole 1  Wall 5%; Mon. 4 s.f. Pole 4 s.f.  Mon. 4’ Pole 4’  10’ off paved surface  External  One wall only  
USE GROUPS  
Assembly Uses: Churches, Community Center, Schools Commercial Uses: Cemetery. Outdoor Commercial, Parks, Resort Hotel, Temporary Real Estate Office Residential Uses: Agricultural Uses, Child care, Home Occupation, Keeping of roomers, Living quarters, Multi family, Private garages, private pools, Residential care facility, Single family, Two family  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS  
1. Churches located on lots in excess of 20 acres may increase monument and pole sign size by a factor of 2. 2. Message boards may be illuminated but may only contain manually changeable copy when located along a local or residential collector street. 10  

51 

2.8.6.7 Parking, R-6 Zone Additional information and standards for parking as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 6. 
Table 2.20 R-6 Parking 
PARKING STANDARDS  
Land Use  Parking Required  Notes  
Agricultural Use  1 space/employee  
Cemetery  1 space/employee  1 space/each vehicle owned by the facility  
Childcare, In home  N/A  Provide onsite area for drop off/pick up, wholly on site  
Church  1 space/3 seats  Based on seating in main sanctuary, min. of 5 spaces  
Community center  1 space/600 s.f.  1 bus parking space/25 required spaces.  
Community Residence  1 space/3 occupants  
Events Center  1 space/400 s.f. 15  
Home Occupation  N/A  No on street parking allowed for commercial vehicles owned by the use  
Neighborhood Center  5 spaces11  
Outdoor Commercial  5 spaces + 1/employee  Lakes, Campgrounds, Zoos, Riding Stables, Batting cages  
Parks  1 space/acre  Other uses present require parking based on use.  
Private Club  1 space/200 s.f. 13  
Real Estate Office, Temporary  1 space/400 s.f.  
Residential care facility  1 space/3 beds  
Residential, Single family  2 spaces/D. U.  
Residential storage facility  1 space/employee + 5 spaces  Area in and around units may not be counted as parking spaces  
Residential, Multi family  2 spaces/D. U.  1 additional space for each 4 D.U./OFT  
Residential, Two family  2 spaces/D. U.  +1 space for each 4 units (OFT) if more than 1 building on a parcel11  
School, K – 8  1 space/classroom & office + 10 visitor spaces  If gymnasium or auditorium on site an additional 1 space/3 seats shall be provided  
School, 9 – 12  1 space/classroom & office + 1 space/ 5 seats in each classroom  If gymnasium or auditorium on site an additional 1 space/3 seats shall be provided  
School, Post-Secondary  1 space/classroom & office + 1 space/ 2 seats in each classroom  If gymnasium or auditorium on site an additional 1 space/3 seats shall be provided3  
Table 2.21 R-6 Perimeter Landscape Buffer Area3 


2.8.6.8 Landscaping, R-6 Zone Additional information and standards for Vehicular Use Area (VUA) Landscaping as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 5. 
Landscape Buffer Area Category  Width Options (In Feet)  Planting Density Multiplier  
5’  1.5  
Category A  10’  1.33  
15’  1  

Table 2.22 R-6 Buffering Requirements 

Landscape Buffer Area  Buffering Use Classification  
Category  Buffered Use  Buffering Use  
Category A  R-1, R-2  R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6  

Table 2.23 Perimeter Planting Density *(OFT) Or Fraction Thereof 


Planting Density Requirement Categories  
A  B  C  D  
2 Large Trees or 1 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 3’ screening/80’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  2 Large Trees or 1 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 4’ screening/60’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  3 Large Trees or 2 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 5’ screening/60’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  3 Large Trees or 2 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 6’ screening/60’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  

53 

2.8.7 	C-1 Neighborhood Office This district is primarily for professional office uses. This district should be used to buffer more intense business districts from residential neighborhoods. Applied to areas where transitional uses are seen as desirable. 
2.8.7.1 Principal Uses Uses substantially similar to those listed herein shall also be permitted, in light of the above described purposes of this zoning district and the Comprehensive Plan. 
Assembly Uses: 
1. 	
Churches and associated facilities. 

2. 	
Events Center. 15 

3. 	
Schools for academic instruction and associated facilities. 

4. 	
Private Club.13 




Commercial Uses: 
1. 
Adult daycare. 

2. 
Art Gallery. 

3. 
Assisted Living Facilities. 

4. 
Beauty shops, barber shops, shoe repair. 15 

5. 
Bed and Breakfast establishments. 

6. 
Cemetery.6 

7. 
Childcare centers. 

8. 
Fine arts studio. 

9. 
Funeral Home. 15 

10. 
Library. 

11. 
Museum. 

12. 
Nursing Home. 11 

13. 
Offices. 



Residential Uses: 
1. 
Community residence.3 

2. 
Halfway House.12 


2.8.7.2 Accessory Uses Uses and structures which are customarily accessory, clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted uses. 

Commercial Uses: 
1. 	
Dwelling unit for owners, operators or employees of a permitted use provided that if such dwelling unit shall be a part of the building it shall have a separate entrance.8 

2. 	
Parking area. 

3. 	
Private garages and storage buildings. 


2.8.7.3 Conditional Uses Uses permitted only with Board approval after consideration of the intent and purpose of these regulations and consideration of the development guidelines as detailed in the Comprehensive Plan. 
1. None 
2.8.7.4 Special Provisions 
1. 	
All permitted business uses shall confine storage and display to principal or accessory structures. 

2. 	
No single building shall be greater than 5,000 S.F. in floor area should the lot abut property in any residential zoning district. 

3. 	
No single building shall be greater than 10,000 S.F. in floor area should the lot abut any zoning district other than a residential zoning district. 

4. 	
Within areas designated by the Comprehensive Plan as historic neighborhoods, existing structures shall be utilized unless certified as structurally unfit for human occupancy by the Building Official, according to the Kentucky Building Code. Any remodeling, alterations or additions shall be consistent with the exterior architectural features of the existing structure. Any new structures erected shall be architecturally compatible with surrounding structures in the historical neighborhood. All plans and specifications for new structures shall be submitted to the Commission for review and approval prior to the issuance of a building permit, commencement of building activity or Certificate of Occupancy. 

5. 	
When new construction or additions are made to an existing structure, the structure or addition may be located on the lot with setbacks the same as other similar commercial structures on parcels within five-hundred feet (500’). 

6. 	
No subdivision or re-subdivision of a lot that results in a lot fronting on a right-of-way of less than thirty (30’) feet in width shall be permitted. 

7. 	
The minimum frontage for corner lots may be reduced to the minimum lot frontage criteria when access is restricted along the street frontage of the lot.14 


55 


2.8.7.5 Lot Criteria 
1. 	
Minimum Lot Frontage – 100’; EXCEPTION: Corner Lots, Minimum Frontage – 150’ each street frontage.8 

2. 	
Minimum Front Yard Setback – 40’ when abutting property zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or R-6; 30’ when abutting all other zones. 

3. 	
Minimum Side Yard Setback –30’ when abutting property zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or R-6; 20’ when abutting all other zones. 

4. 	
Minimum Rear Yard Setback – 30’ when abutting property zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or R-6; 20’ when abutting all other zones. 

5. 	
Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio (ISR) – .85 


6. Maximum Building Height – 45’ NOTE: For the purposes of this ordinance abutting shall address each lot line to determine applicable setbacks for each yard. 
2.8.7.6 Signs, C-1 Zone Additional information and standards for signs as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 7. 
Table 2.24 C-1 Signs 
USE  ALLOWED TYPES  MAXIMUM NUMBER  MAXIMUM SIGN AREA  MAXIMUM HEIGHT  LOCATION REQUIREMENTS  LIGHTING ALLOWED  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS  
Assembly Use  Wall Monument Pole Roof7  Mon. 1/street13 Pole 1/street Roof 17  Wall 15% Mon. 50 s.f. Pole 36 s.f. Roof 15%7  Mon. 12’ Pole 12’  10’ off paved surface  Yes  Wall sign 15% or 32s.f., whichever is greater  
Commercial Use  Wall Monument Pole Roof7  Mon. 1/street, Pole 1/street Roof 17  Wall 15% Mon. 50 s.f. Pole 36 s.f. Roof 15%7  Mon. 12’ Pole 12’  10’ off paved surface  Yes  Wall sign 15% or 32s.f., whichever is greater  
Residential Use  Wall, Monument Pole  Wall 1 Mon. 1 Pole 1  Wall 5%; Mon. 4 s.f. Pole 4 s.f.  Mon. 4’ Pole 4’  10’ off paved surface  External  One wall only3  
USE GROUPS  
Assembly Uses: Churches, Schools Commercial Uses: All other listed uses. Residential Uses: Community residence.3  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS  
1. Churches located on lots in excess of 20 acres may increase monument and pole sign size by a factor of 2. 2. If use is a multi-tenant building (3 or more separate tenants)6 the development name must be placed on the sign. It may be a maximum of 25% of the overall sign face. This shall not be calculated in the maximum area for tenant signs.  

2.8.7.7 Parking, C-1 Zone Additional information and standards for parking as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 6. 
Table 2.25 C-1 Parking 
PARKING STANDARDS  
Land Use  Parking Required  Notes  
Adult day care  1 space/employee + 1 space/500 s.f.  Provide onsite area for safe drop off & pick up, wholly on site  
Art gallery/studio, artisan workshop  1 space/600 s.f.  
Assisted Living  .5 spaces/D. U.  Additionally, 1 space for each employee  
Barber shop, beauty shop, shoe repair  2 spaces/chair15  
Cemetery  1 space/employee  1 space/each vehicle owned by the facility6  
Childcare  1 space/employee + 1 space/400 s.f.  Provide onsite area for safe drop off & pick up, wholly on site  
Church  1 space/3 seats  Based on seating in main sanctuary, min. of 5 spaces  
Events Center  1 space/200 s.f.  
Community Residence  1 space/3 occupants3  
Financial Institutions  1 space/200 s.f.  
Funeral home  1 space/3 seats  1 space/each vehicle owned by the use  
Halfway House  1 space/occupant12  
Office, general  1 space/250 s.f.  Financial, Legal, Medical, Professional, Veterinarian, etc.  
Office, real estate  1 space/400 s.f.  
Office projects  1 space/400 s.f.  When more than one office building on a lot  
Library  1 space/600 s.f.  
Museum  1 space/600 s.f.  
Nursing Home  1 space/3 beds + 1 space/employee  Based on maximum employees on a shift, including medical staff. Minimum of 5 spaces11  
Parks  1 space/acre  Other uses present require parking based on use.  
Private Club  1 space/200 s.f. 13  
School, K – 8  1 space/classroom & office + 10 visitor spaces  If gymnasium or auditorium on site an additional 1 space/3 seats shall be provided  
School, 9 – 12  1 space/classroom & office + 1 space/ 5 seats in each classroom  If gymnasium or auditorium on site an additional 1 space/3 seats shall be provided  
School, Post-Secondary  1 space/classroom & office + 1 space/ 2 seats in each classroom  If gymnasium or auditorium on site an additional 1 space/3 seats shall be provided3  

57 

2.8.7.8 Landscaping, C-1 Zone Additional information and standards for Vehicular Use Area (VUA) Landscaping as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 5. 
Table 2.26 C-1 Perimeter Landscape Buffer Area3 
Landscape Buffer Area Category  Width Options (In Feet)  Planting Density Multiplier  
10’  1.5  
Category B  15’  1.33  
20’  1  
Table 2.27 C-1 Buffering Requirements 



Landscape Buffer  Buffering Use Classification  
Area Category  Buffered Use  Buffering Use  
Category B  R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6  C-1, C-2, WCD  

Table 2.28 Perimeter Planting Density *(OFT) Or Fraction Thereof 

Planting Density Requirement Categories  
A  B  C  D  
2 Large Trees or 1 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 3’ screening/80’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  2 Large Trees or 1 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 4’ screening/60’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  3 Large Trees or 2 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 5’ screening/60’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  3 Large Trees or 2 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 6’ screening/60’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  

2.8.8 	C-2 Neighborhood Commercial This district is primarily for professional office and limited service business uses. This district should be used for those businesses that do not require large amounts of daily traffic. 
2.8.8.1 Principal Uses Uses substantially similar to those listed herein shall also be permitted, in light of the above described purposes of this zoning district and the Comprehensive Plan. 
Assembly Uses: 
1. 	
Business College or technical school. 

2. 	
Church and associated facilities. 

3. 	
Events Center. 15 

4. 	
Private Club. 6 

5. 	
Schools for academic instruction and associated facilities. 




Commercial Uses: 
1. 	
Adult daycare. 

2. 	
Art Gallery. 

3. 	
Assisted Living Facilities. 

4. 	
Beauty shops, barber shops, shoe repair shops. 

5. 	
Bed and Breakfast. 

6. 	
Cemetery.6 

7. 	
Childcare centers. 

8. 	
Clinic. 

9. 	
Convenience stores, no less than 500 square feet and no greater than 5,000 square feet in building area. The sale of petroleum products may be included as part of this use. 

10. 
Data processing centers. 

11. 
Financial Institutions.9 

12. 
Fine arts studio. 

13. 
Laboratories. 

14. 
Laundry, self-service or pick-up stations. 

15. 
Library. 

16. 
Museum. 

17. 
Nursing home. 

18. 
Offices. 

19. 
Parking lots and structures.17 

20. 
Pet (small animal) grooming and boarding.3 

21. 
Pharmacy. 

22. 
Restaurant. 

23. 
Retail Package Liquor Sales. 9 

24. 
Shopping Center, Convenience and Neighborhood. 

25. 
Specialty retail shops. 

26. 
Travel agencies. 



Residential Uses: 
1. 	
Community residence.3 

2. 	
Halfway House.12 


2.8.8.2 Accessory Uses Uses and structures which are customarily accessory, clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted uses. 

Commercial Uses: 
1. 	
Dwelling unit for owners, operators or employees of a permitted use provided that if such dwelling unit shall be a part of the building it shall have a separate entrance.8 

2. 	
Parking area. 

3. 	
Private garages and storage buildings. 

4. 	
Retail Drink Liquor Establishment when accessory to a Beauty Shop, Barber Shop or Bed & Breakfast. 17 

5. 	
Temporary Uses. 

6. 	
Warehousing, wholesaling and storage, excluding outdoor storage and provided that no building for such accessory use shall have openings other than stationary windows within 100 feet of any residential zone. 


59 

2.8.8.3 Conditional Uses Uses permitted only with Board approval after consideration of the intent and purpose of these regulations and consideration of the development guidelines as detailed in the Comprehensive Plan. 

Commercial Uses: 
1. 	
Drive thru or drive in facilities when associated with any principal use. 

2. 	
Indoor Theater (this use shall be exempt from the building square footage limitation in this zone found in special provisions.12 


2.8.8.4 Special Provisions 
1. 	
All permitted business uses shall confine storage and display to principal or accessory structures. 

2. 	
No single building shall be greater than 10,000 S.F. in floor area. 6 

3. 	
Within areas designated by the Comprehensive Plan as historic neighborhoods, existing structures shall be utilized unless certified as structurally unfit for human occupancy by the Building Official, according to the Kentucky Building Code. Any remodeling, alterations or additions shall be consistent with the exterior architectural features of the existing structure. Any new structures erected shall be architecturally compatible with surrounding structures in the historical neighborhood. All plans and specifications for new structures shall be submitted to the Commission for review and approval prior to the issuance of a building permit, Certificate of Occupancy or commencement of building activity. 

4. 	
When new construction or additions are made to an existing structure, the structure or addition may be located on the lot with setbacks the same as other similar commercial structures on parcels within five-hundred feet (500’). 

5. 	
No subdivision or re-subdivision of a lot that results in a lot fronting on a right-of-way of less than thirty (30’) feet in width shall be permitted. 

6. 	
The minimum frontage for corner lots may be reduced to the minimum lot frontage criteria when access is restricted along the street frontage of the lot.14 



2.8.8.5 Lot Criteria 
1. 	
Minimum Lot Frontage – 100’; EXCEPTION: Corner Lots, Minimum Frontage – 150’ each street frontage. 8 

2. 	
Minimum Front Yard Setback – 40’ when abutting property zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or R-6; 30’ when abutting all other zones. 

3. 	
Minimum Side Yard Setback –30’ when abutting property zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or R-6; 20’ when abutting all other zones. 

4. 	
Minimum Rear Yard Setback – 30’ when abutting property zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or R-6; 20’ when abutting all other zones. 

5. 	
Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio (ISR) – .85 


6. Maximum Building Height – 45’ NOTE: For the purposes of this ordinance abutting shall address each lot line to determine applicable setbacks for each yard. 
2.8.8.6 Signs, C-2 Zone Additional information and standards for signs as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 7. 
Table 2.29 C-2 Signs 
USE  ALLOWED TYPES  MAXIMUM NUMBER  MAXIMUM SIGN AREA  MAXIMUM HEIGHT  LOCATION REQUIREMENTS  LIGHTING ALLOWED  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS  
Assembly Use  Wall, Monument Pole Roof7  Mon. 1/street Pole 1/street  Wall 15% Mon. 64 s.f. Pole 48 s.f. Roof 15%7  Mon. 16’ Pole 16’  Monument 10’ off paved surface; Pole 20’ off paved surface  Yes  Wall sign 15% or 32s.f., whichever is greater  

USE  ALLOWED TYPES  MAXIMUM NUMBER  MAXIMUM SIGN AREA  MAXIMUM HEIGHT  LOCATION REQUIREMENTS  LIGHTING ALLOWED  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS  
Commercial Use  Wall, Monument Pole Roof7  Mon. 1/street Pole 1/street  Wall 15% Mon. 64 s.f. Pole 48 s.f. Roof 15%7  Mon. 16’ Pole 16’  Monument 10’ off paved surface; Pole 20’ off paved surface  Yes  Wall sign 15% or 32s.f., whichever is greater  
Residential Use  Wall, Monument Pole  Wall 1 Mon. 1 Pole 1  Wall 5%; Mon. 4 s.f. Pole 4 s.f.  Mon. 4’ Pole 4’  10’ off paved surface  External  One wall only3  
Shopping Center, Convenience  Wall, Monument Pole Roof7  Mon. 1 Pole 1  Wall 15% or 32 s.f., whichever is greater; Mon. 72 s.f. Pole 72 s.f. Roof 15%7  Mon. 16’ Pole 25’  Monument 10’ off paved surface; Pole 20’ off paved surface  Yes  Monument or pole sign must contain name or logo. Wall I.D. sign 15% of wall  
Shopping Center, Neighborhood  Wall, Monument Pole Roof7  Mon. 213 Pole 213  Wall 15% or 32 s.f., whichever is greater; Mon. 100 s.f. Pole 100 s.f. Roof 15%7  Mon. 16’ Pole 25’  Monument 10’ off paved surface; Pole 20’ off paved surface  Yes  Monument or pole sign must contain name or logo. Wall I.D. sign 15% of wall  
Shopping Center, Out Parcel  Wall, Monument Pole Roof7  Mon. 1 Pole 1  Wall 15% or 32 s.f., whichever is greater; Mon. 80 s.f.10 Pole 36 s.f. Roof 15%7  Mon. 12’10 Pole 20’  Mon. – 10’ off paved surface Pole – 20’ off paved surface  Yes  If Monument sign erected, an additional monument sign, 24 s.f. max. may be erected at rear of lot. 10  
USE CATEGORY  
Assembly Uses: Business College, Churches, Private Club, Schools. Commercial Uses: All other listed uses. Residential Uses: Community residence.3  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS  
1. Churches located on lots in excess of 20 acres may increase monument and pole sign size by a factor of two (2). 2. If use is a multi-tenant building (3 or more separate tenants)6 the development name must be placed on the sign. It may be a maximum of 25% of the sign face. This shall not be calculated in the maximum area for tenant signs. 3. Drive thru menu and presale boards not counted as part of allowed signage when not located in primary front yard. 4. If more than one Pole or Monument sign allowed, the size may be increased by 50% if only one sign is erected.  
Table 2.30 C-2 Parking 


2.8.8.7 Parking, C-2 Zone Additional information and standards for parking as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 6. 
PARKING STANDARDS  
Land Use  Parking Required  Notes  
Adult day care  1 space/employee + 1 space/500 s.f.  Provide onsite area for safe drop off & pick up, wholly on site  
Art gallery/studio, artisan workshop  1 space/600 s.f.  
Assisted Living  .5 spaces/D. U.  Additionally, 1 space for each employee  
Barber/Beauty shop  2 spaces/chair  
Bed & Breakfast  1 space/room  

61 

Land Use  Parking Required  Notes  
Business College & Technical School  1 space/classroom & office + 1 space/ 3 seats in each classroom  If gymnasium or auditorium on site an additional 1 space/3 seats shall be provided  
Cemetery  1 space/employee  1 space/each vehicle owned by the facility6  
Childcare  1 space/employee + 1 space/400 s.f.  Provide onsite area for safe drop off & pick up, wholly on site  
Church  1 space/3 seats  Based on seating in main sanctuary, min. of 5 spaces  
Clinic, medical/dental  1 space/400 s.f.  
Community Residence  1 space/3 occupants3  
Convenience Shopping Center  1 space/400 s.f.  Based on leasable space (not public spaces)  
Convenience store  1 space/250 s.f.  
Data processing centers  1 space/200 s.f.  
Events Center  1 space/200 s.f. 15  
Financial Institutions  1 space/200 s.f.  
Halfway House  1 space/occupant12  
Laboratory  1 space/400 s.f.  
Laundry, self service  1 space/2 machines  
Library  1 space/600 s.f.  
Museum  1 space/600 s.f.  
Neighborhood Shopping Center  1 space/400 s.f.  Based on leasable space (not public spaces)  
Nursing Home  1 space/3 beds + 1 space/employee  Based on maximum employees on a shift, including medical staff. Minimum of 5 spaces  
Office, general  1 space/250 s.f.  Financial, Legal, Medical, Professional, Veterinarian  
Office projects  1 space/400 s.f.  When more than one office building on a lot  
Pet Grooming & Boarding  1 space/500 s.f.3  
Pharmacy  1 space/400 s.f.  
Private Club  1 space/200 s.f. 6  
Restaurant, Fast Food6  1 space/75 s.f  
Restaurant, Full Service  1 space/60 s.f6  
Retail Package Liquor Sales  1 space/400 s.f9  
Retail, Specialty  1 space/600 s.f. 10  
School, K – 8  1 space/classroom & office + 10 visitor spaces  If gymnasium or auditorium on site an additional 1 space/3 seats shall be provided  
School, 9 – 12  1 space/classroom & office + 1 space/ 5 seats in each classroom  If gymnasium or auditorium on site an additional 1 space/3 seats shall be provided  
School, Post-Secondary  1 space/classroom & office + 1 space/ 2 seats in each classroom  If gymnasium or auditorium on site an additional 1 space/3 seats shall be provided3  
Theater, Indoor  1 space/4 seats15  
Travel Agency  1 space/400 s.f.  

2.8.8.8 Landscaping, C-2 Zone Additional information and standards for Vehicular Use Area (VUA) Landscaping as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 5. 
Table 2.31 C-2 Perimeter Landscape Buffer Area3 
Landscape Buffer Area Category  Width Options (In Feet)  Planting Density Multiplier  
10’  1.5  
Category B  15’  1.33  
20’  1  
Table 2.32 C-2 Buffering Requirements 



Landscape Buffer Area Category  Buffering Use Classification  
Buffered Use  Buffering Use  
Category B  R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6  C-1, C-2, WCD  

Table 2.33 Perimeter Planting Density *(OFT) Or Fraction Thereof 

Planting Density Requirement Categories  
A  B  C  D  
2 Large Trees or 1 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 3’ screening/80’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  2 Large Trees or 1 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 4’ screening/60’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  3 Large Trees or 2 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 5’ screening/60’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  3 Large Trees or 2 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 6’ screening/60’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  

63 

2.8.9 C-3 Regional Commercial 	This district is composed of areas to be used for businesses which require a high volume of passing vehicular traffic to provide the support necessary for successful operations. These are commonly retail and other uses which are necessary for the economic viability of the community and the region. Applied to areas with high traffic capacities and high visibility, as well as areas where infrastructure necessary to support this type and scale of use is in place. 
2.8.9.1 Principal Uses Uses substantially similar to those listed herein shall also be permitted, in light of the above described purposes of this zoning district and the Comprehensive Plan. 
Assembly Uses: 
1. 
Business colleges or technical school. 

2. 
Churches and associated facilities. 

3. 
Community Center. 

4. 
Convention Center. 

5. 
Events Center. 15 

6. 
Private Club6 

7. 
Schools for academic instruction and associated facilities. 




Commercial Uses: 
1. 	
Adult daycare. 

2. 	
Agricultural Market. 

3. 	
Art gallery, artist or artisan studio. 

4. 	
Assisted Living Facilities. 

5. 	
Automobile, motorcycle, truck sales, rental, service and repair or sale of parts and supplies for such. 

6. 	
Automobile service stations. No more than 15 inoperable vehicles shall be stored on site for a period not to exceed 90 days. Vehicles shall be stored within a fenced and screened area. 

7. 	
Beauty shops, barber shops, shoe repair shops. 

8. 	
Blueprinting, printing, publishing and lithographing. 

9. 	
Building Supply Sales. 

10. 
Car wash. 

11. 	
Carnivals and Circuses on a temporary basis. Location to be approved by Department and all other permits must be obtained.4 

12. 
Cemetery.6 

13. 
Childcare centers. 

14. 
Clinic. 

15. 
Convenience stores. The sale of petroleum products may be included as part of this use. 

16. 
Data processing centers. 

17. 
Financial institutions. 

18. 
Flea market.3 

19. 
Funeral homes. 

20. 
Garden centers. 

21. 
Golf course, driving range. 

22. 
Grocery. 

23. 
Health Club. 

24. 
Homeless Shelter. 6 

25. 
Hotel or motel. 

26. 
Indoor recreation such as billiard or pool halls, skating rinks, bowling alleys and dance halls. 

27. 
Indoor theaters. 

28. 
Kennel. 

29. 
Laundry, self-service or laundry pick-up stations. 

30. 
Library. 

31. 
Marine sales, parts and service. 

32. 
Miniature golf or putting courses, outdoor. 

33. 
Museum. 

34. 
Nursing and rest homes. 


65 

35. 
Off premise sign. Must meet spacing requirements found in Chapter 7. 

36. 
Offices. 

37. 
Parking lots and structures. 

38. 
Pharmacy. 

39. 
Recycling collection point. 

40. 
Research and testing laboratories. 

41. 	
Residential storage facilities. Exterior treatments should be of a type to closely resemble exteriors of existing housing in close proximity to the proposed development. Acceptable treatments include, but are not limited to brick veneer, wood, vinyl, aluminum siding or stucco. 

42. 
Restaurants. 

43. 
Retail Malt Beverage Establishment.9 

44. 
Retail Package Liquor Sales.9 

45. 
Retail sale of merchandise. 

46. 
Shopping Center, Community, Convenience, Neighborhood & Regional. 

47. 
Shopping Center, enclosed regional mall. 

48. 
Sign making. 

49. 
Specialty retail shops. 

50. 
Tattoo Shop.6 16 

51. 	
Telephone exchanges, radio and television studios, cable television systems, signal distribution centers and studios. 

52. 
Towers for distribution of radio and similar signals. 

53. 	
Towing services. No more than 15 inoperable vehicles shall be stored on site for a period not to exceed 90 days. Vehicles shall be stored within a fenced and screened area. 

54. 
Travel agencies. 

55. 	
Veterinary hospitals or clinics, provided that such structure or use, excluding parking areas, shall be at least 100 feet from any residential zone. 



Institutional Uses: 
1. 	Hospitals. 

Residential Uses: 
1. 	
Community residence.3 

2. 	
Halfway House.12 


2.8.9.2 Accessory Uses Uses and structures which are customarily accessory, clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted uses. 

Commercial Uses: 
1. 	
Dwelling unit for owners, operators or employees of a permitted use provided that if such dwelling unit shall be a part of the building it shall have a separate entrance. 8 

2. 	
Outdoor wholesale, warehouse and storage facilities. 

3. 	
Recycling collection point. 

4. 	
Temporary uses. 


2.8.9.3 Conditional Uses Uses permitted only with Board approval after consideration of the intent and purpose of these regulations and consideration of the guidelines in the Comprehensive Plan. Any conditional use shall be located so that the conditional use has a minimal effect on the adjoining streets and the surrounding uses. 
Assembly Uses: 
1. 	Indoor and outdoor athletic facilities such as field houses, gymnasiums, football stadiums, soccer fields or polo fields and baseball fields. 

Commercial Uses: 
1. 	
Amusement parks, fairgrounds or horse racing tracks, if all structures are located no less than 200’ from any residential zone, and further provided that all structures for housing animals shall be 200’ from any residential zone, residential use, school, hospital, nursing or rest home. 

2. 	
Indoor rifle and gun ranges. Use must meet all federal and state regulations. 

3. 	
Outdoor recreational facilities including go cart tracks, archery ranges, skateboard and roller skating rinks, trampoline centers, swimming pools, water slides and other water related recreational facilities and other similar uses. 11 

4. 	
Outdoor theaters, provided that all facilities other than highway access drives are not less than 1,000’ from a residential zone, residence, school, church, hospital, nursing or rest home, and further provided that a vehicle storage area equal to 30% of the capacity of the theater be provided between the highway and the theater ticket gate. 


2.8.9.4 Special Provisions 
1. 	
All permitted business uses shall confine storage to side and rear yards only, which shall be enclosed on all sides by a wall or fence not less than five (5) feet in height. 

2. 	
Businesses involved in sales or recycling of automobile and truck tires and like items shall limit storage of tires to be recycled or disposed of to an area no larger than 2,500 cubic feet and shall be enclosed on all sides by a wall or solid fence no less than five (5) feet in height. 

3. 	
Recycling collection points may be located in buildings no greater than 3,500 square feet in floor area. Trailers and containers and the adjacent areas shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. Any violation of health, safety or welfare regulations may be cause for immediate removal. Recycling centers must comply with all other requirements of the Ordinance. They shall be located so as not to present any danger to pedestrian and vehicular traffic, with the location to be approved by the Fire Chief and the Director of the Department. 

4. 	
When new construction or additions are made to an existing structure, the structure or addition may be located on the lot with setbacks the same as other similar commercial structures on parcels within five-hundred feet (500’). 

5. 	
No subdivision or re-subdivision of a lot that results in a lot fronting on a right-of-way of less than thirty (30’) feet in width shall be permitted. 

6. 	
Any outdoor theater screen or illuminated scoreboard or other similar surface shall not be visible from any street for a distance of 1,000 feet from such structure. For these such uses entrances and exits shall not be closer than 300 feet to the nearest intersection of two (2) streets. Points of ingress or egress, acceleration length and deceleration length shall be provided in conformance with requirements as established by the appropriate agency. 

7. 	
The minimum frontage for corner lots may be reduced to the minimum lot frontage criteria when access is restricted along the street frontage of the lot.14 



2.8.9.5 Lot Criteria 
1. 	
Minimum Lot Frontage – 100’; EXCEPTION: Corner Lots, Minimum Frontage – 200’ each street frontage. 

2. 	
Minimum Front Yard Setback – 40’ when abutting property zoned R-1, R-2; 30’ when abutting R­3, R-4, R-5 or R-6; 20’ when abutting all other zones. 

3. 	
Minimum Side Yard Setback –30’ when abutting property zoned R-1, R-2, R-3 or R-4; 20’ when abutting property zoned R-5 or R-6; 10’ when abutting all other zones. 

4. 	
Minimum Rear Yard Setback – 40’ when abutting property zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or R-6; 20’ when abutting all other zones. 

5. 	
Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio (ISR) – .85 


6. Maximum Building Height – 75’ NOTE: For the purposes of this ordinance abutting shall address each lot line to determine applicable setbacks for each yard. 
2.8.9.6 Permitted Signs, C-3 Zone Additional information and standards for signs as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 7. 
Table 2.34 C-3 Signs 
USE  ALLOWED TYPES  MAXIMUM NUMBER  MAXIMUM SIGN AREA  MAXIMUM HEIGHT  LOCATION REQUIREMENTS  LIGHTING ALLOWED  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS  
Wall,  Mon.  Wall 15%  Mon. – 10’ off  Wall sign 15%  
Assembly Use  Monument Pole  1/street13 Pole  Mon. 150 s.f. Pole 150 s.f.  Mon. 16’ Pole 25’  paved surface Pole – 20’ off  Yes  or 32s.f., whichever is  
Roof7  1/street  Roof 15%7  paved surface  greater  

67 

USE  ALLOWED TYPES  MAXIMUM NUMBER  MAXIMUM SIGN AREA  MAXIMUM HEIGHT  LOCATION REQUIREMENTS  LIGHTING ALLOWED  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS  
Commercial Use  Wall, Monument Pole Roof7  Mon. 1/street, Pole 1/street  Wall 15% Mon. 150 s.f. Pole 150 s.f. Roof 15%7  Mon. 16’ Pole 45’  Mon. – 10’ off paved surface Pole – 20’ off paved surface  Yes  Wall sign 15% or 32s.f., whichever is greater  
Institutional Use  Wall, Monument Pole Roof7  Mon. 1/street Pole 1/street  Wall 15%; Mon. 150 s.f. Pole 150 s.f. Roof 15%7  Mon. 16’ Pole 45’  Mon. – 10’ off paved surface Pole – 20’ off paved surface  Yes  Wall sign 15% or 32s.f., whichever is greater  
Residential Use  Wall, Monument Pole  Wall 1 Mon. 1 Pole 1  Wall 5%; Mon. 4 s.f. Pole 4 s.f.  Mon. 4’ Pole 4’  10’ off paved surface  External  One wall only3  
Shopping Center, Community  Wall, Monument Pole Roof7  Mon. 3 Pole 3  Wall 15%; Mon. 200 s.f. Pole 200 s.f. Roof 15%7  Mon. 16’ Pole 35’  20’ off paved surface  Yes  Monument or pole sign must contain name or logo. Wall I.D. sign 15% of wall  
Shopping Center, Convenience  Wall, Monument Pole Roof7  Mon. 1 Pole 1  Wall 15% or 32 s.f., whichever is greater; Mon. 100 s.f. Pole 100 s.f. Roof 15%7  Mon. 16’ Pole 25’  Monument 10’ off paved surface; Pole 20’ off paved surface  Yes  Monument or pole sign must contain name or logo. Wall I.D. sign 15% of wall  
Shopping Center, Neighborhood  Wall, Monument Pole Roof7  Mon. 2 Pole 2  Wall 15% or 32 s.f., whichever is greater; Mon. 150 s.f. Pole 150 s.f. Roof 15%7  Mon. 16’ Pole 35’  20’ off paved surface  Yes  Monument or pole sign must contain name or logo. Wall I.D. sign 15% of wall  
Shopping Center, Out parcel  Wall, Monument Pole Roof7  Mon. 1 Pole 1  Wall 15% or 32 s.f., whichever is greater; Mon. 80 s.f.10 Pole 50 s.f. Roof 15%7  Mon. 12’ 10 Pole 20’10  Mon. – 10’ off paved surface Pole – 20’ off paved surface  Yes  If Monument sign erected, an additional monument sign, 24 s.f. max. may be erected at rear of lot. 10  
Shopping Center, Regional  Wall, Monument Pole Roof7  Mon. 4 Pole 4  Wall 15% or 32 s.f., whichever is greater; Mon. 250 s.f. Pole 250 s.f. Roof 15%7  Mon. 25’ Pole 45’  20’ off paved surface  Yes  Monument or pole sign must contain name or logo. Wall I.D. sign 15% of wall  
USE GROUPS  
Assembly Uses: Business college/technical school, Churches, Community Center, Convention Center, Schools Commercial Uses: All uses not listed as Assembly or Institutional Institutional Uses: Hospital  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS  
1. Churches located on lots in excess of 20 acres may increase monument and pole sign size by a factor of two (2). 2. If use is a multi-tenant building (3 or more separate tenants)6 the development name must be placed on the sign. It may be a maximum of 25% of the sign face. This shall not be calculated in the maximum area for tenant signs. 3. Drive thru menu and presale boards not counted as part of allowed signage when not located in primary front yard. 4. If more than one Pole or Monument sign allowed, the size may be increased by 50% if only one sign is erected. 5. Hospitals may install one additional freestanding sign for each 500’ of street frontage. 6. For the following commercial uses a multiplier is in effect: 1) Automobile sales 2) Automobile service station 3) Contractor, farm equipment sales 4) Marine sales 5) Motorcycle sales Multiplier: 101’ – 500’ street frontage: Maximum number --pole/monument sign x 2 501’ – 1000’ street frontage: Maximum number --pole/monument sign x 3 1001’ – > street frontage: Maximum number --pole/monument sign x 4  

2.8.9.7 Parking, C-3 Zone Additional information and standards for parking as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 6. 
Table 2.35 C-3 Parking 
PARKING STANDARDS  
Land Use  Parking Required  Notes  
Adult day care  1 space/employee + 1 space/500 s.f.  Provide onsite area for safe drop off & pick up, wholly on site  
Agricultural Market  1 space/600 s.f.  
Art gallery/studio, artisan workshop  1 space/600 s.f.  
Assisted Living  .5 spaces/D. U.  Additionally, 1 space for each employee  
Automobile rental  1 space/600 s.f.  Lot for rental vehicles not required to be striped  
Automobile sales  1 space/600 s.f.  Parking for product in display area not required to be striped  
Automobile Service Station  1space/600 s.f.  Minimum of 5 spaces; storage area must be fenced and screened15  
Automotive parts  1 space/600 s.f  
Barber/Beauty salon  2 spaces/chair  
Blueprinting, Publishing  1 space/800 s.f.  Additionally, 1 space for each delivery vehicle  
Business College & Technical School  1 space/classroom & office + 1 space/ 3 seats in each classroom  If gymnasium or auditorium on site an additional 1 space/3 seats shall be provided  
Car wash, full service  1 space/employee  Stacking area to equal 5 times capacity of car wash  
Car wash, self service  N/A  2 stacking spaces/bay  
Carnival, Temporary  Adequate parking on site must be designated. 15  
Cemetery  1 space/employee  1 space/each vehicle owned by the facility6  
Childcare  1 space/employee + 1 space/400 s.f.  Provide onsite area for safe drop off & pick up, wholly on site  
Church  1 space/3 seats  Based on seating in main sanctuary, min. of 5 spaces  
Clinic, medical/dental  1 space/400 s.f.  
Community center  1 space/600 s.f.  1 bus parking space/25 required spaces.  
Convenience store  1 space/250 s.f.  
Convention Center  1 space/75 s.f.  1 large vehicle15 parking space/25 required spaces.  
Data processing centers  1 space/200 s.f.  
Events Center  1 space/200 s.f. 15  
Financial Institutions  1 space/200 s.f.  
Flea Market  2 spaces/vendor stall3  
Funeral home  1 space/3 seats  1 space/each vehicle owned by the use  
Garden Center  1 space/600 s.f.  
Golf course  3 spaces/hole  Additional parking required if other uses present  
Golf driving range  1 space/tee  1 space for each employee (minimum of 5 spaces)  
Grocery, specialty  1 space/250 s.f.  Building size >5,000 s.f.  
Grocery, supermarket  1 space/200 s.f.  Building size <5,000 s.f.  
Halfway House  1 space/occupant12  
Health club  1 space/200 s.f.  
Homeless Shelter  1 space/600 s.f. 6  

69 

Land Use  Parking Required  Notes  
Hospital  1 space/3 beds + 1 space/employee  Based on maximum employees on a shift, including medical staff. Minimum of 5 spaces  
Hotel/Motel  1/room  Minimum of 5 spaces  
Indoor amusement or athletic, w/o fixed seats  1 space/100 s.f  Includes billiards, dancing establishments, and similar uses  
Indoor amusement or athletic, with fixed seats  1 space/4 seats + 1/three employees  Tennis courts, Indoor soccer, etc.  
Laboratory  1 space/400 s.f.  
Laundry, self service  1 space/2 machines  
Library  1 space/600 s.f.  
Museum  1 space/600 s.f.  
Nursing Home11  1 space/3 beds + 1 space/employee  Based on maximum employees on a shift, including medical staff. Minimum of 5 spaces  
Office, general  1 space/250 s.f.  Financial, Legal, Medical, Professional, Veterinarian, etc.  
Office projects  1 space/400 s.f.  When more than one office building on a lot  
Pharmacy  1 space/400 s.f.  
Private Club  1 space/200 s.f. 6  
Residential Storage Facility  1 space/employee + 5 spaces  Area in and around units may not be counted as parking spaces.8  
Restaurant, Fast Food6  1 space/75 s.f.  
Restaurant, Full Service  1 space/60 s.f. 6  
Retail  1 space/400 s.f.  Books, Camera, Clothing, Computer, Electronics, Musical Instruments, Sporting goods4  
Retail, department store  1 space/300 s.f.  Includes superstore or warehouse store4  
Retail Malt Beverage Establishment  1 space/60 s.f9  
Retail Package Liquor Sales  1 space/400 s.f9  
Retail, specialty  1 space/600 s.f. 10  
School, 9 – 12  1 space/classroom & office + 1 space/ 5 seats in each classroom  If gymnasium or auditorium on site an additional 1 space/3 seats shall be provided  
School, Post-Secondary  1 space/classroom & office + 1 space/ 2 seats in each classroom  If gymnasium or auditorium on site an additional 1 space/3 seats shall be provided3  
Shopping Center (All)  1 space/400 s.f.  Based on leasable space (not public spaces)  
Tattoo Shop 16  2 spaces/chair 6  
Theater, Indoor  1 space/4 seats  
Theater, Outdoor  1 space/speaker  
Travel Agency  1 space/400 s.f.  

2.8.9.8 Landscaping, C-3 Zone Additional information and standards for Vehicular Use Area (VUA) Landscaping as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 5. 
Table 2.36 C-3 Perimeter Landscape Buffer Area3 
Landscape Buffer Area Category  Width Options (In Feet)  Planting Density Multiplier  
20’  1.5  
Category C  25’  1.33  
30’  1  
Table 2.37 C-3 Buffering Requirements 



Landscape Buffer Area Category  Buffering Use Classification  
Buffered Use  Buffering Use  
Category C  R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6  C-3, C-4, C-5  

Table 2.38 Perimeter Planting Density *(OFT) Or Fraction Thereof 

Planting Density Requirement Categories  
A  B  C  D  
2 Large Trees or 1 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 3’ screening/80’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  2 Large Trees or 1 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 4’ screening/60’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  3 Large Trees or 2 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 5’ screening/60’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  3 Large Trees or 2 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 6’ screening/60’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  

71 

2.8.10 	C-4 General Service Commercial This district is composed of businesses that generate traffic and other perceived nuisances such as outdoor storage, dust, noise and odors. This zone primarily applied to areas with adequate infrastructure but less visibility and areas between higher intensity industrial and lower intensity commercial uses. 
2.8.10.1 Principal Uses Uses substantially similar to those listed herein shall also be deemed permitted, in light of the above described purposes of this zoning district and the Comprehensive Plan. 
Assembly Uses: 
1. 
Stadium. 

2. 
Churches and associated facilities.6 

3. 
Private Club.6 




Commercial Uses: 
1. 	
Agricultural Laboratories & Testing Facilities.12 

2. 	
Agricultural Market. 

3. 	
Agricultural supply sales. 

4. 	
Artisan’s workshop. 

5. 	
Automobile, motorcycle, truck, sales, rental, service and repair or sale of parts and supplies for such. 

6. 	
Automobile service stations. No more than 15 inoperable vehicles shall be stored on site for a period not to exceed 90 days. Vehicles shall be stored within a fenced and screened area. 

7. 	
Blueprinting, printing, publishing and lithographing. 

8. 	
Building supply sales. 

9. 	
Car wash. 

10. 
Cemetery.6 

11. 
Childcare. 

12. 
Commercial warehousing. 

13. 
Construction equipment sales, rental, service and repair or sale of parts and supplies for such. 

14. 
Contractor’s office. 

15. 
Crematorium.3 

16. 
Convention center.14 15 

17. 
Events Center.15 

18. 
Farm equipment and agricultural supply sales. 

19. 
Flea market.3 

20. 
Garden center. 

21. 
Health club. 

22. 
Homeless Shelter. 6 

23. 
Hotel.12 

24. 
Kennels. 

25. 
Marine sales, service and repair, including parts and supplies. 

26. 
Off premise sign. Must meet spacing requirements found in Chapter 7. 

27. 
Offices.6 

28. 
Parking lot/structure. 11 

29. 
Passenger Transportation Terminals. 

30. 
Recycling collection point. 

31. 
Residential Storage Facility. 

32. 
Restaurant.12 

33. 
Retail Package Liquor Sales.9 

34. 
Sign making. 

35. 
Tattoo Shop. 16 

36. 	
Telephone exchanges, radio and television studios, cable television systems, signal distribution centers and studios. 

37. 
Towers for distribution of radio and similar signals. 

38. 	
Towing services. No more than 15 inoperable vehicles shall be stored on site for a period not to exceed 90 days. Vehicles shall be stored within a fenced and screened area. 


73 

39. 
Truck stop/plaza. 

40. 
Warehousing, with office space. 

41. 
Wholesale establishments. 

42. 
Veterinary hospitals or clinics. 



Institutional Uses: 
1. 	Correctional facilities. 
Residential Uses: 
1. 	Halfway House.12 
2.8.10.2 Accessory Uses Uses and structures which are customarily accessory, clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted uses. 

Commercial Uses: 
1. 	
Dwelling unit for owners, operators or employees of a permitted use provided that such dwelling unit shall be a part of the building and shall have a separate entrance. 

2. 	
Parking area. 

3. 	
Storage yard for contractor equipment and supplies. 

4. 	
Temporary uses. 


2.8.10.3 Conditional Uses Uses permitted only with Board approval after consideration of the intent and purpose of these regulations and consideration of the guidelines in the Comprehensive Plan. 
1. 	
Agricultural Events Centers, including museums and indoor theaters 

2. 	
Livestock Events Centers, including indoor/outdoor arenas for sales and demonstrations 

3. 	
Agricultural product storage and handling facilities 


2.8.10.4 Special Provisions 
1. 	
All permitted business uses shall confine storage to side and rear yards only. When adjacent to any residential zoning district the storage area shall be enclosed on all sides by a wall or fence not less than five (5) feet in height. 

2. 	
Businesses involved in sales or recycling of automobile and truck tires and like items shall limit storage of tires to be recycled or disposed of to an area no larger than 2,500 cubic feet and shall be enclosed on all sides by a wall or solid fence no less than five (5) feet in height, but shall in any case be one foot higher than items stored. 

3. 	
Recycling collection points may be located in buildings no greater than 3,500 square feet in floor area. Trailers and containers and the adjacent areas shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. Any violation of health, safety or welfare regulations may be cause for immediate removal. Recycling centers must comply with all other requirements of the Ordinance. They shall be located so as not to present any danger to pedestrian and vehicular traffic, with the location to be approved by the Fire Chief and the Director of the Department. 

4. 	
When new construction or additions are made to an existing structure, the structure or addition may be located on the lot with setbacks the same as other similar commercial structures on parcels within five-hundred feet (500’). 

5. 	
No subdivision or re-subdivision of a lot that results in a lot fronting on a right-of-way of less than thirty (30’) feet in width shall be permitted. 

6. 	
The minimum frontage for corner lots may be reduced to the minimum lot frontage criteria when access is restricted along the street frontage of the lot.14 



2.8.10.5 Lot Criteria 
1. 	
Minimum Lot Frontage – 100’; EXCEPTION: Corner Lots, Minimum Frontage – 200’ each street frontage. 

2. 	
Minimum Front Yard Setback – 40’ when abutting property zoned R-1, R-2 or R-3; 30’ when abutting R-4, R-5 or R-6; 20’ when abutting all other zones. 

3. 	
Minimum Side Yard Setback –30’ when abutting property zoned R-1, R-2 or R-3; 20’ when abutting property zoned R-4, R-5 or R-6; 10’ when abutting all other zones. 

4. 	
Minimum Rear Yard Setback – 40’ when abutting property zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or R-6; 20’ when abutting all other zones. 

5. 	
Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio (ISR) – .85 


6. Maximum Building Height – 75’ NOTE: For the purposes of this ordinance abutting shall address each lot line to determine applicable setbacks for each yard. 
2.8.10.6 Signs, C-4 Zone Additional information and standards for signs as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 7. 
Table 2.39 C-4 Signs 
USE  ALLOWED TYPES  MAXIMUM NUMBER  MAXIMUM SIGN AREA  MAXIMUM HEIGHT  LOCATION REQUIREMENTS  LIGHTING ALLOWED  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS  
Assembly Use  Wall, Monument Pole Roof7  Mon. 1/street Pole 1/street  Wall 15% Mon. 150 s.f. Pole 150 s.f. Roof 15%7  Mon. 16’ Pole 45’  Mon. – 10’ off paved surface Pole – 20’ off paved surface  Yes  Wall sign 15% or 32s.f., whichever is greater  
Commercial Use  Wall, Monument Pole Roof7  Mon. 1/street, Pole 1/street  Wall 15% Mon. 150 s.f. Pole 150 s.f. Roof 15%7  Mon. 16’ Pole 45’  Mon. – 10’ off paved surface Pole – 20’ off paved surface  Yes  Wall sign 15% or 32s.f., whichever is greater  
Institutional Use  Wall, Monument Pole Roof7  Mon. 1/street Pole 1/street  Wall 15%; Mon. 150 s.f. Pole 150 s.f. Roof 15%7  Mon. 16’ Pole 45’  Mon. – 10’ off paved surface Pole – 20’ off paved surface  Yes  Wall sign 15% or 32s.f., whichever is greater  
USE GROUPS  
Assembly Uses: Stadium Commercial Uses: All uses not labeled as Assembly or Institutional Institutional Uses: Correctional facility  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS  
1. If use is a multi-tenant building (3 or more separate tenants)6 the development name must be placed on the sign. It may be a maximum of 25% of the sign face6. This shall not be calculated in the maximum area for tenant signs. 2. If more than one Pole or Monument sign allowed, the size may be increased by 50% if only one sign is erected. 3. For the following commercial uses a multiplier is in effect: 1) Automobile sales 2) Automobile service station 3) Contractor, farm equipment sales 4) Marine sales 5) Motorcycle sales 6) Stadium Multiplier: 101’ – 500’ street frontage: Maximum number --pole/monument sign x 2 501’ – 1000’ street frontage: Maximum number --pole/monument sign x 3 1001’ – > street frontage: Maximum number --pole/monument sign x 4  
Table 2.40 C-4 Parking 


2.8.10.7 Parking, C-4 Zone Additional information and standards for parking as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 6. 
PARKING STANDARDS  
Land Use  Parking Required  Notes  
Agricultural Events Center  1 space/75 s.f.12  
Agricultural Laboratory & Testing Facility  1 space/800 s.f.12  
Agricultural Market  1 space/600 s.f.  
Agricultural Product Storage  1 space/300 s.f.12  
Agricultural Supply Store  1 space/600 s.f.  
Art gallery/studio, artisan workshop  1 space/600 s.f.  
Automobile sales  1 space/600 s.f.  Parking for product in display area not required to be striped  
Automotive parts  1 space/600 s.f  
Automobile Service Station  1 space/400 s.f.  
Blueprinting, printing publishing  1 space/600 s.f.  

75 

Land Use  Parking Required  Notes  
Building Supply  1 space/400 s.f.  1 space/each vehicle owned by the use  
Car wash, full service  1 space/employee  Stacking area to equal 5 times capacity of car wash  
Car wash, self service  N/A  2 stacking spaces/bay  
Cemetery  1 space/employee  1 space/each vehicle owned by the facility6  
Childcare  1 space/employee + 1 space/400 s.f.  Provide onsite area for safe drop off & pick up, wholly on site  
Church  1 space/3 seats  Based on seating in main sanctuary, min. of 5 spaces6  
Commercial warehouse  1 space/employee  Minimum of 5 spaces required.  
Construction Equipment  1 space/600 s.f.  
Contractors Office  1 space/600 s.f.  
Crematorium  1 space/employee  1 space/vehicle owned by use.3  
Convention Center  1 space/75 s.f.  1large vehicle parking space/25 required spaces. 15  
Events Center  1 space/200 s.f. 15  
Flea Market  2 spaces/vendor stall3  
Garden Center  1 space/600 s.f.  
Halfway House  1 space/occupant12  
Health club  1 space/200 s.f.  
Homeless Shelter  1 space/600 s.f. 6  
Hotel  1 space/room12  
Indoor Theater  1 space/4 seats12  
Kennel  1 space/300 s.f.  
Livestock Events Center  1 space/4 seats12  
Marine sales  1 space/600 s.f.  Parking for product in display area not required to be striped  
Office, general  1 space/250 s.f.  Financial, Legal, Medical, Professional, Veterinarian, etc. 6  
Office w/warehousing  1 space/500 s.f.  1 space/4,000 of warehouse space  
Passenger Terminal  1 space/200 s.f. lobby area + 1 space/emp.  
Private Club  1 space/200 s.f. 6  
Recycling, neighborhood  1 space/600 s.f.  Drop off area for recyclables should not conflict with parking areas  
Residential storage facility  1 space/employee + 5 spaces  Area in and around units may not be counted as parking spaces  
Restaurant, Fast Food  1 space/60 s.f.12  
Restaurant, Full Service  1 space/75 s.f.12  
Retail, department store  1 space/300 s.f.  Includes superstore or warehouse store4  
Retail Package Liquor Sales  1 space/400 s.f9  
Retail, specialty  1 space/600 s.f.  Florist, Flea Market, Mail order, Tobacco4  
Sign making  1 space/600 s.f.  1 space/employee  
Stadium  1 space/3 seats + 1 space/employee  
Tattoo Shop 16  2 spaces/chair 6  
Television, radio, studios, etc.  1 space/2 employees  1 space/each vehicle owned by the use  
Towing Service  1 space/employee  1 space/each vehicle owned by the facility6  
Truck Stop/Plaza  1 space/200 s.f.  1 space/600 s.f. for large truck parking  
Wholesale Business  1 space/600 s.f.  
Veterinary Hospital/Clinic  1 space/200 s.f. lobby area + 1 space/emp.  

2.8.10.8 Landscaping, C-4 Zone Additional information and standards for Vehicular Use Area (VUA) Landscaping as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 5. 
Table 2.41 C-4 Perimeter Landscape Buffer Area3 
Landscape Buffer Area Category  Width Options (In Feet)  Planting Density Multiplier  
20’  1.5  
Category C  25’  1.33  
30’  1  
Table 2.42 C-4 Buffering Requirements 



Landscape Buffer Area Category  Buffering Use Classification  
Buffered Use  Buffering Use  
Category C  R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6  C-3, C-4, C-5  

Table 2.43 Perimeter Planting Density*(OFT) Or Fraction Thereof 

Planting Density Requirement Categories  
A  B  C  D  
2 Large Trees or 1 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 3’ screening/80’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  2 Large Trees or 1 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 4’ screening/60’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  3 Large Trees or 2 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 5’ screening/60’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  3 Large Trees or 2 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 6’ screening/60’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  

77 

2.8.11 C-5 	Downtown Mixed Use This district is comprised of residential and commercial uses conducive to a compact coordinated development pattern historically associated with downtown central business districts. 
2.8.11.1 Principal Uses Uses substantially similar to those listed herein shall also be permitted, in light of the above described purposes of this zoning district and the Comprehensive Plan. 
Assembly Uses: 
1. 
Business colleges or technical school. 

2. 
Churches and associated facilities. 

3. 
Community Center.9 

4. 
Events Center15 

5. 
Private Club.6 

6. 
Schools for academic instruction and associated facilities. 




Commercial Uses: 
1. 	
Adult daycare. 

2. 	
Agricultural market. 

3. 	
Art galleries. 

4. 	
Assisted Living Facilities. 

5. 	
Banks and similar financial institutions/offices. 

6. 	
Beauty shops, barber shops, shoe repair shops. 

7. 	
Bed and Breakfast establishments. 

8. 	
Billiard or pool halls. 

9. 	
Blueprinting, printing, publishing and lithographing. 

10. 
Cable TV, radio, satellite signal distribution centers, and similar uses. 

11. 
Cemetery.6 

12. 
Childcare. 

13. 
Commercial Driver Training School.10 

14. 
Data processing centers. 

15. 
Fine arts studio. 

16. 
Funeral homes. 

17. 
Grocery, specialty. 

18. 
Health Club. 

19. 
Homeless Shelter. 6 

20. 
Indoor theaters. 

21. 
Laundry. 

22. 
Library. 

23. 
Microbrewery.9 

24. 
Motel or hotel. 

25. 
Museum. 

26. 
Offices. 

27. 
Parking lots and structures. 

28. 
Passenger Transportation Terminals. 

29. 
Pet Crematorium.14 

30. 	
Residential Storage Facility. Exterior treatments should be of a type to closely resemble exteriors of existing housing in close proximity to the proposed development. Acceptable treatments include, but are not limited to brick veneer, wood, vinyl, aluminum siding or stucco. 

31. 
Restaurants, no drive in or drive through service facilities are allowed. 

32. 
Retail Drink Liquor Establishment.13 

33. 
Retail Malt Beverage Establishment.9 

34. 
Retail Package Liquor Sales.9 

35. 
Retail sales. 

36. 
Self-service laundry or laundry pick-up stations. 

37. 	
Sidewalk food vendors. Location is to be approved jointly by the Department and the Police Department before issuance of permits. 

38. 
Sign making. 


79 

39. 
Skating rinks. 

40. 	
Telephone exchanges, radio and television studios, cable television systems, signal distribution centers and studios. 

41. 
Towers for distribution of radio and similar signals. 

42. 
Travel agencies. 



Institutional Uses: 
1. 	Nursing and rest homes. 

Residential Uses: 
1. 	
Dwelling units, provided the units are not mixed with nonresidential uses on the same floor unless separate entrances are provided for the residential and nonresidential uses. 11 

2. 	
Community residence.3 

3. 	
Halfway House.12 


2.8.11.2 Accessory Uses Uses and structures which are customarily accessory, clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted uses. 

Commercial Uses: 
1. 	
Sidewalk café when accessory to any permitted restaurant. 

2. 	
Storage, wholesaling and warehousing. 

3. 	
Storage yards for delivery vehicles of a permitted use. 


2.8.11.3 Conditional Uses Uses permitted only with Board approval after consideration of the intent and purpose of these regulations and consideration of the development guidelines as detailed in the Comprehensive Plan. 
Assembly Uses: 
1. 	Stadium and exhibition halls. 
2.8.11.4 Special Provisions 
1. 	All permitted business uses shall confine storage to principal or accessory structures. 

2.8.11.5 Lot Criteria 
1. 	
Minimum Lot Frontage – 25’ 

2. 	
Minimum Lot Area – No Minimum 

3. 	
Minimum Front Yard Setback – 0’ 

4. 	
Minimum Side Yard Setback – 0’ 

5. 	
Minimum Rear Yard Setback – 0’ 

6. 	
Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio (ISR) – 1.00 


7. Maximum Building Height – 75’3 NOTE: For the purposes of this ordinance abutting shall address each lot line to determine applicable setbacks for each yard. 
2.8.11.6 Signs, C-5 Zone Additional information and standards for signs as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 7. 
Table 2.44 C-5 Signs 
USE  ALLOWED TYPES  MAXIMUM NUMBER  MAXIMUM SIGN AREA  MAXIMUM HEIGHT  LOCATION REQUIREMENTS  LIGHTING ALLOWED  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS  
Assembly Use  Wall, Monument Pole Roof7  Mon. 1/street13 Pole 1/street frontage  Wall 15% Mon. 100 s.f. Pole 100 s.f. Roof 15%7  Mon. 16’ Pole 25’  10’ off paved surface  Yes  Wall sign 15% or 32s.f., whichever is greater  
Commercial Use  Wall, Monument Pole Roof7  Mon. 1/street, Pole 1/street  Wall 15% Mon. 100 s.f. Pole 100 s.f. Roof 15%7  Mon. 16’ Pole 35’  Monument 10’ off paved surface; Pole 20’ off paved surface  Yes  Wall sign 15% or 32s.f., whichever is greater  

USE  ALLOWED TYPES  MAXIMUM NUMBER  MAXIMUM SIGN AREA  MAXIMUM HEIGHT  LOCATION REQUIREMENTS  LIGHTING ALLOWED  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS  
Residential Use  Wall, Monument Pole  Wall 1 Mon. 1 Pole 1  Wall 5%; Mon. 4 s.f. Pole 4 s.f.  Mon. 4’ Pole 4’  Monument 10’ off paved surface; Pole 20’ off paved surface  External  W.M., one wall only  
USE GROUPS  
Assembly Uses: Business college/technical school, Churches, Community Center, Convention Center, Schools. Commercial Uses: All uses not listed as Assembly or Institutional. Institutional Uses: Hospital Residential Uses: Dwelling Units, Community Residence.  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS  
1. If use is a multi-tenant building (3 or more separate tenants)6 the development name must be placed on the sign. It may be a maximum of 25% of the sign face. This shall not be calculated in the maximum area for tenant signs. 2. If more than one Pole or Monument sign allowed, the size may be increased by 50% if only one sign is erected. 3. Message boards may be illuminated but may only contain manually changeable copy when located in the National Register Historical District Overlay Zone.5 4. Incidental signs, when located so as not to inhibit pedestrian or vehicular traffic movements.6  

2.8.11.7 Parking Requirements, C-5 Zone Additional information and standards for parking as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 6. 
Uses located within the C-5 zone are not required to provide onsite parking. Should onsite parking be provided, it is recommended that the parking meet the specific location and other standards as found in this Zoning Ordinance to the extent possible. 10 
Table 2.45 C-5 Parking Recommendations 10 
PARKING STANDARDS  
Land Use  Parking Required  Notes  
Adult day care  1 space/employee + 1 space/500 s.f.  Provide onsite area for safe drop off & pick up, wholly on site  
Agricultural Market  1 space/600 s.f.  
Art gallery/studio, artisan workshop  1 space/600 s.f.  
Assisted Living  .5 spaces/D. U.  Additionally, 1 space for each employee  
Barber/Beauty salon  2 spaces/chair  
Bed & Breakfast  1 space/room  
Cemetery  1 space/employee  1 space/each vehicle owned by the facility6  
Childcare  1 space/employee + 1 space/400 s.f.  Provide onsite area for safe drop off & pick up, wholly on site  
Church  1 space/3 seats  Based on seating in main sanctuary, min. of 5 spaces  
Community Center  1 space/600 s.f9  
Community Residence  1 space/3 occupants3  
Data processing centers  1 space/200 s.f.  
Dwelling units  1 space/unit  
Events Center  1 space/200 s.f. 15  
Funeral home  1 space/3 seats  1 space/each vehicle owned by the use  
Grocery, specialty  1 space/250 s.f.  Building size >5,000 s.f.  
Halfway House  1 space/occupant12  
Health club  1 space/200 s.f.  
Homeless Shelter  1 space/600 s.f. 6  
Hotel/Motel  1 space/suite  Minimum of 5 spaces required  

81 

Land Use  Parking Required  Notes  
Indoor amusement or athletic, w/o fixed seats  1 space/100 s.f  Includes billiards, dancing establishments, and similar uses  
Laundry, full service  1 space/200 s.f. lobby area  1 space/each employee + 1 space/vehicle owned by the use  
Laundry, self service  1 space/2 machines  
Library  1 space/600 s.f.  
Microbrewery  1 space/60 s.f9  Includes only areas where product is served. 15  
Museum  1 space/600 s.f.  
Nursing home, Orphanage, Rehab.  1 space/3 beds + 1 space/employee  Based on maximum employees on a shift, including medical staff. Minimum of 5 spaces  
Office, general  1 space/250 s.f.  Financial, Legal, Medical, Professional, Veterinarian, etc.  
Office projects  1 space/400 s.f.  When more than one office building on a lot  
Office, real estate  1 space/400 s.f.  
Private Club  1 space/200 s.f6  
Residential storage facility  1 space/employee + 5 spaces  Area in and around units may not be counted as parking spaces  
Restaurant, Full Service  1 space/60 s.f6  
Retail, department store  1 space/400 s.f.  Includes superstore or warehouse store  
Retail, durable goods  1 space/400 s.f.  Books, Camera, Clothing, Computer, Electronics, Musical Instruments, Sporting goods  
Retail, general & specialty  1 space/600 s.f.  Florist, Flea Market, Mail order, Tobacco  
Retail, heavy goods  1 space/800 s.f.  Appliances, Electrical, Furniture, Hardware, Heating & Plumbing, Lawn & Garden, Lumber & Building  
Retail Malt Beverage Establishment  1 space/60 s.f9  
Retail Package Liquor Sales  1 space/400 s.f9  
School, K – 8  1 space/classroom & office + 10 visitor spaces  If gymnasium or auditorium on site an additional 1 space/3 seats shall be provided  
School, 9 – 12  1 space/classroom & office + 1 space/ 5 seats in each classroom  If gymnasium or auditorium on site an additional 1 space/3 seats shall be provided  
School, Business School, College & Technical  1 space/classroom & office + 1 space/ 3 seats in each classroom  If gymnasium or auditorium on site an additional 1 space/3 seats shall be provided  
School, Post-Secondary  1 space/classroom & office + 1 space/ 2 seats in each classroom  If gymnasium or auditorium on site an additional 1 space/3 seats shall be provided3  
Sign Making  1 space/600 s.f.  1 space/employee  
Skating rink  1 space/500 s.f.  1 space/employee  
Stadium  1 space/3 seats +  1 space/employee  
Theater, Indoor  1 space/4 seats  
Television, Radio, Studios, etc.  1 space/2 employees  1 space/each vehicle owned by the use  
Terminal, Passenger  1 space/200 s.f. lobby area + 1 space/emp.  
Travel Agency  1 space/400 s.f.  

2.8.11.8 Landscaping, C-5 Zone Additional information and standards for Vehicular Use Area (VUA) Landscaping as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 5. 
Table 2.46 C-5 Perimeter Landscape Buffer Area3 
Landscape Buffer Area Category  Width Options (In Feet)  Planting Density Multiplier  
20’  1.5  
Category C  25’  1.33  
30’  1  
Table 2.47 C-5 Buffering Requirements 



Landscape Buffer Area  Buffering Use Classification  
Category  Buffered Use  Buffering Use  
Category C  R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6  C-3, C-4, C-5  

Table 2.48 Perimeter Planting Density*(OFT) Or Fraction Thereof 

Planting Density Requirement Categories  
A  B  C  D  
2 Large Trees or 1 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 3’ screening/80’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  2 Large Trees or 1 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 4’ screening/60’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  3 Large Trees or 2 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 5’ screening/60’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  3 Large Trees or 2 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 6’ screening/60’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  

83 

2.8.12 	I-1 General Industrial This district is composed of industrial areas for manufacturing and related uses that generate few if any off site impacts. Applied to areas usually considered self-sufficient rather than inter related uses. They are encouraged to develop in a campus atmosphere. 
2.8.12.1 Principal Uses Uses substantially similar to those listed herein shall also be permitted, in light of the above described purposes of this zoning district and the Comprehensive Plan. 


Commercial Uses: 
1. 	
Automobile, motorcycle, truck, commercial truck (greater than 7,500 GVW), boat and farm implement sales, rental, service and repair or sale of parts and supplies for such, provided the outdoor display or storage of vehicles shall conform to the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. 

2. 	
Breweries, Distilleries, Wineries.9 

3. 	
Building Supply sales. 

4. 	
Cable television systems, signal distribution centers and studios, including but not limited to towers. 

5. 	
Childcare centers. 

6. 	
Construction equipment sales, rental, service and repair or sale of parts and supplies for such. 

7. 	
Crematorium.3 

8. 	
Data processing centers. 

9. 	
Electrical Contractors Office.12 

10. 
Farm equipment and agricultural supply sales. 

11. 
Off premise sign. Must meet spacing requirements found in Chapter 7. 

12. 
Offices.12 

13. 
Research Laboratory. 

14. 
Sexually Oriented Business. 

15. 
Sign making. 

16. 	
Towing services. No more than 15 inoperable vehicles shall be stored on site for a period not to exceed 90 days. Vehicles shall be stored within a fenced and screened area.6 

17. 	
Waste haulers. Offices, vehicle parking and storage of empty containers are permitted. No storage of waste materials allowed. 6 



Industrial Uses: 
1. 	
Air & ground freight transportation services. 

2. 	
Automobile & automobile parts manufacturing. 

3. 	
Manufacturing, compounding, assembling and/or wholesaling of the following: 

a. 
Chemical products. 

b. 
Concrete products. 

c. 
Electrical/Electronic products. 

d. 
Food & food related products. 

e. 
Machinery manufacturing. 

f. 
Metals & Metal products. 

g. 
Plastic products. 

h. 
Stone and similar materials. 

i. 
Textiles & Textile products. 

j. 
Wood & Wood products. 



4. 	
Public or private utility facilities. 

5. 	
Recycling center for sorting baling and processing of glass and metals, including automobile and home appliance recycling, but not including automobile wrecking yard, building materials salvage or junk yards or toxic or hazardous wastes. 

6. 	
Warehousing. 


2.8.12.2 Accessory Uses Uses and structures which are customarily accessory, clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted uses. 

Commercial Uses: 
1. 	
Dwelling units for watchman or caretakers provided that such facilities shall be located on the same premises as the permitted use. 

2. 	
Facilities for serving food only for employees and visitors and having no direct access to the exterior and having no signs visible from the right-of-way. 

3. 	
Off street parking areas and structures and loading facilities. 

4. 	
Offices. 

5. 	
Outdoor storage of products manufactured on the premises or materials to be used in manufacture on the premises. 

6. 	
Recreational facilities. 


85 

2.8.12.3 Conditional Uses Uses permitted only with Board approval after consideration of the intent and purpose of these regulations and consideration of the development guidelines as detailed in the Comprehensive Plan. 

Commercial Uses: 
1. 	Sale of manufactured goods related or incidental to the principal use. 

Industrial Uses: 
1. 	
Compressed Natural Gas Cascade System, provided such system meets the compressed natural gas standard of the National Fire Prevention Association. Such a system shall be fully enclosed with a chain link fence at least to the height of the tanks and not less than six (6) feet in any case. 

2. 	
Gas storage and distribution facility where the means of distribution is railroad tank cars, gas piping, or tank trucks which may each have a water capacity in excess of 4,000 gallons; however, the volume shall be governed by National Fire Prevention Association regulations. 



Institutional Uses: 
1. 	Correctional institutions. 
2.8.12.4 Special Provisions 
1. 	
All uses shall be conducted in a completely enclosed building, except for outdoor storage uses which may be enclosed on all sides by a wall or fence not less than six (6) feet in height. 11 

2. 	
Total building area in square feet is not to exceed 175,000, inclusive of all buildings on an individual site.3 

3. 	
Recycling operations, including but not limited to automobile and home appliance recycling must be enclosed by a solid fence no less than twelve (12’) in height. Public parking areas must be paved with a durable dustless bound surface. Yard storage areas must be gravel or similar material. All street frontages shall contain, in addition to the required fence, a landscape buffer consisting of trees, shrubs and similar landscape material. 

4. 	
No subdivision or re-subdivision of a lot that results in a lot fronting on a right-of-way of less than thirty (30’) feet in width shall be permitted. 

5. 	
Sexually Oriented Businesses must be located a minimum of 1,000 feet from any residentially zoned area, Planned Neighborhood area, and a minimum of 1,000 feet from any public or private recreation facility, school, church, childcare center or any establishment that sells or serves alcohol. 

6. 	
When new construction or additions are made to an existing structure, the structure or addition may be located on the lot with setbacks the same as other similar industrial structures on parcels within one thousand (1000’) feet. 

7. 	
The minimum frontage for corner lots may be reduced to the minimum lot frontage criteria when access is restricted along the street frontage of the lot.14 



2.8.12.5 Lot Criteria 
1. 	
Minimum Lot Frontage – 100’; EXCEPTION: Corner Lots, Minimum Frontage – 150’.8 

2. 	
Minimum Front Yard Setback – 75’ when abutting property zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or R-6; 50’ when abutting all other zones. 

3. 	
Minimum Side Yard Setback – 50’ when abutting property zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or R-6; 20’ when abutting all other zones. 

4. 	
Minimum Rear Yard Setback – 75’ when abutting property zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or R-6; 25’ when abutting all other zones. 

5. 	
Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio (ISR) – .85 


6. Maximum Building Height – 75’ NOTE: For the purposes of this ordinance abutting shall address each lot line to determine applicable setbacks for each yard. 
2.8.12.6 Signs, I-1 Zone Additional information and standards for signs as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 7. 
Table 2.49 I-1 Signs 
USE  ALLOWED TYPES  MAXIMUM NUMBER  MAXIMUM SIGN AREA  MAXIMUM HEIGHT  LOCATION REQUIREMENTS  LIGHTING ALLOWED  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS  
Commercial Use  Wall, Monument Pole Roof7  Mon. 1/street, Pole1/street  Wall 15% Mon. 150 s.f. Pole 150 s.f. Roof 15%7  Mon. 16’ Pole 45’  Mon. – 10’ off paved surface Pole – 20’ off paved surface  Yes  Wall sign 15% or 32s.f., whichever is greater  
Industrial Use  Wall, Monument Pole Roof7  Mon. 1/street Pole1/street13  Wall 15% Mon. 150 s.f. Pole 150 s.f. Roof 15%7  Mon. 16’ Pole 25’  Mon. – 10’ off paved surface Pole – 20’ off paved surface  Yes  Wall sign 15% or 32s.f., whichever is greater  
Institutional Use  Wall, Monument Pole Roof7  Mon. 1/street Pole 1/street  Wall 15%; Mon. 150 s.f. Pole 150 s.f. Roof 15%7  Mon. 16’ Pole 35’  Mon. – 10’ off paved surface Pole – 20’ off paved surface  Yes  Wall sign 15% or 32s.f., whichever is greater  
USE GROUPS  
Commercial Uses: Automobile sales and supplies, Building Supply sales, Cable television systems, Childcare centers, Crematorium3, Data processing centers, Dwelling Units for watchmen, Farm equipment and agricultural supply sales, Food service (for employees), Off street parking, Offices, Outdoor Storage, Recreational facility, Research Laboratory, Sale of manufactured goods on site, Sexually Oriented Business, Sign making, Waste Haulers. Industrial Uses: Any use not listed as Commercial or Institutional. Institutional Uses: Correctional facility.  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS  
1. If use is a multi-tenant building (3 or more separate tenants)6 the development name must be placed on the sign. It may be a maximum of 25% of the sign face. This shall not be calculated in the maximum area for tenant signs. 2. If more than one Pole or Monument sign allowed, the size may be increased by 50% if only one sign is erected. 3.For the following commercial uses a multiplier is in effect: 1) Automobile sales 2) Automobile service station 3) Contractor, farm equipment sales 4) Marine sales 5) Motorcycle sales 6) Stadium Multiplier: 101’ – 500’ street frontage: Maximum number --pole/monument sign x 2 501’ – 1000’ street frontage: Maximum number --pole/monument sign x 3 1001’ – > street frontage: Maximum number --pole/monument sign x 4  
Table 2.50 I-1 Parking 


2.8.12.7 Parking, I-1 Zone Additional information and standards for parking as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 6. 
PARKING STANDARDS  
Land Use  Parking Required  Notes  
Brewery, Distillery, Winery  1 space/employee  On a maximum shift9  
Childcare  1 space/employee + 1 space/400 s.f.  Provide onsite area for safe drop off & pick up, wholly on site  
Commercial Truck Sales  1 space/600 s.f.  Parking for product in display area not required to be striped  
Correctional facility  1 space/employee  
Construction Equipment  1 space/600 s.f.  
Crematorium  1 space/employee  1 space/vehicle owned by use.3  
Data processing centers  1 space/200 s.f.  
Manufacturing  1 space/employee  On a maximum shift  
Office  1 space/250 s.f.12  

87 

Land Use  Parking Required  Notes  
Public/Private Utility  1space/employee  1 space/vehicle owned by the use  
Recycling  1 space/employee + 5 spaces  1 space/vehicle owned by the use  
Research laboratory  1 space/employee + 5 visitor spaces  
Sexually Oriented Bus.  1 space/50 s.f.  All spaces must be visible from public right-of­ways  
Sign Making  1 space/600 s.f.  Based on maximum employees on a shift, including medical staff. Minimum of 5 spaces  
Transportation Services  1 space/250 s.f.  Air, Bus, Rail, Truck  
Towing Service  1 space/employee  1 space/each vehicle owned by the facility6  
Warehouse  1 space/3,000 s.f.  Any office area calculated at 1 space/500 s.f.  
Waste Haulers  1 space/employee  1 space/each vehicle owned by the facility6  

2.8.12.8 Landscaping, I-1 Zone Additional information and standards for Vehicular Use Area (VUA) Landscaping as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 5. 
Table 2.51 I-1 Perimeter Landscape Buffer Area3 
Landscape Buffer Area Category  Width Options (In Feet)  Planting Density Multiplier  
30’  1.5  
Category D  40’  1.33  
50’  1  
Table 2.52 I-1 Buffering Requirements 



Landscape Buffer Area Category  Buffering Use Classification  
Buffered Use  Buffering Use  
Category D  R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-5, WCD  I-1, I-2, MAZ  

Table 2.53 Perimeter Planting Density *(OFT) Or Fraction Thereof 


Planting Density Requirement Categories  
A  B  C  D  
2 Large Trees or 1 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 3’ screening/80’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  2 Large Trees or 1 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 4’ screening/60’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  3 Large Trees or 2 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 5’ screening/60’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  3 Large Trees or 2 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 6’ screening/60’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  

2.8.13 I-2 	Regional Industrial This district is comprised of those manufacturing and related uses with potential off site impacts (such as noise, traffic, dust and odors) due to processes of the scale of the use. This zone is primarily assigned to areas with highest level of infrastructure and areas of sufficient size. Such areas include industrial parks. 
2.8.13.1 Principal Uses Uses substantially similar to those listed herein shall also be permitted. 
Assembly Uses: 
1. 	Community Center.9 
Commercial Uses: 
1. 	
Cable television systems, signal distribution centers and studios, including but not limited to towers. 

2. 	
Childcare centers. 

3. 	
Commercial truck (greater than 7,500 GVW), boat and farm implement sales, rental, service and repair or sale of parts and supplies for such, provided the outdoor display or storage of vehicles shall conform to the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. 

4. 	
Data processing centers. 

5. 	
Employment Job Training Centers & Associated Offices.12 

6. 	
Off premise sign. Must meet spacing requirements found in Chapter 7. 

7. 	
Offices.12 

8. 	
Sexually Oriented Business. 

9. 	
Sign making. 

10. 	
Waste haulers. Offices, vehicle parking and storage of empty containers are permitted. No storage of waste materials allowed. 6 


Industrial Uses: 
1. 	
Air & ground freight transportation services. 

2. 	
Automobile & automobile parts manufacturing. 

3. 	
Breweries, Distilleries, Wineries.9 

4. 	
Manufacturing, compounding, assembling and/or wholesaling of the following: 

k. 
Chemical products. 

l. 
Concrete products. 

m. 
Electrical/Electronic products. 

n. 
Food & food related products. 

o. 
Machinery manufacturing. 

p. 
Metals & Metal products. 

q. 
Plastic products. 

r. 
Stone and similar materials. 

s. 
Textiles & Textile products. 

t. 
Wood & Wood products. 



5. 	
Public or private utility facilities. 

6. 	
Recycling center for sorting baling and processing of glass and metals, including automobile and home appliance recycling, but not including automobile wrecking yard, building materials salvage or junk yards or toxic or hazardous wastes. 

7. 	
Warehousing. 


2.8.13.2 Accessory Uses Uses and structures which are customarily accessory, clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted uses. 
Commercial Uses: 
1. 	
Dwelling units for watchman or caretakers provided that such facilities shall be located on the same premises as the permitted use. 

2. 	
Facilities for serving food only for employees and visitors and having no direct access to the exterior and having no signs visible from the right of way. 

3. 	
Off street parking areas and structures and loading facilities. 

4. 	
Offices. 

5. 	
Recreational facilities. 


89 

Industrial Uses: 
1. 	Outdoor storage of products manufactured on the premises or materials to be used in manufacture on the premises. 
2.8.13.3 Conditional Uses Uses permitted only with Board approval after consideration of the intent and purpose of these regulations and consideration of the development guidelines as detailed in the Comprehensive Plan. 
Commercial Uses: 
1. 	Sale of manufactured goods related or incidental to the principal use. 
Industrial Uses: 
1. 	Livestock feed yards. 
Institutional Uses: 
1. 	Correctional institutions. 
2.8.13.4 Special Provisions 
1. 	
All uses shall be conducted in a completely enclosed building, except for outdoor storage uses which may be enclosed on all sides by a wall or fence not less than six (6) feet in height. 

2. 	
Recycling operations, including but not limited to automobile and home appliance recycling must be enclosed by a solid fence no less than twelve (12’) in height. Public parking areas must be paved with a durable dustless bound surface. Yard storage areas must be gravel or similar material. All street frontages shall contain, in addition to the required fence, a landscape buffer consisting of trees, shrubs and similar landscape material. 

3. 	
No subdivision or re-subdivision of a lot that results in a lot fronting on a right-of-way of less than thirty (30’) feet in width shall be permitted. 

4. 	
Sexually Oriented Businesses must be located a minimum of 1,000 feet from any residentially zoned area, Planned Neighborhood area, and a minimum of 1,000 feet from any public or private recreation facility, school, church, childcare center or any establishment that sells or serves alcohol. 

5. 	
When new construction or additions are made to an existing structure, the structure or addition may be located on the lot with setbacks the same as other similar industrial structures on parcels within one thousand feet (1000’). 

6. 	
The minimum frontage for corner lots may be reduced to the minimum lot frontage criteria when access is restricted along the street frontage of the lot.14 


2.8.13.5 Lot Criteria 
1. 	
Minimum Lot Frontage – 150’; EXCEPTION: Corner Lots, Minimum Frontage – 300’. 8 

2. 	
Minimum Front Yard Setback – 150’ when abutting property zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or R-6; 50’ when abutting all other zones. 

3. 	
Minimum Side Yard Setback – 100’ when abutting property zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or R-6; 20’ when abutting all other zones. 

4. 	
Minimum Rear Yard Setback – 100’ when abutting property zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or R-6; 25’ when abutting all other zones. 

5. 	
Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio (ISR) – .85 


6. Maximum Building Height – 75’ NOTE: For the purposes of this ordinance abutting shall address each lot line to determine applicable setbacks for each yard. 
2.8.13.6 Permitted Signs, I-2 Zone Additional information and standards for signs as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 7. 
Table 2.54 I-2 Signs 
USE  ALLOWED TYPES  MAXIMUM NUMBER  MAXIMUM SIGN AREA  MAXIMUM HEIGHT  LOCATION REQUIREMENTS  LIGHTING ALLOWED  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS  
Wall,  Mon.  Wall 15%  Mon. – 10’ off  Wall sign 15%  
Commercial Use  Monument Pole  1/street, Pole  Mon. 150 s.f. Pole 150 s.f.  Mon. 16’ Pole 45’  paved surface Pole – 20’ off  Yes  or 32s.f., whichever is  
Roof7  1/street  Roof 15%7  paved surface  greater  

USE  ALLOWED TYPES  MAXIMUM NUMBER  MAXIMUM SIGN AREA  MAXIMUM HEIGHT  LOCATION REQUIREMENTS  LIGHTING ALLOWED  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS  
Industrial Use  Wall, Monument Pole Roof7  Mon. 1/street Pole 1/street  Wall 5% Mon. 150 s.f. Pole 150 s.f. Roof 15%7  Mon. 16’ Pole 25’  Mon. – 10’ off paved surface Pole – 20’ off paved surface  Yes  Wall sign 15% or 32s.f., whichever is greater  
Institutional Use  Wall, Monument Pole Roof7  Mon. 1/street Pole 1/street  Wall 15%; Mon. 150 s.f. Pole 150 s.f. Roof 15%7  Mon. 16’ Pole 35’  Mon. – 10’ off paved surface Pole – 20’ off paved surface  Yes  Wall sign 15% or 32s.f., whichever is greater  
USE GROUPS  
Commercial Uses: Cable television systems, Childcare centers, Commercial truck sales, Data processing centers, Dwelling Units for watchmen, Farm equipment and agricultural supply sales, Food service (for employees), Off street parking, Offices, Outdoor Storage, Recreational facility, Research Laboratory, Sale of manufactured goods on site, Sexually Oriented Business, Sign making, Waste Haulers. Industrial Uses: Any use not listed as Commercial or Institutional Institutional Uses: Correctional facility.  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS  
1. If use is a multi-tenant building (3 or more separate tenants)6 the development name must be placed on the sign. It may be a maximum of 25% of the sign face. This shall not be calculated in the maximum area for tenant signs. 2. If more than one Pole or Monument sign allowed, the size may be increased by 50% if only one sign is erected. 3. For the following commercial uses a multiplier is in effect: 1) Automobile sales 2) Automobile service station 3) Contractor, farm equipment sales 4) Marine sales 5) Motorcycle sales 6) Stadium Multiplier: 101’ – 500’ street frontage: Maximum number --pole/monument sign x 2 501’ – 1000’ street frontage: Maximum number --pole/monument sign x 3 1001’ – > street frontage: Maximum number --pole/monument sign x 4  

2.8.13.7  Parking Requirements, I-2 Zone  Additional information and standards for parking as  
well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 6.  
Table 2.55  I-2 Parking  

PARKING STANDARDS  
Land Use  Parking Required  Notes  
Brewery, Distillery, Winery  1 space/employee  On a maximum shift9  
Childcare  1 space/employee + 1 space/400 s.f.  Provide onsite area for safe drop off & pick up, wholly on site  
Commercial Truck Sales  1 space/600 s.f.  Parking for product in display area not required to be striped  
Community Center  1 space/600 s.f.9  
Correctional facility  1 space/employee  
Data processing centers  1 space/200 s.f.  
Employment Job Training Center  1 space/400 s.f.12  
Manufacturing  1 space/employee  On a maximum shift  
Office  1 space/250 s.f.12  
Public/Private Utility  1space/employee  1 space/vehicle owned by the use  
Recycling  1 space/employee + 5 spaces  1 space/vehicle owned by the use  
Research laboratory  1 space/employee + 5 visitor spaces  
Sexually Oriented Bus.  1 space/50 s.f.  All spaces must be visible from public right-of­ways  
Transportation Services  1 space/250 s.f.  Air, Bus, Rail, Truck  

91 

Land Use  Parking Required  Notes  
Sign Making  1 space/600 s.f.  Based on maximum employees on a shift, including medical staff. Minimum of 5 spaces  
Warehouse  1 space/3,000 s.f.  Any office area calculated at 1 space/500 s.f.  
Waste Haulers  1 space/employee  1 space/each vehicle owned by the facility6  

2.8.13.8 Landscaping, I-2 Zone Additional information and standards for Vehicular Use Area (VUA) Landscaping as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 5. 
Table 2.56 I-2 Perimeter Landscape Buffer Area3 
Landscape Buffer Area Category  Width Options (In Feet)  Planting Density Multiplier  
30’  1.5  
Category D  40’  1.33  
50’  1  

Table 2.57 I-2 Buffering Requirements 

Landscape Buffer Area Category  Buffering Use Classification  
Buffered Use  Buffering Use  
Category D  R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-5, WCD  I-1, I-2, MAZ  

Table 2.58 Perimeter Planting Density *(OFT) Or Fraction Thereof 

Planting Density Requirement Categories  
A  B  C  D  
2 Large Trees or 1 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 3’ screening/80’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  2 Large Trees or 1 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 4’ screening/60’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  3 Large Trees or 2 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 5’ screening/60’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  3 Large Trees or 2 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 6’ screening/60’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  

2.8.14 PNR-1 	Planned Neighborhood Residential-1 The Planned Neighborhood Residential classification includes low and medium density residential development, consisting of single family and multifamily residential uses along with limited service and light retail uses to serve the needs of the local population. Density and use bonuses may be realized by the provision of site amenities such as wider sidewalks, bicycle or walking paths, park or open spaces, mixed use residential/commercial buildings, as outlined in these regulations. 
2.8.14.1 Principal Uses Uses substantially similar to those listed herein shall also be permitted. 
1. 	
Adult Day Care 

2. 	
Assisted Living Facilities. 

3. 	
Childcare centers. 

4. 	
Churches and associated facilities. 

5. 	
Community Center.9 

6. 	
Convenience Shopping Center. 

7. 	
Convenience stores no less than 500 square feet and no greater than 5,000 square feet in building area. Sales of gasoline are permitted. 

8. 	
Events Center. 15 

9. 	
Financial institution. 

10. 
Government operated parks. 

11. 
Libraries. 

12. 
Multifamily residences. 

13. 
Neighborhood Center. 11 

14. 	
Neighborhood shopping centers, no greater than 25,000 square feet in building area for all buildings. 

15. 
Nursing home. 

16. 
Offices. 

17. 
Residential care facilities. 

18. 
Residential storage facilities. 

19. 	
Restaurants, no greater than 3,000 square feet in building area and no drive in or drive through facilities are provided. 

20. 
Schools for academic instruction. 

21. 
Single Family Attached (2 residences). 11 

22. 
Single family Attached (3 or more residences). 11 

23. 
Single family detached residences. 

24. 
Two Family residences. 


2.8.14.2 Accessory Uses Uses and structures which are customarily accessory, clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted uses. 
1. 	
Home occupation. 

2. 	
Private garages, private storage sheds and private parking areas. 

3. 	
Swimming pools, tennis courts, clubhouses and other private or common use open space and recreational areas. 


2.8.14.3 Conditional Uses Uses permitted only with Board approval after consideration of the intent and purpose of these regulations and consideration of the development guidelines as detailed in the Comprehensive Plan. 
1. 	Golf course. 


2.8.14.4 Special Provisions 
1. 	
Commercial and other nonresidential uses are to be designed to complement the style, size and architecture of the residential uses. 

2. 	
No outside storage of any type permitted for any commercial use. 

3. 	
No subdivision or re-subdivision of a lot that results in a lot fronting on a right-of-way of less than thirty (30’) feet in width shall be permitted. 

4. 	
Developer will be required to submit an overall design, including types, sizes, allowable colors and landscape treatments for approval.13 

5. 	
Planned neighborhood developments are required to file a Master Plan designating all areas to be reserved for lots, streets, utilities, open space and other requirements to ensure these developments are developed to the highest standards possible. 

6. 	
Planned neighborhood developments must file a separate landscape plan designating areas and materials for interior and perimeter landscaping. 

7. 	
Planned neighborhood developments must file an architectural design plan designating permitted architectural styles for both commercial and residential structures. 

8. 	
All special conditions, awarded bonuses, private restrictions, covenants, and special provisions shall be formalized in a binding elements document and submitted to the Commission for approval. 

9. 	
Single family detached zero lot line developments are required to designate on the subdivision plat which side yard will have 0’ setback. All single-family detached zero lot line developments shall have maintenance/access/use easements and when necessary, drainage easements, provided on adjacent lots and at a width of not less than ten (10’) feet. Adjacent lots shall not place any building within this easement. 

10. 	
The minimum frontage for corner lots may be reduced to the minimum lot frontage criteria when access is restricted along the street frontage of the lot.14 


93 


2.8.14.5 Lot Criteria 
1. 	
Minimum Lot Frontage, Single Family Detached – 50’; EXCEPTION: Corner Lots Minimum Frontage – 100’ each street frontage. 6/8/11 

2. 	
Minimum Lot Frontage, Single Family Attached & Two Family – 30’ /D.U.; EXCEPTION: Corner Lots Minimum Frontage – 65’ each street frontage. 6/8/11 

3. 	
Minimum Lot Frontage, Multi Family – 100’6/8 EXCEPTION: Corner Lots Minimum Frontage – 185’ each street frontage. 8 

4. 	
Minimum Lot Frontage, Commercial – 150’ 6 EXCEPTION: Corner Lots Minimum Frontage – 200’ each street frontage. 8 

5. 	
Maximum Lot Area – 29,040 S.F./D.U.; no maximum for commercial 

6. 	
Minimum Lot Area, Per Dwelling Unit (without density bonuses) – 8,712 S.F. when abutting R-1; 5,124 S.F. when abutting R-2; 3,960 S.F. when abutting R-3; 3,630 S.F. when abutting R-4; 2,904 when abutting all other zones. Minimum for commercial 43,560 S.F. 

7. 	
Minimum Front Yard Setback – 15’ 

8. 	
Minimum Side Yard Setback, Single Family – 10’ 

9. 	
Minimum Side Yard Setback, Single Family Detached Zero Lot Line – 15’ one side yard, 0’ other side yard. 11 

10. 	
Minimum Side Yard Setback, Single Family Attached (2 residences) – 10’ each end wall, 0’ each common wall. 11 

11. 	
Minimum Side Yard Setback, Multi Family & Single Family Attached (3 or more residences) – 15’ each end wall, 0’ each common wall. 11 

12. 
Minimum Side Yard Setback, Commercial – 15’ 

13. 
Minimum Rear Yard Setback, Single Family & Single Family Attached (2 residences) – 15’11 

14. 	
Minimum Rear Yard Setback, Multi Family and Single Family Attached (3 or more residences)– 20’11 

15. 
Minimum Rear Yard Setback, Commercial – 30’ 

16. 
Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio (ISR), Single Family & Single Family Attached (2 residences) 


– .7011 
17. 	
Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio (ISR), Single Family Attached (3 or more residences), Multi Family – .8011 

18. 
Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio (ISR), Commercial – .80 


19. Maximum Building Height – 45’ NOTE: For the purposes of this ordinance abutting shall address each lot line to determine applicable setbacks for each yard. 

2.8.14.6 Density Bonuses 
1. 	
Minimum gross density in the PNR-1 zone is 1.5 D.U./Acre and the maximum gross density, without bonuses is 3 D.U./Acre, with bonuses gross density may rise to 8 D.U./Acre. 

2. 	
When density bonuses apply to a development then for each additional residential unit constructed over and above the maximum density without bonuses, an additional 500 square feet of commercial floor area may be constructed. 

3. 	
Commercial areas may not exceed 15% of the total building area unless density and use bonuses are earned. 

4. 	
If multifamily residential structures provide variation in colors, fenestration, trim, building materials and offsets in building facades, a density bonus of 1.0 D.U./Acre will be added to the density calculation. 

5. 	
If wider sidewalks (minimum of 6 feet in width), multipurpose paths or bicycle trails (minimum of 8 feet in width) are provided throughout the development, a density bonus of .50 D.U./Acre will be added to the density calculation. Also, two square feet of additional commercial floor area may be constructed for each lineal foot of wider sidewalk, walking path or bicycle trail. 

6. 	
If open space is provided, a density bonus of .25 D.U./Acre will be added to the density calculation for each 10 acres of open space provided above the minimum. A minimum of 10 acres of open space must be provided to qualify for a density bonus. Also, 500 square feet of additional commercial floor area may be constructed for each acre of open space. Open spaces shall be contiguous and yard and other setback areas shall not be calculated in determining acreage of open space. Areas designated as part of any golf course may not be used in calculating open spaces or park space when determining density bonuses. 

7. 	
If park space is provided, a density bonus of 1.0 D.U./Acre will be added to the density calculation for each 5 acres of park space provided above the minimum. A minimum of 5 acres of park space must be provided to qualify for a density bonus. Also, 1,000 square feet of additional commercial floor area may be constructed for each acre of park space. Park spaces should consist of both active and passive recreation opportunities and must be a minimum of 2 contiguous acres in size. Areas designated as part of any golf course may not be used in calculating open space or park space when determining density bonuses. 

8. 	
Density bonuses may not result in the commercial areas exceeding 25% of the total building area. The square footage of schools and churches is not considered commercial area. 


2.8.14.7 Signs, 	PNR-1 Zone Additional information and standards for signs as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 7. Along with the general requirements found elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance, and the guidance of the Comprehensive Plan, and to ensure the integration of the development with surrounding land and uses, a separate signage plan shall be submitted as part of the Master Plan requirements. 
2.8.14.8 Parking, PNR-1 Zone 	Additional information and standards for parking as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 6. 
Table 2.59 PNR-1 Parking 
PARKING STANDARDS  
Land Use  Parking Required  Notes  
Adult day care  1 space/employee + 1 space/500 s.f.  Provide onsite area for safe drop off & pick up, wholly on site  
Assisted Living  .5 spaces/D. U.  Additionally, 1 space for each employee  
Childcare  1 space/employee + 1 space/400 s.f.  Provide onsite area for safe drop off & pick up, wholly on site  
Church  1 space/3 seats  Based on seating in main sanctuary, min. of 5 spaces  
Community Center  1 space/600 s.f.9  
Convenience Shopping Center  1 space/400 s.f.  Based on leasable space (not public spaces)  
Convenience store  1 space/250 s.f.  
Events Center  1 space/200 s.f. 15  
Home Occupation  N/A  No on street parking allowed for commercial vehicles owned by the use  

95 

Land Use  Parking Required  Notes  
Library  1 space/600 s.f.  
Neighborhood Center  5 spaces11  
Neighborhood Shopping Center  1 space/400 s.f.  Based on leasable space (not public spaces)  
Nursing home, Orphanage, Rehab.  1 space/3 beds + 1 space/employee  Based on maximum employees on a shift, including medical staff. Minimum of 5 spaces  
Parks  1 space/acre  Other uses present require parking based on use.  
Residential care facility  1 space/3 beds  
Residential, Multi family  2 spaces/D. U.  1 additional space for each 4 D.U.  
Residential, Single family  2 spaces/D. U.  
Residential, Two family  2 spaces/D. U.  +1 space for each 4 units (OFT) if more than 1 building on a parcel11  
Restaurant, Full Service  1 space/60 s.f6  
School, K – 8  1 space/classroom & office + 10 visitor spaces  If gymnasium or auditorium on site an additional 1 space/3 seats shall be provided  
School, 9 – 12  1 space/classroom & office + 1 space/ 5 seats in each classroom  If gymnasium or auditorium on site an additional 1 space/3 seats shall be provided  
School, Post-Secondary  1 space/classroom & office + 1 space/ 2 seats in each classroom  If gymnasium or auditorium on site an additional 1 space/3 seats shall be provided3  

2.8.14.9 Landscaping, PNR-1 Zone Additional information and standards for Vehicular Use Area (VUA) 
Landscaping as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 5. 
Along with the general requirements found elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance, and the guidance of the 
Comprehensive Plan, a separate landscaping plan shall be submitted as part of the Master Plan requirements. 
The Commission may require landscaping above the minimums required to ensure the integration of the 
development with surrounding land and uses. 

2.8.15 PNR-2 	Planned Neighborhood Residential-2 The Planned Neighborhood Residential classification provides for manufactured housing developments and provides for the necessary services for these developments. 
2.8.15.1 Principal Uses Uses substantially similar to those listed herein shall also be permitted. 
1. 	
Childcare centers. 

2. 	
Government parks. 

3. 	
Manufactured Housing Developments. 

4. 	
Neighborhood Center. 11 

5. 	
Single family dwelling. 6 


2.8.15.2 Accessory Uses Uses and structures which are customarily accessory, clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted uses. 
1. 	
Home occupation. 

2. 	
Leasing/management office. 

3. 	
Private garages, private storage sheds and private parking areas. 

4. 	
Residential Storage Building. 

5. 	
Swimming pools, tennis courts, clubhouses and other private or common use open space and recreational areas. 


2.8.15.3 Conditional Uses Uses permitted only with Board approval after consideration of the intent and purpose of these regulations and consideration of the development guidelines as detailed in the Comprehensive Plan. 
1. 	None. 

2.8.15.4 Special Provisions 
1. 	
Planned neighborhood developments are required to file a Master Plan designating all areas to be reserved for lots, streets, drive lanes, utilities, open space and other requirements to ensure these developments are developed to the highest standards possible. 

2. 	
Planned neighborhood developments must file a separate landscape plan designating areas and materials for interior and perimeter landscaping. 

3. 	
All special conditions, private restrictions, covenants, and special provisions shall be formalized in a binding elements document and submitted to the Commission for approval. 

4. 	
The minimum frontage for corner lots may be reduced to the minimum lot frontage criteria when access is restricted along the street frontage of the lot.14 



2.8.15.5 Lot Criteria 
1. 	
Minimum Lot Frontage, – 30’ Manufactured Housing Type 26 

2. 	
Minimum Lot Frontage, Single Family – 50’; EXCEPTION: Corner Lots, Minimum Frontage – 100’ each street frontage. 6 

3. 	
Minimum Lot Area, Per Dwelling Unit – 3,000S.f. 

4. 	
Minimum Front Yard Setback – 25’ 

5. 	
Minimum Side Yard Setback – 5’ 

6. 	
Minimum Rear Yard Setback – 15’ 

7. 	
Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio (ISR) – .80 

8. 	
Maximum Building Height – 35’ 

9. 	
Open Space Ratio – 50 s.f. per dwelling unit 


NOTE: For the purposes of this ordinance abutting shall address each lot line to determine applicable setbacks for each yard. 
2.8.15.6 	Signs, PNR-2 Zone Additional information and standards for signs as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 7. 
Along with the general requirements found elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance, and the guidance of the Comprehensive Plan, and to ensure the integration of the development with surrounding land and uses, a separate signage plan shall be submitted as part of the Master Plan requirements. 
97 

2.8.15.7 	Parking, PNR-2 Zone Additional information and standards for parking as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 6. 
Table 2.60 PNR-2 Parking 
PARKING STANDARDS  
Land Use  Parking Required  Notes  
Childcare  1 space/employee + 1 space/400 s.f.  Provide onsite area for safe drop off & pick up, wholly on site  
Home Occupation  N/A  No on street parking allowed for commercial vehicles owned by the use  
Manufactured Home  2 spaces/unit  
Manufactured Housing Management Office  1 space/400 s.f.  
Neighborhood Center  5 spaces11  
Parks  1 space/acre  Other uses present require parking based on use.  
Single family dwelling  2 spaces/unit6  

2.8.15.8 Landscaping, PNR-2 Zone Additional information and standards for Vehicular Use Area (VUA) Landscaping as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 5. 
Along with the general requirements found elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance, a separate landscaping plan shall be submitted as part of the Master Plan requirements. The Commission may require landscaping above the minimums required to ensure the integration of the development with surrounding land and uses. 
2.8.16 PNC Planned Neighborhood Commercial The Planned Neighborhood Commercial classification includes neighborhood office commercial, limited regional commercial and low, medium and high density residential development, consisting of single family, two family and multifamily residential uses with the residential developments serving to provide housing alternatives as well as facilitating live/work arrangements and similar needs. Density bonuses may be realized by provision of site amenities such as wider sidewalks, bicycle or walking paths, park or open spaces, mixed use residential/commercial buildings, etc. 
2.8.16.1 Principal Uses Uses substantially similar to those listed herein shall also be permitted. 
1. 	
Assisted Living Facilities. 

2. 	
Childcare centers. 

3. 	
Churches and associated facilities. 

4. 	
Community Center.9 

5. 	
Community Shopping Center. 

6. 	
Convenience Shopping Center. 

7. 	
Convenience stores, which may contain gasoline sales, no less than 500 square feet and no greater than 5,000 square feet in building area. 

8. 	
Events Center. 15 

9. 	
Financial Institution. 

10. 
Fine art studios. 

11. 
Government operated parks. 

12. 
Health Clubs. 

13. 
Indoor theaters. 

14. 
Laundry pick-up stations. 

15. 
Libraries. 

16. 
Multi Family Residences. 

17. 
Neighborhood Center. 

18. 
Neighborhood Shopping Center. 

19. 
Nursing Homes. 

20. 
Offices. 

21. 
Residential care facilities. 

22. 
Restaurants. 

23. 
Retail Malt Beverage Establishment.9 

24. 
Retail Package Liquor Sales.9 

25. 
Schools for academic instruction. 

26. 
Single family detached residences. 

27. 
Specialty retail shops. 

28. 
Single Family Attached (2 residences). 11 

29. 
Single Family Attached (3 or more residences). 11 

30. 
Two Family Residences. 


2.8.16.2 Accessory Uses Uses and structures which are customarily accessory, clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted uses. 
1. 	
Home occupation. 

2. 	
Outdoor storage of merchandise, when screened from adjacent uses or roadways. 

3. 	
Private garages, private storage sheds and private parking areas. 

4. 	
Swimming pools, tennis courts, clubhouses and other private or common use open space and recreational areas. 


2.8.16.3 Conditional Uses Uses permitted only with Board approval after consideration of the intent and purpose of these regulations and consideration of the development guidelines as detailed in the Comprehensive Plan. 
1. 	Golf course. 
99 


2.8.16.4 Special Provisions 
1. 	
Commercial and other non-residential uses are to be designed to complement the style, size and architecture of the residential uses. 

2. 	
Outdoor storage must be screened by a solid wall a minimum of six (6’) feet in height and at least one (1’) foot higher than the material stored. Wall should be of materials similar to building façade. 

3. 	
No subdivision or re-subdivision of a lot that results in a lot fronting on a right-of-way of less than thirty (30’) feet in width shall be permitted. 

4. 	
Developer will be required to submit a signage plan, including types, sizes, allowable colors and landscape treatments for approval. 

5. 	
Planned neighborhood developments are required to file a Master Plan designating all areas to be reserved for lots, streets, drive lanes, utilities, open space and other requirements to ensure these developments are developed to the highest standards possible. 

6. 	
Planned neighborhood developments must file a separate landscape plan designating areas and materials for interior and perimeter landscaping. 

7. 	
Planned neighborhood developments must file an architectural design plan designating permitted architectural styles for both commercial and residential structures. 

8. 	
All special conditions, awarded bonuses, private restrictions, covenants, and special provisions shall be formalized in a binding elements document and submitted to the Commission for approval. 

9. 	
Single family detached zero lot line developments are required to designate on the subdivision plat which side yard will have 0’ setback. All single-family detached zero lot line developments shall have maintenance/access/use easements and when necessary, drainage easements, provided on adjacent lots and at a width of not less than ten (10’) feet. Adjacent lots shall not place any building within this easement. 11 

10. 	
The minimum frontage for corner lots may be reduced to the minimum lot frontage criteria when access is restricted along the street frontage of the lot.14 



2.8.16.5 Lot Criteria 
1. 	
Minimum Lot Frontage, Single Family Detached – 50’; EXCEPTION: Corner Lots, Minimum Frontage – 100’ each street frontage. 6/8/11 

2. 	
Minimum Lot Frontage, Single Family Attached & Two Family – 30’ /D.U.; EXCEPTION: Corner Lots, Minimum Frontage – 65’ each street frontage. 6/8/11 

3. 	
Minimum Lot Frontage, Multi Family – 100’6/8 EXCEPTION: Corner Lots, Minimum Frontage – 65’ each street frontage. 8 

4. 	
Minimum Lot Frontage, Commercial – 200’6 

5. 	
Maximum Lot Area – 29,040 S.F./D.U. 

6. 	
Minimum Lot Area, Per Dwelling Unit (without density bonuses) – 8,712 S.F. when abutting R-1; 5,124 S.F. when abutting R-2; 3,960 S.F. when abutting R-3; 3,630 S.F. when abutting R-4; 2,904 when abutting all other zones. Minimum for commercial 43,560 S.F. 

7. 	
Minimum Front Yard Setback – 15’ 

8. 	
Minimum Side Yard Setback, Single Family Detached – 10’11 

9. 	
Minimum Side Yard Setback, Single Family Detached Zero Lot Line – 15’ one side yard, 0’ other side yard. 11 

10. 	
Minimum Side Yard Setback, Single Family Attached (2 residences), & Two Family – 10’ each end wall, 0’ each common wall. 11 

11. 
Minimum Side Yard Setback, Multi Family – 15’ each end wall, 0’ each common wall 

12. 
Minimum Side Yard Setback, Commercial – 15’ 

13. 
Minimum Rear Yard Setback, Single Family, Single Family Attached (2 residences) & Two Family 


– 15’11 
14. 
Minimum Rear Yard Setback, Multi Family & Single Family Attached (3 or more – 20’11 

15. 
Minimum Rear Yard Setback, Commercial – 30’ 

16. 	
Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio (ISR), Single Family, Single Family Attached (2 residences) & Two Family – .7011 

17. 	
Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio (ISR), Single Family Attached (3 or more residences), Multi Family – .8011 

18. 
Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio (ISR), Commercial – .80 


19. Maximum Building Height – 55’ NOTE: For the purposes of this ordinance abutting shall address each lot line to determine applicable setbacks for each yard. 

2.8.16.6 Density Bonuses 
1. 	
Commercial floor area may not exceed 60% of the total lot or development area unless use bonuses are earned. 

2. 	
If wider sidewalks (minimum of 6 feet in width), walking paths or bicycle trails (minimum of 8 feet in width) are provided throughout the development, two square feet of additional commercial floor area may be constructed for each lineal foot of sidewalk, walking path or bicycle trail. 

3. 	
If open space is provided, 500 square feet of additional commercial floor area may be constructed for each acre of open space. A minimum of 10 acres of open space must be provided to qualify for a bonus. Open spaces shall be contiguous and yard and other setback areas shall not be calculated in determining acreage of open space. Areas designated as part of any golf course may not be used in calculating open space, park space when determining density bonuses. 

4. 	
If park space is provided, 1,000 square feet of additional commercial floor area may be constructed for each acre of park space. A minimum of 5 acres of park space must be provided to qualify for a bonus. Park spaces should consist of both active and passive recreation opportunities and be a minimum of 1 acre in size. 

5. 	
If residential uses are developed an additional 500 square feet of commercial building area may be constructed for each dwelling unit, a minimum of 24 dwelling units must be provided. 

6. 	
After inclusion of all bonuses, the total commercial building floor area may not exceed 85% of the total development. 


2.8.16.7 	Signs, PNC Zone Additional information and standards for signs as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 7. 
Along with the general requirements found elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance, and the guidance of the Comprehensive Plan, and to ensure the integration of the development with surrounding land and uses, a separate signage plan shall be submitted as part of the Master Plan requirements. 
2.8.16.8 Parking Requirements, PNC Zone Additional information and standards for parking as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 6. 
Table 2.61 PNC Parking 
PARKING STANDARDS  
Land Use  Parking Required  Notes  
Assisted Living  .5 spaces/D. U.  Additionally, 1 space for each employee  
Childcare  1 space/employee + 1 space/400 s.f.  Provide onsite area for safe drop off & pick up, wholly on site  
Church  1 space/3 seats  Based on seating in main sanctuary, min. of 5 spaces  
Community Center  1 space/600 s.f.9  
Clinic, medical/dental  1 space/400 s.f.  
Convenience Shopping Center  1 space/400 s.f.  Based on leasable space (not public spaces)  
Convenience store  1 space/250 s.f.  
Events Center  1 space/200 s.f. 15  
Financial Institutions  1 space/200 s.f.  

101 

Land Use  Parking Required  Notes  
Golf course  3 spaces/hole  Additional parking required if other uses present  
Grocery, specialty  1 space/250 s.f.  Building size >5,000 s.f.  
Health club  1 space/200 s.f.  
Home Occupation  N/A  No on street parking allowed for commercial vehicles owned by the use  
Laundry, Pick up  1 space/400 s.f.  
Library  1 space/600 s.f.  
Neighborhood Center  5 spaces11  
Nursing home, Orphanage, Rehabilitation facility  1 space/3 beds + 1 space/employee  Based on maximum employees on a shift, including medical staff. Minimum of 5 spaces  
Office, general  1 space/250 s.f.  Financial, Legal, Medical, Professional, Veterinarian, etc.  
Office, real estate  1 space/400 s.f.  
Office projects  1 space/400 s.f.  When more than one office building on a lot  
Parks  1 space/acre  Other uses present require parking based on use.  
Pharmacy  1 space/400 s.f.  
Residential care facility  1 space/3 beds  
Residential childcare  N/A  Provide onsite area for drop off/pick up, wholly on site  
Residential, Multi family  2 spaces/D. U.  1 additional space for each 4 D.U.  
Residential, Single family  2 spaces/D. U.  
Residential, Two family  2 spaces/D. U.  
Restaurant, Fast Food6  1 space/75 s.f.  
Restaurant, Full Service  1 space/60 s.f.6  
Retail, general & specialty  1 space/600 s.f.  Florist, Flea Market, Mail order, Tobacco  
Retail Malt Beverage Establishment  1 space/60 s.f.9  
Retail Package Liquor Sales  1 space/400 s.f.9  
Retail, Shopping Center  1 space/400 s.f.  Based on leasable space (not public spaces)  
School, K – 8  1 space/classroom & office + 10 visitor spaces  If gymnasium or auditorium on site an additional 1 space/3 seats shall be provided  
School, 9 – 12  1 space/classroom & office + 1 space/ 5 seats in each classroom  If gymnasium or auditorium on site an additional 1 space/3 seats shall be provided  
School, Post-Secondary  1 space/classroom & office + 1 space/ 2 seats in each classroom  If gymnasium or auditorium on site an additional 1 space/3 seats shall be provided3  
Theater, Indoor  1 space/4 seats  
Travel Agency  1 space/400 s.f.  

2.8.16.9 Landscaping, PNC Zone Additional information and standards for Vehicular Use Area (VUA) 
Landscaping as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 5. 
Along with the general requirements found elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance, a separate 
landscaping plan shall be submitted as part of the Master Plan requirements. The Commission may 
require landscaping above the minimums required to ensure the integration of the development 
with surrounding land and uses. 

103 

2.8.17 WCD-1, WCD-2 	Woodland Corridor District The purpose of the Woodland Corridor District (WCD) is to regulate the development and use of property in the Woodland Corridor by providing additional protections and flexibility not provided through the application of conventional zoning regulations. This district is intended to promote the objectives of the Woodland Corridor Plan adopted by the City as a guide to future development along Woodland Drive. The Woodland Corridor District is a zoning district and shall be designated on the official Zoning Map or the City and shall be further subdivided into sub-districts 1 and 2. All property within the Woodland Corridor District boundaries is subject to the provisions of this section. 
2.8.17.1 Principal Uses Uses substantially similar to those listed herein shall also be deemed permitted, in light of the above described purposes of this zoning district and the Comprehensive Plan. 
Principal uses for sub-district 1 are as follows: 
Assembly Uses: 
1. 	
Medical educational facilities. 

2. 	
Adult care facilities. 


Commercial Uses: 
1. 	
Assisted living facility. 

2. 	
Childcare centers. 

3. 	
Emergency services including ambulance service. 

4. 	
Medical and dental equipment and supply facilities. 

5. 	
Medical research, experimental and testing laboratories. 

6. 	
Offices, general.3 

7. 	
Offices for professionals providing health care, including but not limited to, doctors, dentists, optometrists, ophthalmologists, chiropractors and related providers of health care. 

8. 	
Retail sale of medically related products, including but not limited to, pharmacies, medical supplies and related health care products. 


Institutional Uses: 
1. 	
Hospitals. 

2. 	
Nursing homes and congregate care facilities. 


Residential Uses: 
1. 	
Community residences. 

2. 	
Multifamily residences. 11 

3. 	
Single Family Attached (2 residences). 11 

4. 	
Single Family Attached (3 or more residences). 11 

5. 	
Single family detached residences11 

6. 	
Two Family residences. 11 


Principal uses for sub-district 2 are as follows: 
Assembly Uses: 
1. 	
Churches and associated facilities. 

2. 	
Medical educational facilities. 


Commercial Uses: 
1. 	
Adult care facilities. 

2. 	
Assisted living facility. 

3. 	
Childcare centers. 

4. 	
Emergency services including ambulance service. 

5. 	
Financial institutions provided that they not exceed 3,000 square feet in gross floor area. 

6. 	
Medical and dental equipment and supply facilities. 

7. 	
Medical research, experimental and testing laboratories. 

8. 	
Offices, general.3 

9. 	
Offices for professionals providing health care, including but not limited to, doctors, dentists, optometrists, ophthalmologists, chiropractors and related providers of health care. 

10. 
Office buildings. 

11. 
Professional services. 

12. 	
Retail sale of medically related products, including but not limited to, pharmacies, medical supplies and related health care products. 

13. 	
Retail facilities, provided that they not exceed 10,000 square feet in gross floor area and that no automotive sales or services are permitted. 

14. 	
Restaurants, no greater than 2,000 square feet in building area and no drive in or drive through service facilities are provided. 


105 

Institutional Uses: 
1. 	
Hospitals. 

2. 	
Nursing homes. 


Residential Uses: 
1. 	
Community residences. 

2. 	
Family lodging facility. 

3. 	
Multifamily residences. 11 

4. 	
Single family detached residences. 11 

5. 	
Single Family Attached (2 residences). 11 

6. 	
Single Family Attached (3 or more residences). 11 

7. 	
Two Family residences. 11 


2.8.17.2 Accessory Uses Uses and structures which are customarily accessory, clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted uses. 
Assembly/Commercial/Institutional/Residential Uses: 
1. 	Accessory buildings. Exterior treatments shall be designed to complement the principal structure found on site. 
2.8.17.3 Conditional Uses Uses permitted only with Board approval after consideration of the intent and purpose of these regulations and consideration of the development guidelines as detailed in the Comprehensive Plan. 
1. 	None. 
2.8.17.4 Special Provisions 
1. 	
The Woodland Corridor Development Control Standards, The Woodland Drive Conceptual Streetscape Plan and the Woodland Drive Corridor Plan, contained within the Woodland Corridor Plan adopted by the City Council on June 19, 1995, shall serve as a guide to the Department and Commission in the review of development plans submitted pursuant to Chapter 3, provided, however that additional documentation may be required by the Department to demonstrate compliance with this Section. 

2. 	
No subdivision or re-subdivision of a lot that results in a lot fronting on a right-of-way of less than thirty (30’) feet in width shall be permitted. 

3. 	
When new construction or additions are made to an existing structure, the structure or addition may be located on the lot with setbacks the same as other similar residential or commercial structures on parcels within five-hundred feet (500’). 

4. 	
The minimum frontage for corner lots may be reduced to the minimum lot frontage criteria when access is restricted along the street frontage of the lot.14 


2.8.17.5 Lot Criteria 
1. 	
Minimum Lot Frontage – 100’; EXCEPTION: Corner Lots, Minimum Frontage – 150’ each street frontage. 6/8 

2. 	
Minimum Lot Area – 21,780 S.F. 

3. 	
Minimum Front Yard Setback – 30’ 

4. 	
Minimum Side Yard Setback – 10’ 

5. 	
Minimum Rear Yard Setback – 20’; 50’ if abutting any residential use 

6. 	
Maximum Building Height – 45’ 

7. 	
Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio (ISR) Nursing Homes & Congregate Care Facilities – .75; all other uses – .60 


NOTE: For the purposes of this ordinance abutting shall address each lot line to determine applicable setbacks for each yard. 
2.8.17.6 Signs, WCD Zone Additional information and standards for signs as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 7. 
Table 2.62 WCD Signs 
USE  ALLOWED TYPES  MAXIMUM NUMBER  MAXIMUM SIGN AREA  MAXIMUM HEIGHT  LOCATION REQUIREMENTS  LIGHTING ALLOWED  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS  
Assembly Use  Wall, Monument Pole Roof7  Mon. 1 Pole 1  Wall 15% Mon. 50 s.f. Pole 50 s.f. Roof 15%7  Mon. 16’ Pole 20’  Mon. – 10’ off paved surface Pole – 20’ off paved surface  Yes  Wall sign 15% or 32s.f., whichever is greater  
Commercial Use  Wall, Monument Pole Roof7  Mon. 1 Pole 1  Wall 15% Mon. 50 s.f. Pole 50 s.f. Roof 15%7  Mon. 16’ Pole 20’  Mon. – 10’ off paved surface Pole – 20’ off paved surface  Yes  Wall sign 15% or 32s.f., whichever is greater  
Institutional Use  Wall, Monument Pole Roof7  Mon. 1/street Pole 1/street  Wall 15%; Mon. 100 s.f. Pole 100 s.f. Roof 15%7  Mon. 16’ Pole 35’  Mon. – 10’ off paved surface Pole – 20’ off paved surface  Yes  Wall sign 15% or 32s.f., whichever is greater  
Single Family Attached, Two Family, Multi Family Identification11  Monument  2/entrance  32 s.f.  15’  To be approved by Engineering Department  External  Walls and fences permitted as part of overall sign design4  
Residential Use  Wall, Monument Pole  Wall 1 Mon. 1 Pole 1  Wall 5%; Mon. 4 s.f. Pole 4 s.f.  Mon. 4’ Pole 4’  10’ off paved surface  External  One wall only  
USE GROUPS  
Assembly Uses: Churches, Medical educational facility. Commercial Uses: Adult care, Assisted Living, Childcare centers, Emergency services, Financial Institutions, Offices, Professional services, Research Laboratory, retail. Institutional Uses: Hospital, Nursing home. Residential Uses: Community residence, family lodging facility, multi family, single family  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS  
1. Churches located on lots in excess of 20 acres may increase monument and pole sign size by a factor of two (2). 2. Multifamily identification signs, one (1) per entrance, containing the name of the development and date of construction. Sign face not to exceed thirty-two (32 s.f.) square feet. Structures such as fences and walls when part of the overall sign design are allowed. Maximum height shall be fifteen (15’) feet. Landscaping is required. 3. If use is a multi-tenant building (3 or more separate tenants)6 the development name must be placed on the sign. It may be a maximum of 25% of the sign face. This shall not be calculated in the maximum area for tenant signs. 4. If more than one Pole or Monument sign allowed, the size may be increased by 50% if only one sign is erected. 5. Hospitals may install one additional freestanding sign for each 500’ of street frontage. 6. Message boards may be illuminated but may only contain manually changeable copy. 7. When a business has frontage on both Woodland Drive and North Dixie Avenue (US 31W) one additional pole or monument sign is permitted. The maximum size and height of pole/monument sign along Woodland Drive frontage shall be 50 sf and 20 ft., the maximum size and height of pole/monument sign along North Dixie Avenue shall be 150 sf and 45 ft. 15 8. When a commercial use has frontage in excess of 400 feet on Woodland Drive one (1) additional pole or monument sign is permitted. The maximum size and height of the additional pole/monument sign along Woodland Drive shall be 100 s.f. in sign area and 35 feet in height.17  
Table 2.63 WCD Parking 


2.8.17.7 Parking, WCD Zone Additional information and standards for parking as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 6. 
PARKING STANDARDS  
Land Use  Parking Required  Notes  
Adult day care  1 space/employee + 1 space/500 s.f.  Provide onsite area for safe drop off & pick up, wholly on site  
Assisted Living  .5 spaces/D. U.  Additionally, 1 space for each employee  

107 

Land Use  Parking Required  Notes  
Childcare  1 space/employee + 1 space/400 s.f.  Provide onsite area for safe drop off & pick up, wholly on site  
Clinic, medical/dental  1 space/400 s.f.  
Community Residence  1 space/3 occupants  
Congregate Care  .75 spaces/D. U.  
Financial Institutions  1 space/200 s.f.  
Home Occupation  N/A  No on street parking allowed for commercial vehicles owned by the use  
Hospital  1 space/3 beds + 1 space/employee  Based on maximum employees on a shift, including medical staff. Minimum of 5 spaces  
Nursing home, Orphanage, Rehabilitation facility  1 space/3 beds + 1 space/employee  Based on maximum employees on a shift, including medical staff. Minimum of 5 spaces  
Office, general  1 space/250 s.f.  Financial, Legal, Medical, Professional, Veterinarian, etc.3  
Pharmacy  1 space/400 s.f.  
Residential, Multi family  2 spaces/D. U.  1 additional space for each 4 D.U.  
Residential, Single family  2 spaces/D. U.  
Residential, Two family  2 spaces/D. U.  
Restaurant  1 space/75 s.f  
Retail, specialty  1 space/600 s.f.  Florist, Flea Market, Mail order, Tobacco  
Research laboratory  1 space/employee + 5 visitor spaces  
Table 2.64 WCD Perimeter Landscape Buffer Area3 


2.8.17.8 Landscaping, WCD Zone Additional information and standards for Vehicular Use Area (VUA) Landscaping as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 5. 
Landscape Buffer Area Category  Width Options (In Feet)  Planting Density Multiplier  
10’  1.5  
Category B  15’  1.33  
20’  1  
Table 2.65 WCD Buffering Requirements 



Landscape  Buffering Use Classification  
Buffer Area Category  Buffered Use  Buffering Use  
Category B  R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6  C-1, C-2, WCD  

Table 2.66 Perimeter Planting Density *(OFT) Or Fraction Thereof 

Planting Density Requirement Categories  
A  B  C  D  
2 Large Trees or 1 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 3’ screening/80’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  2 Large Trees or 1 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 4’ screening/60’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  3 Large Trees or 2 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 5’ screening/60’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  3 Large Trees or 2 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 6’ screening/60’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  

2.8.18 MAZ Municipal Airport Zone 	The Municipal Airport Zone (MAZ) is created for the purpose of assuring that property comprising airfields continue to be used in a manner compatible with general aviation and aircraft operations. The MAZ is intended to provide for uses associated with the operation of the airport and uses that might benefit from their proximity to the airport. This district will regulate the height of structures and objects, either natural or manmade, in order to protect the lives of airport users and to protect the property and occupants of land in its vicinity. 
2.8.18.1 Principal Uses Permitted uses include, but are not limited to the following types of activities provided they comply with the development standards found herein. Other uses substantially similar to those listed herein may also be deemed permitted, in light of the above described purposes of this zoning district and the Comprehensive Plan. 
Assembly Uses: 
1. 	
Aerospace and aviation related training facilities and schools. 

2. 	
Open Space. 

3. 	
Public and semi-public buildings, structures, and uses essential to the welfare of the City of Elizabethtown such as fire stations, police stations, water storage facilities and similar uses. 


Commercial Uses: 
1. 	
Air ambulance facilities. 

2. 	
Aircraft sales, repair, rebuild, rental, maintenance service and storage and facilities for or important for the operation of such businesses. 

3. 	
Airport passenger terminal, with associated ticket sales, restaurant/lounge and food services and other incidental services when associated with said terminal facility. 

4. 	
Automobile rental/leasing agencies. 

5. 	
Automotive parts and supply distributors. 

6. 	
Aviation fuel, oil and other fluids sales. 

7. 	
Aviation research and testing laboratories. 

8. 	
Call Center or data processing center.11 

9. 	
Cemetery. 

10. 
Commercial printing facilities. 

11. 
Fixed base operations providing aviation and aircraft services to the public. 

12. 
Hangers intended for the storage of aircraft. 

13. 
Landscape and horticultural services. 

14. 
Laundry cleaning and garment services. 

15. 
Machinery equipment sales/rental and supply. 

16. 
Sales of Agricultural supplies or products. 

17. 	
Transportation terminals, including bus terminals, rail terminals, trucking terminals, commuter van, taxi and limousine services and incidental parking garages and lots. 

18. 
Wholesale bakeries. 

19. 
Wholesale florists. 

20. 
Wholesale lawn and garden supply. 

21. 
Wholesale lumber and construction materials. 

22. 
Wholesale plumbing/heating/electrical supply. 

23. 	
Runways, taxiways, navigational equipment, aircraft parking areas and other facilities and features normally associated with a general aviation airport. 

24. 	
Triage center used to provide first aid and/or medical stabilization necessary prior to air evacuation. 


Industrial Uses: 
1. 	
Air cargo/freight terminals, operations and activities. 

2. 	
Industrial activities. 

3. 	
Mail order facilities. 

4. 	
Newspaper, periodical publishing and printing. 

5. 	
Warehousing and storage facilities. 


Residential Uses: 
1. 	
Agricultural use. 

2. 	
Single family detached residence. 11 


109 

2.8.18.2 Accessory Uses Uses and structures which are customarily accessory, clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted uses. 
Commercial Uses: 
1. 	Parking areas. 
2.8.18.3 Conditional Uses Uses permitted only with Board approval after consideration of the intent and purpose of these regulations and when appropriate measures are taken to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses and goals of the Comprehensive Plan. 
Commercial Uses: 
1. 	
Radio, television, communication and data transmission services and facilities including 
antennae and satellite dishes. 


2. 	
Service retail businesses. 


2.8.18.4 Special Provisions 
1. 	
All developments in the MAZ shall comply with the Federal Air Regulations Part 77 “Objects Affecting Navigable Airspace” and Federal Aviation Administration Advisory Circular 150/5300­13 “Airport Design”, or subsequently adopted regulation. 

2. 	
All developments in the MAZ shall comply with the regulations of the Kentucky Airport Zoning Commission and KRS 183. 

3. 	
When new construction or additions are made to an existing structure, the structure or addition may be located on the lot with setbacks the same as other similar structures on parcels within one thousand feet (1000’). 

4. 	
The minimum frontage for corner lots may be reduced to the minimum lot frontage criteria when access is restricted along the street frontage of the lot.14 


2.8.18.5 Lot Criteria 
1. 	
Minimum Lot Frontage – 100’; EXCEPTION: Corner Lots, Minimum Frontage – 200’ each street frontage. 6/8 

2. 	
Minimum Front Yard Setback – 75’ when abutting property zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or R-6; 50’ when abutting all other zones. 

3. 	
Minimum Side Yard Setback –30’ when abutting property zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or R-6; 20’ when abutting all other zones. 

4. 	
Minimum Rear Yard Setback – 50’ when abutting property zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or R-6; 20’ when abutting all other zones. 

5. 	
Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio (ISR) – .85 


6. Maximum Building Height – 75’ NOTE: For the purposes of this ordinance abutting shall address each lot line to determine applicable setbacks for each yard. 
2.8.18.6 Prohibited Uses 
1. 	
Any use that would encourage the concentration of bird populations. 

2. 	
Campgrounds. 

3. 	
Churches and related facilities and buildings. 

4. 	
Hospitals. 

5. 	
Schools for academic instruction. 

6. 	
Stadiums. 

7. 	
Sanitary landfill. 

8. 	
Theaters, amphitheaters. 


2.8.18.7 	Signs, MAZ Zone Additional information and standards for signs as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 7. 
Table 2.67 MAZ Signs 

USE  ALLOWED TYPES  MAXIMUM NUMBER  MAXIMUM SIGN AREA  MAXIMUM HEIGHT  LOCATION REQUIREMENTS  LIGHTING ALLOWED  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS  
Assembly Use  Wall, Monument Pole Roof7  Mon. 1/street Pole 1/street  Wall 15% Mon. 150 s.f. Pole 150 s.f. Roof 15%7  Mon. 16’ Pole 25’  Mon. – 10’ off paved surface Pole – 20’ off paved surface  Yes  Wall sign 15% or 32s.f., whichever is greater  
Commercial Use  Wall, Monument Pole Roof7  Mon. 1/street, Pole 1/street  Wall 15% Mon. 150 s.f. Pole 150 s.f. Roof 15%7  Mon. 16’ Pole 45’  Mon. – 10’ off paved surface Pole – 20’ off paved surface  Yes  Wall sign 15% or 32s.f., whichever is greater  
Industrial Use  Wall, Monument Pole Roof7  Mon. 1 Pole 1/street  Wall 5% Mon. 150 s.f. Pole 150 s.f. Roof 15%7  Mon. 16’ Pole 25’  Mon. – 10’ off paved surface Pole – 20’ off paved surface  Yes  Wall sign 15% or 32s.f., whichever is greater  
Residential Use  Wall, Monument Pole  Wall 1 Mon. 1 Pole 1  Wall 5%; Mon. 4 s.f. Pole 4 s.f.  Mon. 4’ Pole 4’  10’ off paved surface  External  One wall only  
USE GROUPS  
Assembly Uses: Open space, Schools, Public buildings. Commercial Uses: Any use not listed as Assembly, Industrial or Residential Industrial Uses: Air Terminals, Industrial activity, Mail order, Printing, Warehousing Residential Uses: Single family  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS  
1. If more than one Pole or Monument sign allowed, the size may be increased by 50% if only one sign is erected. 2. If use is a multi-tenant building (3 or more separate tenants)6 the development name must be placed on the sign. It may be a maximum of 25% of the sign face. This shall not be calculated in the maximum area for tenant signs.  
Table 2.68 MAZ Parking 


2.8.18.8 Parking, MAZ Zone Additional information and standards for parking as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 6. 
PARKING STANDARDS  
Land Use  Parking Required  Notes  
Aerospace training facility  1 space/ 3 seats in each classroom  
Agricultural Use  1 space/employee  
Air Ambulance Facility  1 space/employee  
Air Cargo, Freight Terminal  1 space/employee  
Aircraft sales, repair  1 space/1000 s.f.  
Automobile rental  1 space/600 s.f.  Lot for rental vehicles not required to be striped  
Automotive parts distributor  1 space/600 s.f  
Aviation fuel sales  1 space/employee  
Aviation testing, research  1 space/employee  
Cemetery  1 space/employee  1 space/each vehicle owned by the facility  
Commercial printing  1 space/employee  
Fixed base operator  1 space/employee  Minimum of 5 spaces required.  
Hangers, aircraft  1 space/hanger  
Landscape nursery  1 space/employee  
Laundry  1 space/600 s.f.  
Machinery sales  1 space/600 s.f.  Display space not required to be striped.  
Mail order facility  1 space/employee  On a maximum shift  

111 

Land Use  Parking Required  Notes  
Newspaper printing, etc.  1 space/400 s.f.  
Public buildings  1 space/250 s.f.  When more than one building on a lot, 1/400 s.f.  
Residential, single family  2 spaces/unit  
Terminal  1 space/250 s.f.  Air, Bus, Rail, Truck  
Warehouse  1 space/3,000 s.f.  Any office area calculated at 1 space/500 s.f.  
Wholesale Business  1 space/600 s.f.  

2.8.18.9 Landscaping, MAZ Zone Additional information and standards for Vehicular Use Area (VUA) Landscaping as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 5. 
Table 2.69 MAZ Perimeter Landscape Buffer Area3 
Landscape Buffer Area Category  Width Options (In Feet)  Planting Density Multiplier  
30’  1.5  
Category D  40’  1.33  
50’  1  
Table 2.70 MAZ Buffering Requirements 



Landscape Buffer  Buffering Use Classification  
Area Category  Buffered Use  Buffering Use  
Category D  R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-5, WCD  I-1, I-2, MAZ  

Table 2.71 Perimeter Planting Density *(OFT) Or Fraction Thereof 

Planting Density Requirement Categories  
A  B  C  D  
2 Large Trees or 1 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 3’ screening/80’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  2 Large Trees or 1 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 4’ screening/60’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  3 Large Trees or 2 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 5’ screening/60’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  3 Large Trees or 2 Medium & 2 Small Trees + 6’ screening/60’ of linear boundary (OFT)*  

2.8.19 AGB Agri-Business Zone The Agri-business zone is created for the purpose of encouraging and allowing agricultural business uses to develop in a rural setting within the corporate limits. This zone is intended to allow for a mix of uses, both residential and commercial, that will assure that small family agricultural businesses thrive in the community. 15 
2.8.19.1 Principal Uses Uses substantially similar to those listed herein shall also be permitted, in light of the purposes of this zoning district and the Comprehensive Plan. 
Assembly Uses: 
1. 	Churches and associated facilities. 
Commercial Uses: 
1. 	
Agricultural uses excluding open or enclosed commercial feedlot operations. 

2. 	
Bed and breakfast. 

3. 	
Communications towers/poles or collocations of equipment for the same, when erected by or on property owned by a public entity or public utility. 

4. 	
Distilleries 

5. 	
Facilities, indoor and outdoor, used for wedding receptions and events. 

6. 	
Golf course. 

7. 	
Government operated parks. 

8. 	
Retail sales of agricultural products. 

9. 	
Outdoor amphitheater 

10. 
Wineries. 


Residential Uses: 
1. 	Single family detached residences. 
2.8.19.2 Accessory Uses Uses and structures which are customarily accessory, clearly incidental and subordinate to principal uses. 
Residential Uses: 
1. 	
Childcare centers, in home. Centers shall comply with all requirements as regulated by the Commonwealth of Kentucky, Department of Families and Children. 

2. 	
Home Occupations. 

3. 	
Keeping of not more than two (2) roomers or boarders without kitchen facilities. 

4. 	
Living quarters with cooking facilities and not rented for guests and employees of the premises. 

5. 	
Private garages, private storage sheds and private parking areas. 

6. 	
Private swimming pools and tennis courts, private non-commercial parks and open spaces. 


Commercial Uses: 
1. Catering kitchens 
2.8.19.3 Conditional Uses Uses permitted only with Board approval after consideration of the intent and purpose of these regulations and consideration of the guidelines in the Comprehensive Plan. 
Commercial Uses: 
1. 	
Outdoor commercial recreation facilities such as adventure tourism, zoos, riding stables, fishing lakes, swimming pools, tennis courts and campgrounds. 

2. 	
Resort Hotels and Restaurants. 


2.8.19.4 Special Provisions 
1. 	
More than one (1) principal structure per lot or parcel of land shall be permitted. 

2. 	
Structures are encouraged to place the front façade of the building facing the primary street frontage. 

3. 	
Structures shall not be subject to the commercial guideline provisions of this ordinance but all structures associated with a single property are encouraged to contain similar design features and should utilize designs compatible with their rural setting. 



2.8.190.5 Lot Criteria 
1. 	Minimum Lot Frontage – 150’; EXCEPTION: Corner Lots, Minimum Frontage – 175’ each street frontage. 
113 

2. 
Minimum Lot Area – 217,800 S.F. 

3. 
Minimum Front Yard Setback – 100’ 

4. 
Minimum Side Yard Setback – 50’ 

5. 
Minimum Rear Yard Setback – 50’ 

6. 
Maximum Building Height, Residential – 35’ 


7. Maximum Building Height, Commercial & Assembly – 75’ NOTE: For the purposes of this ordinance abutting shall address each lot line to determine applicable lot frontage, lot area and setbacks for each yard. 
2.8.19.6 Signs, AGB Zone Additional information and standards for signs as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 7. 
Table 2.72 AGB Signs 

USE  ALLOWED TYPES  MAXIMUM NUMBER  MAXIMUM SIGN AREA  MAXIMUM HEIGHT  LOCATION REQUIREMENTS  LIGHTING ALLOWED  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS  
Assembly Use  Wall, Monument Pole  Wall 1 Mon. 1/street Pole 1/street  Wall 15% Mon. 100 s.f. Pole 50 s.f.  Mon. 15’ Pole 15’  10’ off paved surface  Yes  
Commercial Use  Wall, Monument Pole  Wall 1 Mon. 1 Pole 1  Wall 15% Mon. 100 s.f. Pole 50 s.f.  Mon. 15’ Pole 15’  10’ off paved surface  Yes  
Residential Use  Wall, Monument Pole  Wall 1 Mon. 1 Pole 1  Wall 5%; Mon. 4 s.f. Pole 4 s.f.  Mon. 4’ Pole 4’  10’ off paved surface  External  W.M., one wall only  
USE GROUPS  
Assembly Uses: Churches Commercial Uses: Agricultural Uses, Bed & Breakfast, Distilleries, Golf Course, Outdoor Commercial, Parks, Resort Hotel, Wineries Residential Uses: Child care, Home Occupation, Keeping of roomers, Living quarters, Private garages, private pools, Residential care facility, Single family  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS  
1. Churches located on lots in excess of 20 acres may increase monument and pole sign size by a factor of two. 2. Message boards may be illuminated but may only contain manually changeable copy, when located along local or residential collector streets.  

2.8.19.7 Parking AGB Zone Additional information and standards for parking as well as specific requirements are found in Chapter 6. 
Table 2.73 AGB Parking 
PARKING STANDARDS  
Land Use  Parking Required  Notes  
Agricultural Use  1 space/employee  
Bed & Breakfast  1 space/room rented  
Childcare, In home  N/A  Provide onsite area for drop off & pick up wholly on site  
Church  1 space/3 seats  Based on seating in main sanctuary, min. of 5 spaces  
Distilleries & wineries  1 space/employee  On a maximum shift  
Events facility  1 spaces/200 sf  
Hotels  1 spaces/room  
Outdoor Amphitheater  1 space/2 seats  May be gravel or other approved surface  
Outdoor Commercial  5 spaces + 1/employee  May be gravel or other approved surface  
Residential care facility  1 space/3 beds  
Retail  1/400 s.f.  

2.8.2015 FDH Future Development Holding In certain situations, such as proposed annexations, or areas currently within the city limits not fully served by adequate infrastructure, including but not limited to potable water, adequate fire protection, public sanitary sewer or streets of insufficient design or construction to allow for the safe movement of vehicular traffic, the Future Development Holding (FDH) zone is created to be implemented as an interim zone until such time as the above noted deficiencies have been addressed. 
Except for those uses or structures existing at the time of the classification of the property as FDH, no new development may occur which would adversely impact any public facility or utility. Existing structures are allowed to expand. Accessory structures, such as barns, private garages for personal automobiles, swimming pools, private storage buildings, gazebos, and other similar structures are permitted only if they are accessory to an existing principal use. 
115 

OVERZONES 
2.9.1 IHSB Interstate Highway Service and Business Over Zone This over zone is intended to provide additional on-premises business identification signage which may be visible to motorists traveling Interstate-65 such that potential customers have adequate time to exit the interstate in a safe manner. These provisions are intended for those businesses which are located near the interstate primarily for the purpose of providing goods and services to interstate motorists. Additionally, it is believed that in attracting interstate motorists to goods and services near interstate highways, there may be additional business activity generated for the remainder of business establishments in the City of Elizabethtown. 
The Interstate Highway Service Business Over zone shall be located on the official Zoning Map. When desired, all permitted business uses which qualify for signage as regulated by Chapter 7 (Table 7.3) and are located within the over zone as measured, 2,600 feet from the intersection of the centerline of Interstate-65 and U. S. 62, and ending at the railroad right-of-way to the West; and measured 1,800 feet from the intersection of the centerline of Interstate-65 and U. S. 31W and U. S. 61; and measured 1,500 feet from the intersection of the centerline of Western Kentucky Parkway (KY 9001) and Ring Road(KY 3005), may apply for this additional signage as required in Chapter 7 (Table 7.3).12 
2.9.2 FO Floodplain Over Zone The Floodplain (FO) Over zone is designed to protect certain areas which have been designated as being susceptible to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, destruction or disruption of commercial and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
The designation of these areas and the regulations imposed on this over zone are designed to: 
• 	
Protect human life and health; 

• 	
Provide for public awareness of the flooding potential; 

• 	
Minimize public and private property damage; 

• 	
Protect individuals from buying lands and structures which are unsuited for intended purposes because of flood hazards; 

• 	
Minimize surface and ground water pollution and erosion of the floodplain soils which will adversely affect human, animal or plant life; 

• 	
Minimize the expenditure of money for costly flood control projects; 

• 	
Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water, natural gas and sanitary sewer lines, mains and facilities; electric, telephone and cable television lines and facilities; streets and bridges; and storm sewer facilities and structures. 


2.9.2.1 Establishment of Floodplain Over Zone The boundaries of the Floodplain Over zone shall be determined by scientific and engineering studies prepared by the Federal Insurance Administration employing customarily accepted scientific and engineering practices of flood protection and the results thereof shall be located on the official Zoning Map. The Floodplain Over zone includes all areas designated as special flood hazard areas on the National Flood Insurance Program Flood Boundaries and Floodway Map, City of Elizabethtown, Kentucky, dated August 16, 2007, or an approved subsequent amendment to that map. Where interpretation is needed in order to allow a property owner, surveyor or other individual to locate the exact boundaries of the Floodplain Over zone as shown on the official Zoning Map, the City’s Director of Stormwater Management (Floodplain Administrator) shall initially make the interpretation based on flood profile information. 
Where Floodplain Over zone areas are designated, regulations for these areas shall be in addition to the regular zoning district requirements. The floodplain district shall overlay regular zoning districts. The regulations of these areas shall be established by the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance as adopted by the City Council. 
2.9.2.2 Specific Standards In all areas of special flood hazard where an applicant wishes to establish a permitted use, he/she must conform to the following requirements when relevant: 
117 

1. 	
All encroachment, including fill, new construction and substantial improvements are prohibited unless permitted by the City’s Department of Storm water Management and other appropriate agency having jurisdiction. 

2. 	
Permits for any new construction or substantial improvement for Residential Construction shall be obtained from the City’s Director of Storm water Management (Floodplain Administrator) and shall comply with all standards, regulations and requirements, including but not limited to, any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. 

3. 	
Permits for any new construction or substantial improvement for Non Residential Construction shall be obtained from the City’s Director of Storm water Management (Floodplain Administrator) and shall comply with all standards, regulations and requirements, including but not limited to, any non-residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, flood proofed below an elevation one (1) above the base flood elevation and elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation or have compliance certified as specified in the City Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance. 


2.9.3 FLO Freeman Lake Over Zone The Freeman Lake (FLO) Over zone is designed to protect certain areas in and around Freeman Lake which have been designated as being susceptible to inundation based on the Probable Maximum Precipitation (PMP). 
The designation of these areas and the regulations imposed in this over zone are designed for the purpose of: 
• 	
Protecting human life and health; 

• 	
Minimizing public and private property damage; 

• 	
Protecting individuals from developing lands and structures which are unsuited for intended purposes because of flood hazards 

• 	
Minimizing surface and ground water pollution; 

• 	
Controlling development, such as fill, dumping, storage of materials, structures and buildings which will minimize the effectiveness of public flood control efforts by reducing the capacity of the flood control structure at Freeman Lake; 

• 	
Providing for public awareness of the flooding potential. 


These goals will be accomplished by: 
• 	
Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property which result in damaging increases in flood heights; 

• 	
Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 

• 	
Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers; 

• 	
Controlling filling, grading, dredging or other activity which may increase erosion or flood damage; 

• 	
Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 


The boundaries of the Freeman Lake Over zone shall be determined by scientific and engineering studies prepared by the City of Elizabethtown employing customarily accepted scientific and engineering practices of flood protection and climatology with the results thereof being indicated on the official Zoning Map. The boundaries of the FLO for construction or use restrictions set forth within the Ordinance shall be delineated by the elevation determined by the scientific and engineering practices for flood hazards based on the PMP. Where interpretation is needed in order to allow a property owner, surveyor or other individual to locate the exact boundaries of the FLO as shown on the official Zoning Map, the Director of the Department and the City’s Director of Storm water Management (Floodplain Administrator) shall make the interpretation based on flood profile information contained within the Hydrologic Study – PMP Flood Limit Determinations Freeman Lake Dam Elizabethtown, Kentucky, dated July 2000, prepared by Fuller, Mossbarger, Scott & May, Inc. 
2.9.3.1 Establishment of Freeman Lake (FLO) Over Zone The over zone established by this Ordinance shall include all areas designated as possible flooding areas based on the PMP and flood routing analysis prepared for the City of Elizabethtown and detailed in the Hydrologic Study 
– PMP Flood Limit Determinations Freeman Lake Dam, Elizabethtown, Kentucky, dated July 2000, prepared by Fuller, Mossbarger, Scott & May, Inc. 
Where Freeman Lake (FLO) Over Zone areas are designated, regulations for these areas shall be in addition to the regular zoning district requirements. The Freeman Lake (FL) Over Zone district shall overlay regular zoning districts. 
2.9.3.1.1 Specific Standards In all areas of the Freeman Lake (FLO) Over Zone where an applicant wishes to undertake activity associated with a permitted use, he/she must conform to the following requirements when relevant: 
1. 	
Prior to any encroachment, such as filling, grading or dredging, a permit shall be obtained from the City’s Department of Storm water Management based on the Hydrologic Study – PMP Flood Limit Determinations Freeman Lake Dam, Elizabethtown, Kentucky, dated July 2000, prepared by Fuller, Mossbarger, Scott & May, Inc. 

2. 	
Residential Construction – New construction or substantial improvements of any residential structure for any property within the over zone shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one (1) foot above the base elevation as determined by the Hydrologic Study – PMP Flood Limit Determinations Freeman Lake Dam, Elizabethtown, Kentucky, dated July 2000, prepared by Fuller, Mossbarger, Scott & May, Inc. This requirement shall not apply to structures and/or buildings that are not occupied as dwelling/living space, including, but not limited to, garages, decks, accessory storage buildings, play equipment and swimming pools. 


2.9.4 National Register Historical District Over Zone This zone is defined as follows: All properties within an area bounded by North Mulberry Street, Plum Alley, Quince Alley and Strawberry Alley (shown on Figure 2.0). This zone is intended to provide additional protections for these properties and to recognize their importance to the historical character of Elizabethtown. 5 

Figure 2.0 
2.9.5 Commercial Transition Overzone The Commercial Transition Overzone is designed to provide for flexibility in areas of the community determined to be in transition from predominantly residential uses and developed commercial uses to redeveloped or more intense commercial uses. The Commercial Transition Overzone is created to meet the goals of the Comprehensive Plan, including but not limited to redevelopment or reuse of declining residential and commercial areas and the recognition that transitional areas contain land uses that are potentially more intense and dense. Because some areas to which these goals apply are comprised of older, smaller and narrower lots, certain waivers may be commonly required to meet the goals of the Comprehensive Plan. 
119 

2.9.5.1 	Waivers Parcels within a designated commercial transition zone may apply for waivers from the following requirements when circumstances warrant such waivers. These areas are: 
1. 	
Minimum lot frontages. 

2. 	
Parking reduction in excess of 50% of the required parking spaces. 

3. 	
Parking design requirements relating to setbacks from property lines. 

4. 	
Entrance standards for distance and locations. 

5. 	
Landscaping requirements. Some landscaping must be installed as lot and parking configurations allow. 


2.9.5.2 	Process A development plan and/or subdivision plat, as applicable, and a waiver application must be submitted for review to the Planning Commission for consideration of approval for all such waivers.10/11/12 
2.9.5.3 	Waiver Limitation Waivers are applicable to the specific development and use requested and will not run with the land, exception being lot frontage waivers granted for subdivisions, and are not transferable to other uses or other lots.12 
2.10 PROHIBITED USES 
1. 	
Enclosed commercial livestock, poultry or similar feeding operations. 

2. 	
Hazardous waste facility for the purpose of acceptance, storage, handling and transfer of hazardous or toxic wastes, when said acceptance, storage, handling and transfer are the primary use of the property. This shall not include businesses and industries which as a byproduct of their business or manufacturing process create a hazardous or toxic substance. 

3. 	
Landfill. 

4. 	
Mining, either underground or open pit. 

5. 	
Recreational vehicle, camper, travel trailer, mobile home, house trailer or residential manufactured housing unit as an office or principal structure/use or accessory structure/use in any Residential, Commercial or Industrial Zone, with the following exceptions: 11 

• 	
Office trailers used as a temporary construction office to be removed at the completion of the construction activity and prior to the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy. 11 

• 	
Office trailers used as temporary real estate sales office, for the sale of lots in a subdivision, to be removed when all lots are sold. 11 

• 	
Mobile homes or trailers located in approved mobile home parks in mobile home subdivisions. 

• 	
Type 1 Manufactured housing units as defined by this ordinance may be placed in any residential zone. 

• 	
Units designed & constructed as offices in an Industrial zone. 



6. 	
Salvage yards. 


CHAPTER 3 
DEVELOPMENT PLANS 

3.0 INTENT AND PURPOSE 
This article establishes and defines development plans which may be utilized for a wide variety of planning related procedures. This article outlines the procedure for submission and content of all development plans required by these regulations unless another procedure or different contents are specified elsewhere. 
The purpose in requiring submission of a development plan is to assure compliance with the standards and requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and other City ordinances for all construction, with the intent of implementing the community’s Comprehensive Plan and promoting the public health, safety, morals and general welfare through planned development. It is the intent of the development plan submission to provide as much information to all city departments and public agencies for their reviews, in an effort to streamline the approval process for developers and owners. 

3.1 DEVELOPMENT PLAN REQUIRED 
Development Plans shall be required as follows: 
1. 	
For map amendment requests. Exception: If large tracts are involved a preliminary plat may be substituted; 11 

2. 	
For new construction of a church, school, commercial, institutional or industrial building; 11 

3. 	
For the enlargement, addition, exterior alteration or extension of a church, school, commercial, institutional or industrial building; 11 

4. 	
For new construction of multifamily structures of three (3) or more dwelling units on a single lot. This includes the conversion or alteration or addition to existing structures into multifamily units of three (3) or more. 

5. 	
When there is to be more than one (1) principal structure on a lot; 

6. 	
For conditional use permits; 

7. 	
For variances, except when for a single family or two family use; 

8. 	
For the conversion of a residential structure to a commercial or industrial use or for a change in use of a commercial or industrial structure when parking, perimeter landscape screening or other similar improvements are required or changed. 

9. 	
For installation of parking areas of 5 or more spaces. 11 

10. 	
For developments requiring review under the Commercial Design Guidelines found in Chapter 4. 11 

11. 	
EXCEPTION: For temporary structures, such as tents and fireworks tents, that are erected for less than six (6) months, however, a site sketch with sufficient information to assure that vehicular and pedestrian access are properly maintained may be required by the Department to obtain the required construction permit.14 



3.2 DEVELOPMENT PLAN PROCEDURES 
To formally request action on the required development plan, the applicant shall file a completed application form, a filing fee, and two (2) copies of the plan. After departmental or Commission review, the applicant shall then provide an original Mylar and four (4) copies of the final plan, signed by the applicant, for full approval. The procedure for development plans differs based upon the type of plan. 
3.2.1 Pre-application Conference Required 
When a development plan is required and meets any of the following thresholds a pre-application conference shall be required. They are: 
1. 	
Multifamily developments containing in excess of twenty-four (24) units. 

2. 	
Commercial developments requiring commercial design guideline review or when a building exceeds 15,000 square feet in floor area. 11 

3. 	
Industrial developments, when a building or building addition exceeds 15,000 square feet.14 

4. 	
Shopping center developments. 


The Department shall arrange the conference which shall be held not less than five (5) working days nor greater than three (3) months prior to the filing date. The Department shall keep a 
121 

record of the conference date and include the information in the record of the development plan application. The Department shall not accept an application for a development plan meeting the above criteria for which a pre-application conference has not been held. 
3.2.2 Development Plans With Map Amendment Requests Review The Department and concerned agencies shall meet to review the development plan for the purpose of resolving all differences and to make recommendations to the Planning Commission. These meetings shall be open to the applicant. Action At the public hearing for the map amendment request, the Commission shall act in the following form: Approval — The Commission may approve the development plan as submitted. In cases where the map amendment request is later disapproved by the City Council, this action is automatically disapproval. Approval with Conditions — The Commission may approve the development plan with conditions and require amendments to the plan and/or completion of all conditions, for either Commission or Department approval, before full approval is granted. Postponement — The Commission may postpone its decision but must approve or disapprove the plan no later than 30 days from City Council action on the map amendment request. Disapproval — The Commission may disapprove the development plan and shall state in writing its reasons for disapproval. To be reconsidered, a new development plan shall be submitted to the Department, and must be approved or disapproved by the Commission within 60 days of resubmission to the Department. 
3.2.3 All Other Development Plans Review The Department and concerned agencies shall meet to review the development plan for the purpose of resolving all differences. These meetings shall be open to the applicant. Action The Department or Commission when required by this ordinance15 shall act within 30 days of submission in the following form: Approval — The Department or Commission15 may approve the development plan as submitted. Approval with Conditions — The Department or Commission15 may approve the development plan with conditions and require amendment to the plan and/or completion of all conditions before granting full approval. Resubmission — The Department may review the plan and submit review comments to the owner and/or owner’s agent listing items that must be provided, corrected or completed for additional review before full approval. Disapproval — The Department or Commission15 may disapprove the development plan and shall state in writing, its reasons for disapproval. To be reconsidered, a new development plan shall be submitted to the Department, and must be approved or disapproved within 30 days of submission to the Department. 


3.3 CERTIFICATION OF APPROVAL 
Within two (2) months of approval or within six (6) months of an approval with conditions15, unless a time extension has been granted previous to the expiration, the following shall be completed, or else the approval becomes null and void: 1) The developer shall fully comply with any conditions of approval placed on the plan and submit the completed original of the plan to the Department with signatures affixed15; and 2) A plan shall be certified by the Planning Commission Chairman or the Director of the Department if it is in conformance with all requirements. 

3.4 CONSTRUCTION COMMENCEMENT 
Any approved development plan shall become invalid if the authorized work has not commenced within one (1) year of plan approval. To be reconsidered, a new development plan shall be resubmitted to the Department for approval. 

3.5 APPROVAL OF DEVELOPMENT PLAN BEFORE BUILDING PERMIT 
When a development plan is required, no building permit shall be issued until a development plan is approved, and the plan is certified by the Planning Commission Chairman or the Director of the Department and is filed with the Department. The approved development plan shall limit and control the issuance of all building and occupancy permits, and restrict the construction, location and use of all land and structures to the conditions as set forth in the plan. 

3.6 COMPLETION OF SITE IMPROVEMENTS BEFORE OCCUPANCY 
Prior to the issuance of a final Certificate of Occupancy, all site improvements as shown on the development plan and as required in the Ordinance shall be completed. However, a temporary Certificate of Occupancy may be issued prior to the completion of all site improvements. 

3.7 CONTENT OF DEVELOPMENT PLAN 
Required plan information shall be as follows (unless certain items are waived by the Department): 
1. 	
All plans shall be prepared by using an engineering drafting scale and shall be a minimum of 18” x 24”. The plan’s scale shall be approved by the Department upon submission but typically should be 1” = 100’ or less. 

2. 	
The title block shall be placed on the bottom right corner of the sheet and shall contain the plan name, preceded by the words “Development Plan For (name of development)” with a written and graphic scale, north arrow, the name and address of the developer and plan preparer and the development address. 

3. 	
The boundary of the subject property, its record plat designation (if available) and a record plat name or owner’s name(s) of all adjoining property. 

4. 	
A vicinity sketch, oriented in the same direction as the design scheme. 

5. 	
Zoning classification of all abutting properties, including those across any street, railroad or other public way. 

6. 	
Topography with spot elevations adequate to determine parking lot grades and site grades relative to accessible routes to the building and positive drainage from the building. A separate site grading and drainage plan may be required for Storm water Department approval. 

7. 	
Building finished floor elevation(s). 

8. 	
Size, location, height, floor area, number of stories and use of all proposed and/or existing buildings and signs, including service structures. 

9. 	
Location, arrangement and dimensions of existing and proposed driveways, walkways, parking areas and arrangement of parking spaces. Including the location of all street entrances and access points and their respective grade and curb radius. 

10. 	
Location of any proposed or existing streets within or abutting the subject property. Including the existing elevation at the street in relation to the site. 

11. 	
Screening, landscape buffering, recreational and other open space areas including notes on landscaping material used. A separate landscape plan may be required by the Department or Commission. 

12. 	
Floodplains, storm water retention/detention areas and any other designated environmentally sensitive or geologic hazard areas. 

13. 	
A note relating to a review of the local F.I.R.M. determining the property’s inclusion in or exclusion from a special flood hazard area. 

14. 
Proposed and existing easements for utilities or other purposes. 

15. 	
Utility connections for items such as water, sanitary sewer, natural gas, and electric service, including the location of regulator stations, transformers, fire hydrants and fire protection and water meter vaults. 

16. 
Areas of existing trees including those located along fence rows and drainage areas. 

17. 	
Notes relative to any special restrictions on the property, such as, access, shared features (entrances, parking or drive lanes), record plat restrictions/covenants, maintenance of common areas and/or architectural building elements. 

18. 	
A statistical summary of all pertinent site data (this information should be listed in acreage, square footage and/or percentage of the site as applicable), including site area, zoning, use, building coverage and floor area, parking and open space areas, number of parking spaces, number of dwelling units, building height, landscape categories. 

19. 	
A Stormwater Department Certification as follows: “I do hereby certify that the appropriate stormwater plans for this development have been reviewed by this office and are approved.” __________________________ Stormwater Manager signature, ____________ Date 

20. 	
An Engineering Department Certification as follows: “I do hereby certify that the appropriate utility plans for this development have been reviewed by this office and are approved.” _______________________City Engineer signature, _______________ Date 

21. 	
An Owner Certification as follows: “I (we) do hereby certify that I am (we are) the only owner(s) of the property shown herein, do adopt this as my (our) development for the property and agree to complete all site improvements shown hereon in their entirety prior to receiving a Certificate of Occupancy to use and occupy the building(s) and property. I (we) further assure and understand that the building and premises, including all landscape materials shall be maintained in a proper manner.” _________________________ Owner signature _________________ Date 

22. 	
A Commission Certification to be signed by the Planning Commission Chair or the Director of the Department as follows: “I do hereby certify that this development plan meets the requirements set by the City of Elizabethtown and is approved”. ___________________ Commission Chair or Department Director signature, ______ Date 


123 


3.8 CONTENT OF CONCEPTUAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN 
Under certain conditions the Commission or Department may allow the submission of a conceptual development plan with a map amendment request. Required plan information shall be as follows (unless certain items are waived by the Department): 
1. 	
All plans shall be done by using an engineering drafting scale and shall be a minimum of 18” x 24”. The plan’s scale shall be approved by the Department upon submission but typically should be 1” = 100’ or less. 

2. 	
The title block shall be placed on the bottom right corner of the sheet and shall contain the plan name, preceded by the words “Conceptual Development Plan For (name of development)” with a written and graphic scale, north arrow, the name and address of the developer and plan preparer and the development address. 

3. 	
The boundary of the subject property, its record plat designation (if available) and a record plat name or owner’s name(s) of all adjoining property. 

4. 	
A vicinity sketch, oriented in the same direction as the design scheme. 

5. 	
Zoning classification of all abutting properties, including those across any street, railroad or public way. 

6. 	
Location and arrangement of existing and proposed driveways, general location of proposed walkways and parking areas. 

7. 	
Location of any proposed or existing streets within or abutting the subject property. 

8. 	
Size, location, floor area and use of proposed and/or existing buildings and signs. 

9. 	
General location of screening, landscape buffering, parking areas, recreational and other open space areas. 

10. 	
Floodplains, storm water retention/detention areas and any other designated environmentally sensitive or geologic hazard areas. 

11. 	
A note relating to a review of the local F.I.R.M. determining the property’s inclusion in or exclusion from a special flood hazard area. 

12. 
Proposed and existing easements for utilities or other purposes. 

13. 
Areas of existing trees including those located along fence rows and drainage areas. 

14. 	
A statistical summary of all pertinent site data (this information should be listed in acreage, square footage and/or percentage of the site as applicable), including site area, zoning, proposed use, maximum building coverage and floor area, parking and open space, and number of freestanding signs. 

15. 	
An Owner Certification as follows: “I (we) do hereby certify that I am (we are) the only owner(s) of the property shown herein and do adopt this as my (our) development concept for the property.” _______________ Owner signature ____ Date 

16. 	
A Commission Certification to be signed by the Planning Commission Chair as follows: “I do hereby certify that this conceptual development plan meets the requirements set by the City of Elizabethtown and is approved”. ___________________ Commission Chair or Department Director ________ Date 


Approval of the conceptual development plan allows the applicant to begin preparation of plats, utility and other improvement plans, and a final development plan. Before any building construction can commence, a final development plan shall be submitted and approved. 
3.8.1 Conceptual Development Plan – Expiration 
Any approved Conceptual Development Plan shall become invalid if no Preliminary Plat, Record 
Plat, Development Plan or Master Plan is filed within two (2) years of plan approval. To be 
reconsidered, a new Conceptual Development Plan shall be resubmitted for approval. 8 


3.9 AMENDMENTS TO DEVELOPMENT PLANS 
Amendments to approved development plans can be made only by the same procedure required for original submission. However, minor amendments which fully meet the requirements herein may be approved and certified by the Director of the Department without further action by the Commission. 
3.9.1 	Minor Amendments Defined Minor amendments are intended to expedite approval in those situations where amendments are of minor significance and generally relate to the shifting of previously approved spaces. Such amendments: 
1. 	
Shall not decrease the overall land area in yards or other open space by more than 20%; 

2. 	
Shall not increase building ground coverage, floor area, or height, or number of dwelling units by more than 10%; 

3. 	
Shall not increase the number or size of signs beyond what is allowed by the Zoning Ordinance; 

4. 	
Shall not increase the number nor change the location of street access points, except that shifts in the approved access location, not exceeding 25 feet may be approved as a minor amendment where the access point is not located on an arterial street and the City Departments or other agency with jurisdiction reviewing the request determine that such relocation will not have a negative effect on traffic safety and movement; 

5. 	
May include a reduction in floor area or number of dwelling units that would permit a lesser number of minimum required off street parking spaces than required for the original development plan. To qualify as a minor amendment, this reduction may be equal to, but may not exceed, the difference in minimum required parking between the original plan and the proposed minor amended plan. For any case, where parking in excess of the minimum requirement was approved on the original development plan, the same number of spaces shall be provided in excess of the minimum requirement for the proposed minor amendment. 


3.9.2 Procedures for Amendments Submission The applicant shall file the following material with the Department: 1) a completed application form, a filing fee, and two (2) copies of the plan. After departmental review, the applicant shall then provide an original Mylar and four (4) copies of the plan, signed by the applicant, for approval. Review The Department shall review the plan for compliance and shall consult with City Departments and other agencies as appropriate to ensure proper plan review. Upon determination that all requirements have been met, the Director of the Department shall certify the plan as approved. If any questions arise as to compliance, however, the plan shall be referred to the full Commission for action. Title Content and Format of Amendments Amendments shall have the same content and format requirements as the original development plan except that: 1) The plan title shall be labeled to indicate the plan as an “Amended Development plan For…”; and 2) A note shall be added, listing the exact nature of the amendments and 3) all site statistical information shall indicate existing and proposed information. 

3.10 MASTER PLAN – PLANNED DISTRICTS 
Projects developed under the PNR-1, PNR-2 and PNC require the submission of a master plan for review and approval by the Commission. 8 
3.10.1 	Content of Master Plan Required plan information shall be as follows (unless certain items are waived by the Commission): 
125 

1. 	
All plans shall be done by using an engineering drafting scale and shall be a minimum of 18” x 24”. The plan’s scale shall be approved by the Department upon submission but typically should be 1” = 100’ or less. At least one full scale colored drawing shall be provided. Smaller versions of the plan may be submitted for presentation purposes. 

2. 	
The title block shall be placed on the bottom right corner of the sheet and shall contain the plan name, preceded by the words “Master Plan For (name of development)” with a written and graphic scale, north arrow, the name and address of the developer and plan preparer and the development address. 

3. 	
The boundary of the subject property, its record plat designation (if available) and a record plat name or owner’s name(s) of all adjoining property. 

4. 	
A vicinity sketch, oriented in the same direction as the design scheme. 

5. 	
Zoning classification of all abutting properties, including those across any street, railroad or public way. 

6. 	
Location of any proposed or existing streets within or abutting the subject property. 

7. 	
General location of the various land uses involved in the project, including type of use, total area for each use and overall density designation. 

8. 	
General location of screening, landscape buffering, recreational and other open space areas. 

9. 	
General location of special flood hazard areas, storm water retention/detention areas and any other designated environmentally sensitive or geologic hazard areas. 

10. 
Existing easements for utilities or other purposes. 

11. 
Areas of existing trees including those located along fence rows and drainage areas. 

12. 
General notes listing development types, density and density bonuses applicable. 

13. 	
General circulation patterns for the development, including streets, access locations, parking, sidewalks, paths, bike lanes, trails and bridges. 

14. 	
Information on architectural elements of the buildings, structures, and other physical features in the development. 

15. 	
A statistical summary of all pertinent site data (this information should be listed in acreage, square footage and/or percentage of the site as applicable), including site area, zoning, proposed use(s), density, maximum building coverage and floor area, open space, and park areas. Listing this information by sections or phases of the development is acceptable. 

16. 	
An Owner Certification as follows: “I (we) do hereby certify that I am (we are) the only owner(s) of the property shown herein and do adopt this as my (our) master plan concept for the property.” ________________ Owner signature __________ Date 

17. 	
A Commission Certification to be signed by the Planning Commission Chair as follows: “I do hereby certify that this master plan meets the requirements set by the City of Elizabethtown and is approved”. ________________ Commission Chair or designee signature, ___________ Date 


3.10.2 Master Plan – Final Plans After approval of a master plan by the Commission, the owner/developer shall prepare detailed plans for the improvement of the property for approval by the appropriate agencies. These detailed plans may include but are not limited to subdivision plats, subdivision improvement plans, architectural design plans, development plans for individual lots within the master plan development, landscaping plans, erosion prevention and sediment control plans, and signage plans. These plans should be submitted for final approval based on the phasing schedule approved by the Commission. 
3.10.3 Master Plan – Binding Elements In addition to the master plan indicating site features, a binding elements document shall be prepared in written form for each planned district which shall include requirements, provisions, restrictions or conditions imposed by the Commission and any promises, covenants, agreements, or restrictions agreed to by the owner/developer. This document shall contain the phasing plan for development of the project. The Commission and the owner/developer shall approve and execute the binding elements document prior to any building permit being issued for construction activity. 
3.10.4 Master Plan – Amendments 

Amendments to approved master plans can only be approved by the Commission after a public meeting is conducted following the same procedures and criteria for the initial approval of the master plan.8 

3.10.5 Master Plan – Expiration 
Any approved Master Plan shall become invalid if no Preliminary Plat, Record Plat, Development Plan, Improvement Plan, Architectural Design Plan, Signage Plan or Binding Elements is filed within five (5) years of plan approval. To be reconsidered, a new Master Plan shall be resubmitted to the Department for approval.8 


3.11 SUBSTITUTION OF SUBDIVISION PLAT FOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN 
In certain cases a preliminary or final subdivision plat would be more appropriate to be considered in conjunction with a map amendment request than a development plan. Generally, such situations involve developments where placement of structures will be tightly controlled by the street, lot patterns and requirements for placement of structures within the zone (typically in a residential development); or involve development of a large tract of land. When a developer is required to provide a development plan, and the developer desires to file a subdivision plat in its place, the developer shall meet with the Department in advance of filing the map amendment request to discuss the appropriateness of a substitution. In any disputed case, the Planning Commission shall have the final judgment as to whether a development plan or a subdivision plat is required. 
127 

CHAPTER 4 

COMMERCIAL DESIGN GUIDELINES 

4.0 INTENT AND PURPOSE 
The following guidelines and regulations are intended to be used as a design aid by developers proposing commercial developments in the community and as an evaluation tool by the Department and the Commission in their review processes. These guidelines and regulations shall apply to shopping centers, malls and to all projects for retail establishments and restaurants. They are to be used in conjunction with the Subdivision Regulations and other regulations and standards found in the Zoning Ordinance and other ordinances of the City relating to the development and use of property and buildings. 
The purpose of requiring compliance with these guidelines and regulations is to assure that projects are developed in a manner to promote public safety, to assure orderly and compatible development with the surrounding environment and neighborhoods and to implement the goals of the City’s Comprehensive Plan. 

4.1 DEFINITIONS 
Arcade – An area contiguous to a street or plaza that is open and unobstructed, and that is accessible to the public at all times. Arcades may include building columns, landscaping, statuary and fountains. Arcades do not include off-street loading/unloading areas, driveways or parking areas. Articulate – To give emphasis to or distinctly identify a particular element. An articulated façade would be the emphasis of elements on the face of a wall including a change in setback, materials, roof pitch or height. Berm – An earthen mound designed to provide visual interest on a site, screen undesirable views, reduce noise or provide a buffer from adjoining uses. Breezeway – A structure, for the principal purpose of connecting a main building or structure on a property with other buildings, that is unenclosed. Buffer – An area provided to reduce the conflict between two different land uses. Buffers are intended to mitigate undesired views, noise and glare -effectively providing greater privacy to neighboring land uses. Typical buffers consist of materials that serve this purpose and include, but are not limited to, plant materials, walls, fences and/or significant land area to separate the uses. Buffer Strip – A portion of a lot or property used to visually separate one use from another through the use of vegetation, distance or other approved method. Building Face, Front – Any building side, which can be touched by a line, drawn perpendicular to a street (public or private). Building Face, Public – Any building side which is visible from a street and/or the sides that contain a public entry. Building Mass – The building’s expanse or bulk and is typically used in reference to structures of considerable size. Design Guidelines – Statements and graphics intended to direct the planning and development of the built environment in a particular manner or style so that the end result contributes positively to the overall development. Dormer – A window set vertically in a gable projecting from a sloping roof. Facade – The portion of any exterior elevation on the building extending from grade to the top of the parapet, wall or eaves and extending the entire length of the building. Front Yard – The portion of the yard extending the full width of the lot and measured between the front lot line and a parallel line across the front of the building. Corner and double frontage lots shall adhere to the front yard setback(s) for each frontage. Gable – A triangular wall section at the end of a pitched roof, bounded by the two roof slopes. Hip Roof – Roof without gables. Parapet – The portion of a wall that extends above the roofline. Pedestrian Oriented Development – Development designed with an emphasis primarily on the street sidewalk and on pedestrian access to the site and buildings/structures rather than on auto access. The buildings/structures are generally located close to the street and the main 
129 

entrance(s) is oriented to the street sidewalk. There are generally windows or display cases along 
building facades. Although parking is provided, it is generally limited in size and location. 
Pedestrian Walkway – A surfaced walkway, separate from the traveled portion of a public or 
private right-of-way or parking lot/driving aisle. 
Portico – A porch or walkway with a roof supported by columns, often leading to the entrance to 
a building. 
Screen – The sole purpose of a screen is to block views. A screen should be constructed of 
opaque materials and whose height will be effective in obstructing unwanted views. 
Setback – A prescribed distance or an area between one element and another (i.e., a building 
and the street). Within these guidelines, the term also refers to: 
a) The minimum distance and the area measured from the property line to the interior of a parcel 
where buildings may be constructed; 
b) The required distance and the area between the edge of the parking lot pavement/curb and 
the property line or buildings/structures; 
c) Placing a building face on a line to the rear of another building line. 
Streetscape – All elements of a development or area that are in view from other points along a 
street, including but limited to, trees, landscape materials, benches, fountains and lighting. 


4.2 APPLICABILITY 
4.2.1 These guidelines apply to the following developments: 
1. 
Retail buildings; 11 

2. 
Restaurants; 11 

3. 
Shopping centers, as defined in Chapter 1; 11 

4. 
Regional enclosed shopping centers (malls). 


4.2.2 Exception: 11 Developments located within the National Register Historic District Overzone within the C-5 zoning district and subject to review by the Elizabethtown Historic Preservation Commission. 

4.3 REQUIRED PLAN SUBMISSIONS 
4.3.1 When these guidelines are applicable to a development the following plans shall be 
submitted to the Planning Commission or Department as applicable for approval: 11 

1. 
Development plan. 

2. 
Building elevation plans showing each building façade. 

3. 
Landscaping plan. 

4. 
Signage placement and design plan. 


4.3.2 	A Pre-Application conference is required for all developments requiring Commercial Design Review. The Department shall arrange the conference which shall be held not less than five 
(5) working days nor greater than three (3) months prior to the filing date. The Department shall keep a record of the conference date and include the information in the record of the development plan application. The Department shall not accept an application for a development plan meeting the above criteria for which a pre-application conference has not been held. 
4.3.3 	All new construction projects requiring Commercial Design Review under this Chapter must be submitted to the Commission for review. Existing buildings requiring Commercial Design Review may be reviewed by the Department as long as no waivers are requested and the building lot coverage or floor area of the existing building is not increased by 10%.11 

4.4 DESIGN GUIDELINES – BUILDINGS 
4.4.1 Materials and Colors 
Exterior building materials and colors comprise a significant part of the visual impact of a building. Therefore, they should be aesthetically pleasing and compatible with materials and colors used in adjoining neighborhoods. Predominant exterior building materials shall be high quality materials. 
4.4.1.1 Predominant building exterior materials include, without limitation: 
• 
Brick 

• 
Wood 

• 
Sandstone and limestone 


• 	
Other native stone 

• 	
Tinted, textured, concrete masonry units 

• 
Tilt-up concrete panels, with a finish similar to other allowed materials.12 Materials that are similar to these may be used with Commission approval.10 


4.4.1.2 	Facade colors shall be low reflectance, subtle, neutral, or earth tone colors. The use of high intensity colors, metallic colors, black or fluorescent colors is prohibited. 
4.4.1.3 	Building trim and accent areas may feature brighter colors, including primary colors, but neon tubing shall not be an acceptable feature for building trim or accent areas. 
4.4.1.4 Trim areas on exterior building materials as well as accents may include the following: 
• 	
Smooth-faced concrete block 

• 	
Metal panels 

• 	
Stucco, Dryvit 


4.4.1.5 Prohibited exterior building materials include the following: 
• 	
PVC or similar plastic materials 

• 	
Pre-fabricated steel panels with a predominantly steel exterior appearance 



4.4.2 Facades and Exterior Walls 
Facades should be articulated to reduce the massive scale and the uniform, impersonal appearances of large retail buildings and provide visual interest that will be consistent with the community’s identity, character and scale. The intent is to encourage a more human scale. 
Developments with a facade over 100 feet in linear length which is visible from a street shall incorporate wall projections or recesses a minimum of 3 foot depth for a minimum of 20 contiguous feet within each 100 feet of facade length. Developments shall use animating features such as arcades, display windows, entry areas, or awnings along at least 60 percent of the façade. 

4.4.3 Detail Features 
Buildings should have architectural features and patterns that provide visual interest, at the scale of the pedestrian, reduce massive aesthetic effects, and recognize local character. These elements of design should be integral parts of the building fabric, and not superficially applied trim or graphics, or paint. 
Building facades shall include a repeating pattern that shall include the elements listed below. Buildings less than 15,000 s.f. shall include at least one of these elements, buildings between 15,000 s.f. and 40,000 s.f. shall include at least two of these elements and buildings greater than 40,000 s.f. shall include no less than three of the elements.12 At least one of these elements shall repeat horizontally. All elements shall repeat at intervals of no more than thirty (30) feet, either horizontally or vertically. 
• 	
Color change 

• 	
Texture change 

• 	
Material change 

• 	
Expression of architectural or structural bay through a change in plane no less than 12 inches in width, such as an offset, reveal, or projecting rib. 



(Drawing courtesy of Fort Collins, Colorado) 

4.4.4 Roofs 
Variations in roof lines should be used to add interest to, and reduce the massive scale of large buildings. Roof features should complement the character of adjoining neighborhoods. 
131 

Roof lines shall be varied with a change in height every 100 linear feet in the building length. 
Parapets, mansard roofs, gable roofs, hip roofs, or dormers shall be used to conceal flat roofs and 
roof top equipment from public view. Alternating lengths and designs may be acceptable. 

4.4.5 Entryways 
Entryway design elements and variations should give orientation and aesthetically pleasing 
character to the building. 
Each principal building on a site shall have clearly defined, highly visible customer entrances 

featuring the following: 
• 
canopies or porticos 
• overhangs 


• 
recesses/projections 

• 
arcades 

• 
raised corniced parapets over the door 

• 
peaked roof forms 

• 
arches 
• outdoor patios 


• 
display windows 

• 	
architectural details such as tile work and moldings which are integrated into the building structure and design 

• 
integral planters or wing walls that incorporate landscaped areas and/or places for sitting Buildings less than 15,000 s.f. shall include at least one of these elements, buildings between 15,000 s.f. and 40,000 s.f. shall include at least two of these elements and buildings greater than 40,000 s.f. shall include no less than three of the elements.12 




4.5 DESIGN GUIDELINES – SITE DESIGN 
4.5.1 Building Entrances 
Buildings should feature multiple entrances. Multiple building entrances reduce walking 
distances from cars, facilitate pedestrian and bicycle access from public sidewalks, and provide 
convenience where certain entrances offer access to individual stores, or identified departments in 
a large store. Multiple entrances also mitigate the effect of the unbroken walls and neglected 
areas that often characterize building facades that face bordering land uses. 
Buildings less than 40,000 s.f. shall include at least one customer entrance, buildings greater than 
40,000 s.f. shall include at least one customer entrance facing any abutting street.12 When a 
customer entrance is located at the corner of a building facing two abutting streets, this will be 
construed as meeting the multiple entrances requirement. 6 Where a principal building directly 
faces more than two abutting streets, this requirement shall apply only to two sides of the building, 
one of which must be the side of the building facing the primary street. Where additional stores will 
be located in the principal building, each such store shall have at least one exterior customer 
entrance, which shall conform to the above requirements. 

4.5.2 Site Entrances 
Access to the site should be clearly defined to assure that customers can easily identify the 
proper traffic circulation for the development for both vehicular and pedestrian traffic. It should 
also present a pleasing, aesthetic entrance to the community. 
A principal entrance should be defined though the use of curbs, appropriate traffic pavement 
markings, signage and extensive landscaping so that the entrance to the development is 
predominant. 
Walkways should also be provided along the principal entrance with a connection to the public sidewalk along the street. 
Walkway widths for convenience, neighborhood and community shopping centers, restaurants 
and retail buildings less than 40,000 s.f. should be five (5) feet. Walkway widths for regional 
shopping centers, regional enclosed malls and retail buildings greater than 40,000 s.f. should be six 
(6) feet. 

4.5.3 Parking Lot Orientation 
Parking areas should provide safe, convenient, and efficient access for vehicles and pedestrians. They should be distributed around buildings in order to shorten the distance to other buildings and public sidewalks and to reduce the overall scale of the paved surface. If buildings are located closer to streets, the scale of the complex is reduced, pedestrian traffic is encouraged, and architectural details take on added importance. 
The amount of off-street parking area for the entire property located between the front facade within the front yard of the principal building(s) and the primary abutting street shall be limited unless the principal building(s) and/or parking lots are screened from view by out parcel development and additional tree plantings and landscaping, which shall be a minimum of 15 % above the required Vehicular Use Area (VUA) landscaping and shall be located along the common property line of the principal building(s) and the out parcel development. 
Principal front yard off-street parking area shall be limited to no more than 80 % of the provided parking area for convenience and neighborhood shopping centers, restaurants and retail buildings up to 15,000 s.f.; no more than 70 % for community shopping centers and retail buildings 15,000 s.f. to 40,000 s.f.; and no more than 60% for regional shopping centers, regional enclosed malls and large retail centers. 

4.5.4 Pedestrian Walkways 
Pedestrian accessibility opens auto-oriented developments to the neighborhood, thereby reducing traffic impacts and enabling the development to project a friendlier, more inviting image. Public sidewalks and internal pedestrian circulation systems can provide user-friendly pedestrian access as well as pedestrian safety, shelter, and convenience within the development. 
Sidewalks at least five (5) feet in width shall be provided along all sides of the lot that abut a street, excluding interstates and limited access state roads. 
Walkways, no less than six (6) feet in width, shall be provided along the full length of the building along any facade featuring a customer entrance, and along any facade abutting off-street parking areas. 
All walkways shall be distinguished from driving surfaces through the use of durable, low maintenance surface materials such as pavers, bricks, or scored concrete to enhance pedestrian safety and comfort, as well as the attractiveness of the walkways. Signs may be installed to designate pedestrian walkways. Connections to community features and public spaces should be provided. 

4.5.5 Landscaping 
Landscaping is a visible indicator of quality development and must be an integral part of every commercial project and not merely located in remnant portions of the site. Landscaping a site enhances the overall appearance of the development, helps to protect the environment by controlling water runoff and by reducing heat effects caused by parking areas, helps clear the air from the effects of vehicle emissions, and can be used to clearly define the separation between vehicle and pedestrian. 
Developments should be generously landscaped to provide a pleasing environment for the customer and the community as a whole. 
All developments shall provide a continuous landscape area along all street frontages which shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width. The use of a variety of plant materials and elevations is encouraged in these areas through the use of differing materials, seasonal plantings, earth berms, decorative walls/fences and the existing topography. For regional shopping centers, regional enclosed malls and retail buildings greater than 40,000 s.f. at least 25% of the area must be in plant materials with one tree for every 1006 lineal feet of street frontage. For community and neighborhood shopping centers and retail buildings 15,000 s.f. to 40,000 s.f., at least 20% of the area must be in plant materials with one tree for every 1006 lineal feet of street frontage and restaurants and retail buildings less than 15,000 s.f. at least 15% of the area must be in plan materials with one tree for every 1006 lineal feet of street frontage. 
Vehicular use area (VUA) landscaping shall be provided in conformance with the standards of this section and the standards found in Chapter 5. VUA landscaping shall be provided in convenience, neighborhood and community shopping centers, restaurants and retail buildings up to 40,000 s.f., at a minimum of 50% of the parking stall aisle end areas. For regional shopping centers, malls and retail centers greater than 40,000 s.f., the end of each parking stall aisle must be provided with VUA landscaping. EXCEPTION: Landscaping shall not be required when handicap parking spaces are located at the end of an aisle. 
133 

All developments shall provide a continuous landscape area along property boundaries, except street frontages, which shall be a minimum of 10 feet in width. The use of a variety of plant materials and elevations is encouraged in these areas through the use of differing materials, seasonal plantings, earth berms, decorative walls/fences and the existing topography. For community, convenience and neighborhood shopping centers and retail centers 15,000 s.f. or greater, at least 20% of the area must be in plant materials with one tree for every 40 lineal feet of boundary6. If the adjoining property is zoned residentially the continuous landscape are shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width and a continuous planting, berm, and/or decorative walls/fences shall be provided. The berm shall be installed, no less than 6 feet in height, containing at a minimum, a double row of evergreen or deciduous trees planted at intervals of 15 feet on center. Materials, colors, and designs of screening walls and/or fences shall conform to those used as predominant materials and colors of the building. EXCEPTION: Boundaries between parcels within the development are not required to provide continuous landscaping but are required to provide any otherwise required VUA landscaping. 

4.5.6 Outdoor Storage, Trash Collection, and Loading Areas 
Loading areas and outdoor storage areas exert visual and noise impacts on surrounding neighborhoods. These areas, when visible from adjoining properties and/or streets, should be screened, recessed or enclosed. While screens and recesses can effectively mitigate these impacts, the selection of inappropriate screening materials can exacerbate the problem. Appropriate locations for loading and outdoor storage areas include areas between buildings, where more than one building is located on a site and such buildings are not more than 40 feet apart, or on those sides of buildings that do not have customer entrances. 
Areas for outdoor storage, truck parking, trash collection or compaction, loading, or other such uses shall not be visible from a street. 
No areas for outdoor storage, trash collection or compaction, loading, or other such uses shall be located within 20 feet of any street, public sidewalk, or pedestrian walkway. 
Loading docks, truck parking, outdoor storage, utility meters, HVAC equipment, trash dumpsters, trash compaction, and other service functions shall be incorporated into the overall design of the building and landscaping so that the visual and noise impacts of these functions are fully contained and out of view from adjacent properties and streets, and no attention is attracted to the functions by the use of screening materials that are different from or inferior to the principal materials of the building and landscape. 
Temporary sales/displays, such as Christmas trees, landscape materials, and fireworks, shall be permanently defined and may not occupy more than 20% of a site. Screening with walls and/or fences may be required to assure pedestrian and vehicular safety. Materials, colors, and designs of screening walls and/or fences shall conform to those used as predominant materials and colors of the building. 

4.5.7 Features and Community Spaces 
Buildings should offer attractive and inviting pedestrian scale features, spaces and amenities. Entrances and parking lots should be configured to be functional and inviting with walkways conveniently tied to logical destinations. Bus stops and drop-off/pick-up points should be considered as integral parts of the configuration. Pedestrian ways should be anchored by special design features such as towers, arcades, porticos, pedestrian light fixtures, bollards, planter walls, and other architectural elements that define circulation ways and outdoor spaces. The features and spaces should enhance the building and the center as integral parts of the community fabric. 
Community, neighborhood and regional shopping centers, regional enclosed malls and retail buildings greater than 40,000 s.f. shall provide at least two of the following: patio/seating area, pedestrian plaza with benches, transportation center, outdoor play area, kiosk area, water feature, clock tower, steeple, or other such deliberately shaped area and/or a focal feature or amenity. Any such areas shall have direct access to the public sidewalk network and such features shall not be constructed of materials that are inferior to the principal materials of the building and landscape. Retail buildings less than 40,000 s.f., convenience centers, shopping center outparcels and restaurants are not required to provide these features and community spaces. 


4.6 WAIVER PROCEDURE 

An applicant may request a waiver from the standards as contained in this Chapter. As part of the waiver request, the applicant shall have the burden of proof in showing that there will be no adverse impact upon the neighborhood or general area by the granting of the waiver. In granting a waiver, the Commission shall consider the following: 
1. 	
The special circumstances of the proposed use; and 

2. 	
Site constraints that would make compliance economically unfeasible; and 

3. 	
The neighborhood and the general development patterns of the surrounding properties and the prospects for development in the near future; and 

4. 	
Whether the development as proposed would serve the purpose of enhancing the public 
welfare and safety; and 


5. 	
The guidelines listed in the Specific Development Criteria and Targeted Planning Areas of the Comprehensive Plan. 

6. 	
The Commission may also consider other factors it may deem relevant in making its decision. A waiver of any of the requirements of this Chapter does not exempt the development from any other requirements of the Ordinance. 

7. 	
Waivers granted shall be for the specific use. Should the use be substantially altered (greater than a 50% change in either the building, parking, landscaping) the developer must obtain new waivers or comply with the sections of this Chapter.3 


135 

CHAPTER 5 

GENERAL LANDSCAPE STANDARDS 

5.0 INTENT AND PURPOSE 
5.0.1 Intent The intent of this chapter is to improve the appearance of vehicular use areas (VUA’s) and property abutting public rights-of-way; to require buffering & screening between incompatible land uses; to protect, preserve and promote the aesthetic appeal, character and value of the surrounding neighborhood; and to promote public health and safety through the reduction of noise pollution, air pollution, visual pollution, air temperature and artificial light glare. 

5.1 SITES AFFECTED 
5.1.1 New Sites No new site development, building or other structure shall hereafter be constructed or vehicular use area created or used unless landscaping is provided as required by the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. 
5.1.2 Existing Sites No building or vehicular use area shall be expanded, moved or removed and/or reconstructed unless minimum landscaping requirements of the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance is provided for the property to the extent of its alteration or expansion, but not for the entire property, except as hereinafter required. 

5.2 CHANGE IN USE 
No use shall be changed to another use for which the Zoning Ordinance required additional parking over and above the previously required, unless vehicular use area landscaping is provided for the additional parking. This shall apply regardless of whether or not new construction is necessary to meet the parking requirements of the new uses. Where new construction will not be necessary to meet the parking requirements, such additional required parking shall be deemed to be on the perimeter for as much as possible of the existing vehicular use area. Interior landscaping shall not be required where only the use of the property is changed and no new construction or reconstruction of buildings or installation of additional parking is proposed. 

5.3 LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS 
Unless otherwise provided, landscaping materials shall be installed to provide a minimum of 50% winter opacity and 70% summer opacity between one foot above the finished grade level to the top of the required planting, hedge, fence, wall or earth mound within four years after installation. The required landscaping shall be provided along the property perimeter in designated landscape buffer areas or adjacent to the vehicular use area as required by the Zoning Ordinance. A planting manual and a plant materials list (Appendix A) provides more detailed information on acceptable an unacceptable plant material. 

5.4 WAIVER FOR DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS 
When a lot is submitted to the Department and the lot is a portion of a larger development project, all perimeter landscaping requirements may be waived along all adjoining property lines within the development project. Perimeter landscaping shall be required along all adjoining property lines of lots which are not a part of the development project, where applicable. 
When requesting a waiver for the perimeter landscaping requirements between lots, the following information must be submitted to the Department: 
1. 	
A conceptual design for all pieces of property involved in the development showing the design layout for the entire site. 

2. 	
Proof of single or joint ownership over all property in the development. 

3. 	
A time frame for completion of the project. 



5.5 PLANTING LOCATIONS 
In situations where a slope occurs along the boundary where perimeter landscaping is required, the required landscape materials shall be placed (in relation to the slope) where they will most effectively screen the more intensive use from the adjoining property. 
137 


5.6 PERVIOUS AREAS 

Grass or ground cover shall be planted on all portions of landscape areas not occupied by other landscape material. 

5.7 ENCROACHMENTS 
When building or paving encroaches into required landscape buffer areas the overall required area of landscaping shall be maintained. To determine required area of landscape buffer area, multiply required average width by length. 

5.8 EXISTING TREES/LANDSCAPING 
Any existing trees or landscaping that is used to meet the requirements of this section shall be credited towards fulfillment of any landscaping, screening or buffering provisions. 

5.9 PERIMETER LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS 
5.9.1 Perimeter Buffering Required Perimeter buffering shall be provided at a minimum width as shown in Chapter 2, Perimeter Landscape Buffer Area tables. The Commission may require additional buffering width should it be determined that the minimums are not adequate to buffer highly dissimilar uses. Plantings and other screening shall be provided as shown in Chapter 2, Perimeter Planting Density tables. 
5.9.2 Buffering Use Requirements Perimeter buffering landscaping is required when dissimilar uses are abutting. Buffering is based on the zoning category in which the use would be permitted. Buffering landscaping shall be required in conformance with the Buffering Requirements tables found in Chapter 2. 
5.9.3 Landscaping in Easements The required landscape buffer area may be combined with any easement as long as all easement requirements can be fully met. Otherwise, the landscape buffer area shall be provided in addition to, and separate from, any easement. 
5.9.4 Double Frontage Lots When the rear wall of any building abuts any collector or arterial street perimeter landscaping shall be required along the rear lot line in conformance with the provisions of the buffering requirements for that zone as found in the Buffering Requirements and Perimeter Planting Density tables in Chapter 2. 
5.9.5 Conflicts With Utilities When proposed perimeter screening conflicts with utility installations, the Department may waive the requirement for the use of plant materials only if more substantial screening such as brick, stone or similar walls are constructed at a minimum of six (6’) feet in height. Brick or stone columns with fencing materials between the columns may be acceptable. 3 

5.10 INTERIOR & VEHICULAR USE AREA LANDSCAPING 
5.10.1 Landscaping of Parking Area A minimum buffer area of ten (10’) feet shall be required along all street rights-of-way and common property boundaries. A continuous three foot high planting, hedge shall be located within 10 feet of all parking lot pavement. A buffer area that exceeds 10 feet in width shall contain three-foot high plantings or serpentine earth mounds along 50% of the boundary. If existing paving is less than 10 feet from the property line then additions to the parking area may be made that have the same setback as the existing paving. The reduction in the landscape area shall be calculated and additional landscaping equaling that amount of landscaping area shall be placed elsewhere on site. 15 
5.10.2 Joint Driveways and Common Vehicular Use Area Vehicular use area screening shall not be required between a vehicular use area and the adjoining property where a property line divides a driveway used for common access to two or more properties, or when both of the following conditions exist: 
1. 	
VUA’s are for the required parking for the properties or the common use of the properties (as substantiated by reciprocal parking and access agreements), and 

2. 	
A final development plan for the properties has been approved. 


5.10.3 Interior Landscaping for Vehicular Use Areas An open VUA (excluding loading, unloading and storage areas in any regional commercial, general commercial or industrial zone) shall provide interior landscaping in accordance with Table 5.0. Interior landscaping shall be peninsular or island types. Where a VUA is altered or expanded to increase the size to areas shown in Table 5.0, interior landscaping shall be provided to the extent of its alteration or expansion. In industrial zones landscaping, including earth berms may be placed along the street frontage and may still be counted towards meeting the required VUA landscaping. 11 
5.10.4 Minimum Area The minimum landscape area permitted shall be as found in Table 5.1, with a four-foot minimum dimension to all trees from edge of pavement where vehicles overhang. 
5.10.5 Maximum Area In order to encourage the required landscaped areas to be properly dispersed, required landscaped area shall be as found in Table 5.1. In both cases, the least dimension of any required area shall be a four-foot minimum distance to all trees from edge of pavement where vehicles overhang. Landscaped areas larger than above are permitted. However, area in excess of the maximum will not be counted towards fulfillment of VUA landscaping requirements. 
5.10.6 Landscape Area Equivalents Landscape areas will be calculated, for purposes of meeting square foot requirements, as found in Table 5.7. Once area equivalents have been met, remaining areas may consist of mulch, turf grasses or groundcovers. 
5.10.7 Minimum Trees Trees shall be required as shown in Table 5.0. Trees shall have a clear trunk of at least five feet above the ground. For the purpose of this ordinance, trees are classified as shown in Table 5.3 & 5.4. Trees of a species whose roots are known to cause damage to public roadways or other public improvements shall not be planted closer than 15 feet to such public improvements.9 
5.10.8 Minimum Shrubs Shrubs shall be of a minimum size as shown in Table 5.5. 
5.10.9 Species Mix To encourage variation and ensure that an entire landscape is not susceptible to blight, disease or other disaster, the number of species required as part of the required VUA landscaping shall be as found in Table 5.2. No individual species may exceed 50% of the required number of trees or shrubs for the entire landscape area. 
5.10.10 Other Materials All plant material shall be living plants (artificial plants are prohibited) and 
shall meet the following requirements: Vines Vines shall be at least 12 inches high at planting and are generally used in conjunction with walls or fences. Grass Grass of the fescue, bluegrass or rye family shall be planted in species normally grown as permanent lawns in Hardin County and may be sod, plugged, sprigged or seeded; except in swales or other areas subject to erosion, here solid sod, erosion reducing net or suitable mulch shall be used. Grass sod shall be clean and free of weeds and noxious pests or disease. Ground Cover Ground cover such as organic material shall be planted not more than 15 inches on center and in such a manner as to present a finished appearance and have 75% of complete coverage after two complete growing seasons. In certain case, ground cover also may consist of rocks, pebbles, sand and similar approved materials. Mulch Mulch may consist of organic and/or inorganic materials such as bark mulches, rocks, pebbles, sand or other similar materials. 
5.10.11 Plant Quality Plant materials in conformance with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance shall conform to the standards of the American Association of Nurserymen and shall have passed any inspection required under state regulations. Bare root plants, with the exception of shrubs, hedges, vines and ground cover shall be prohibited. 
5.10.12 Vehicular Overhang Parked vehicles may hang over the interior landscaped area not more than two and one half feet, as long as concrete curbing or other wheel stops are provided to ensure no greater overhang or penetration of landscaped area. 
5.10.13 Maintenance and Installation All landscaping materials shall be installed in a sound, workmanlike manner and according to accepted, good construction and planting procedures. The owner of the property shall be responsible for the continued proper maintenance of all landscaping materials and keep them in a proper, neat and orderly appearance, free from refuse and debris at all times. All unhealthy or dead plant material shall be replaced within one year or by the next planting season, whichever comes first, while other defective landscape materials shall be replaced or repaired within three months. Topping trees or the severe cutting of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree crown to such a degree as to remove the normal canopy shall not be considered proper or permitted for the maintenance of trees required by the Zoning Ordinance. Violation of these installation and maintenance provisions shall be grounds for the Department to refuse a building occupancy permit, require a replacement of 
139 

landscape materials or institute legal proceedings to enforce the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. Whenever the Zoning Ordinance requires a continuous planting or hedge, in addition to accepted planting procedures and size as prescribed elsewhere in the Zoning Ordinance, the landscape materials planted shall be spaced a minimum of 24 inches apart at the time of planting, unless accepted landscaping practice recommends a greater spacing requirement based on growth rates or other conditions. 
5.10.14 Special Provision, Convenience Markets, Residential Storage Warehouses Convenience markets and Residential storage warehouses must install the minimum required square feet of interior landscaping. Because of the greater number and intensity of vehicular trips, the landscaping may be placed along the perimeter of the paved areas. All other landscaping requirements remain in effect. 

5.11 PLAN SUBMISSION 
Whenever property is affected by these landscape requirements, the property owner or developer shall prepare a landscape plan for submittal to, and approval by the Department. Landscape plans also may be submitted as part of any development plan required by the Commission. Landscaping plans shall be prepared by a qualified landscape professional unless prior approval from the staff waiving this requirement is granted. 

5.12 PLANTING MANUAL & PLANT MATERIALS LIST 
Developers shall refer to the Planting Manual and Plant Materials List (Appendix A) as a guideline for meeting the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. Any materials which are not on the Plant Materials List shall be considered on an individual basis to determine, based on the ability of the unlisted plant to produce an effect similar to listed plants. A plant not on the Plant Materials List shall be permitted only upon the express approval of the Department. 

5.13 RESERVED 
5.14 SCREENING REQUIREMENTS (SERVICE STRUCTURES, BASINS, SATELLITE DISHES) 
5.14.1 Screening Required All service structures shall be fully screened except for those associated with one or two family dwellings, or when located more than 35 feet above the established grade. For the purpose of the Zoning Ordinance, service structures shall include propane tanks, dumpsters, air conditioner units and condensers, electrical transformers and other equipment or elements providing service to a building or site. 
5.14.2 Location of Screening A continuous fence or wall shall enclose any service structure on all sides unless such structure must be frequently moved, in which case, screening on all but one side is required. EXCEPTION: If the opening of the service structure enclosure is visible from a public right­of-way or public areas of the site, the service structure shall be screened on all sides with a gate enclosing the opening. The average height of screening material shall be one foot more than the height of the enclosed structure, but shall not be required to exceed eight feet in height. Whenever a service structure is located next to a building wall, such wall may fulfill the screening requirements for that side of the service structure if that wall is of an average height sufficient to meet the height requirements set out in the Zoning Ordinance. Whenever service structures are screened by additional plant material, such material may count toward the fulfillment of required interior or perimeter landscaping. No interior landscaping shall be required within an area screened for service structures. 
5.14.3 Protection of Screening Material Whenever screening material is placed around any trash disposal unit or waste collection unit which is emptied or removed mechanically on a regularly occurring basis, a fixed barrier to contain the placement or the container shall be provided within the screening material on those sides where there are such materials. The barrier shall be at least 18 inches from the material and shall be of sufficient strength to prevent possible damage to the screening when the container is moved or emptied. The minimum front opening of the screening material shall be 12 feet to allow service vehicle access to the containers. 
5.14.4 Screening of Retention/Detention Basins Retention/Detention basins shall be screened as follows: 
1. 
Basins with an overall average water depth of two feet or less shall not require screening. 

2. 	
Basins with an overall average water depth of more than two feet shall be screened by a fence or railing a minimum of four feet in height where they are within five (5’) feet of a public street or adjacent to a public sidewalk.6 If the enclosure is chain link or similar fencing, landscaping shall be installed. If the enclosure is of a decorative material, additional landscaping will not be required. 


5.14.5 Screening for Satellite Dishes All satellite dishes, larger than two feet in diameter and not mounted on a building or other structure, shall be screened so as to reduce the visual impact of the structure. This may include shrubbery, fencing, trellis or other suitable material. The screening shall be located on three sides while allowing enough area for the dish to rotate within the reception range of satellites that are available at the time of installation of the dish(es). 
5.14.6 Screening Materials The screening materials shall consist of the following and are described 
in more detail in the Planting Manual and Plant Materials List available at the Department. Walls and Fences Walls shall be constructed of natural stone, brick or artificial material arranged in a linear, serpentine or other alignment; fencing may include wrought iron, wood, vinyl, extruded polymer, aluminum or similar materials. Materials other than those noted above require Commission approval before installation. Chain link fencing may not be used to meet the requirements of this Chapter. Chain link fencing may be installed in the required landscaped area only if it is in addition to the required continuous planting, hedge fence wall or earth mound. All walls or fences shall have a minimum opacity of 50%. Walls and fences allowed to meet the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance shall not be used for the erection or display of any sign or other advertising device. Columns/posts may include wrought iron, wood, vinyl, extruded polymer, aluminum, brick, natural or cultured stone, split face masonry units or other similar materials. Earth Mounds Earth mounds shall be physical barriers which block or screen the view similar to hedges, fences or walls. Mounds shall be constructed with proper and adequate plant material to prevent erosion. A difference in elevation between areas requiring screening does not constitute an earth mound. 
141 

LANDSCAPE TABLES Table 5.0 VUA Interior Landscape Area Requirements 
VUA Size/# of spaces  Interior Landscape Area  Trees Required9  Maximum distance between ILA’s  
Less than 5 spaces  0%  N/A9  N/A  
5 – 10 spaces  2.5%  1/250 s.f. of ILA9  120’  
11 – 50 spaces  5%  1/250 s.f. of ILA9  120’  
51 – 100 spaces  7.5%  1/500 s.f. of ILA9  120’  
101+ spaces  10%  1/500 s.f. of ILA9  120’  
Table 5.1 Maximum Landscape Island 



VUA Size  Individual Landscaped Area (in square feet)  
(# of spaces)  Minimum  Maximum  
6 – 50  150  350  
51+  150  1,500  

Table 5.2 Species Mix 

Number of Required VUA Trees/Shrubs  Number of Species Required  
0 – 10  1  
11 – 30  2  
31 – 50  3  
51+  4  

Note: Individual species may not exceed 50% of required trees if more than 1 species required. 
Table 5.3 Deciduous Trees 

Deciduous Tree Classification  Trunk Caliper  Mature Height  
Small  10’ – 25’  
Medium  1½”  26’ – 50’  
Large  51’+  

Table 5.4 Evergreen Trees 

Evergreen Tree Classification  Minimum Planting Height  Mature Height  
Small  10’ – 25’  
Medium  5’  26’ – 50’  
Large  51’+  

Table 5.5 Shrubs 


Shrub Classification  Root ball/ Container size (In gallons)  Mature Height  
Low (Dwarf)  2’ – 3’  
Small  2  4’ – 5’  
Medium  6’ – 10’  
Large  3  10 – 25’  

Table 5.6 RESERVED Table 5.7 Landscape Area Equivalents 
Landscape Material  Square Footage Equivalent  
Large Tree  300 s.f.  
Medium Tree  200 s.f.  
Small Tree  150 s.f.  
Large Shrub  100 s.f.  
Medium Shrub  50 s.f.  
Small/Low Shrub  25 s.f  

CHAPTER 6 

GENERAL PARKING STANDARDS 

6.0 INTENT AND PURPOSE 
The intent of this Chapter is to provide for safe and adequate off street parking, to protect, preserve and promote the safe movement of vehicles and the occupants; and to promote public health and safety through appropriately designed parking and maneuvering areas. 
6.1 PARKING/LOADING ESTABLISHED PRIOR TO ADOPTION OF ORDINANCE 
Any parking or loading spaces established prior to the adoption or amendment of the Zoning Ordinance which are used or intended to be used in connection with any principal building or use shall hereafter be maintained so long as said building, structure or other use remains unchanged. 
6.2 PARKING REQUIREMENTS FOR CHANGE IN PRINCIPAL USE 
When the principal use is changed to a use for which additional parking is required by the Zoning Ordinance, it shall be unlawful to begin or maintain such altered use until such time as the required off street parking is provided. 
6.3 SPECIAL ACCESS, SURFACE AND LOCATION REQUIREMENTS 
No gasoline pump, oil drain pit or similar appliance for any purpose shall be located within 15 feet of any right-of-way line; or within 15 feet of the entrance or exit of the principal building; or within 50 feet of a residential zone, except where such a pump, pit or appliance is within a completely enclosed building and at a distance of at least 15 feet from any vehicular entrance or exit of such building. Except for gasoline service stations, no gasoline pump shall be permitted as an accessory use for another activity unless a development plan showing the following is submitted and approved. 
1. 	
A safe traffic pattern shall exist for vehicles to be served with gas, including a safe entrance and exit to the area and traffic lanes are not impeded by parked vehicles or other objects. 

2. 	
A safe traffic pattern shall exist for pedestrians to ensure that pedestrian flow for other purposes is not routed by the gasoline pumps, thereby exposing pedestrians to unnecessary hazards. 

3. 	
The gasoline pump shall be operated by employees of the activity, or if others are permitted to operate them, the gas pumps shall be located so it will be within an easily visible access of an employee at all times. 

4. 	
Every parcel of land hereafter used as an automobile, truck, mobile home, boat, trailer or camper sales lot, or as an automobile service station, shall be considered a vehicular use area and subject to the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance concerning surfacing, lighting, landscaping and screening and minimum yards and setbacks and shall be considered as the equivalent of a parking area for more than five vehicles regardless of its size. 


6.4 STACKING AREAS 
For any uses which utilize a drive-in or drive-through window or service area, a vehicular stacking area shall be provided for a minimum of five (5) vehicles. Vehicular stacking areas shall not include any spaces located at the windows or service area and shall be provided wholly on the property and not include any right-of-way. Where menu boards or other stopping points are utilized before moving to the window or service area, the vehicular stacking area shall not include the space at the stopping point, or the spaces between that stopping point and the window or service area. Vehicular stacking areas shall be subject to all yard, paving, landscaping and other requirements for vehicular use areas as contained herein. 
6.5 LOCATION AND DISTANCE OF PARKING 
The location of parking spaces shall be as set forth, and where distances are specified, they shall be the walking distance measured from the nearest point of the building to the nearest space. 
1. 	
For one and two family dwellings, on the same lot with the building they are required to serve. 

2. 	
For multifamily dwelling, not more than 200 feet from the building they are required to serve. 

3. 	
For uses located in or permitted in any business zone, and for hospitals, nursing, convalescent and rest homes, orphanages, private clubs, fraternity or sorority houses and churches, not more than 300 feet from the building they are required to serve. 

4. 	
For uses located in or permitted in any industrial zone and for uses not specified herein above, not more than 700 feet from the building or other place of assembly they are required to serve. 


143 

6.6 MINIMUM DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS 
Every parcel of land hereinafter used as a parking area shall be designed and maintained in accordance with the following requirements. 
1. 	
Off street parking areas shall equal or exceed the number of spaces required and shall be of usable shape and surface and have convenient ingress and egress. Aisles and access drives shall be designed so as to provide adequate vehicular maneuvering wholly on the property being served. 

2. 	
All driveways shall be a minimum of five feet from a property line except single family residential units or as otherwise provided for in the Zoning Ordinance. 

3. 	
Any lighting used to illuminate off street parking areas shall be arranged so as to reflect away from any adjoining residential zone or uses or private right-of-way. 

4. 	
Any off street parking area having more than 2,000 sq. ft. of area and/or used by five or more vehicles shall be landscaped and screened as required by the Zoning Ordinance. 

5. 	
All parking areas shall be paved and drained so as to dispose of all surface water within the parking area without carrying said water accumulation over a public sidewalk. Piping the water to a suitable out fall may be required. 

6. 	
Where parking areas are provided for five or more vehicles, or are enlarged or expanded to provide five or more vehicles, they shall be paved with asphalt, concrete, brick or other properly bound surface, so as to be durable and dustless. Each parking space shall be physically delineated on the surface of the parking area. All driveway aprons shall be concrete pavement. 

7. 	
Permanent storm water retention, approved by the Storm water Department, shall be provided for all off street parking spaces containing five or more parking spaces and/or more than 2,000 square feet. For off street parking areas of 2,000 square feet or less, or less than five parking spaces, permanent storm water retention may be required by the Storm water Department upon the determination that the lack of such retention would cause or aggravate flooding or other drainage problems on surrounding property. 

8. 	
All parking spaces located along the perimeter of a parking area or adjacent to any structure on the lot shall be provided with concrete or other wheel stops or a curb, so as to stop any vehicle and provide protection for any landscape materials and pedestrians. 

9. 	
Fire lanes shall be at least 20 feet in width with the road edge closest to the building at least 10 feet from the building. The designation, use and maintenance of fire lanes on private property shall be accomplished as specified by the Fire Marshal. 

10. 	
The maximum distance between landscape areas in each row of parking shall not exceed one-hundred twenty (120’) feet in either direction. Areas must meet minimum size and landscape material requirements found in Chapter 5.3 


6.7 PARKING AREA DESIGN STANDARDS 
Every parcel of land located within the City limits and containing or being used as a parking area shall be required to meet the design standards found in the Tables and Figures in this chapter. 
6.8 SINGLE PARKING AREAS FOR MULTIPLE USES 
The required off street parking for any number of separate uses may be combined in one lot, but the off street parking required by any use shall not be counted in the off street parking required for any other use or on any other lot unless specifically permitted. 
6.9 JOINT USE OF PARKING AREAS 
The Department may, upon application by all parties involved, authorize the joint use of off street parking facilities for uses whose normal and regular hours of operation do not coincide or overlap. Joint use of off street parking shall be subject to the following limitations and conditions: 
1. 	
Off street parking areas required for residential use shall not be included in any joint parking arrangement. 

2. 	
Up to 100% of the off street parking required for a church or facilities incidental to a public or private school, and up to 50% of the off street parking required for any other use may be provided by a joint parking arrangement. 

3. 	
The joint parking areas shall be within 300 feet of all of the uses being served by such facilities. 

4. 	
The applicant shall submit sufficient data to the Department to demonstrate that the normal and regular operating hours of the uses do not coincide or overlap in any manner. 

5. 	
All parties shall execute a properly drawn legal instrument for the joint use of off street parking areas. This instrument, having been approved as to form and manner of execution by the legal counsel of the Commission, shall be filed with the application. 


6.10 PARKING, LOADING AND UNLOADING, RESIDENTIAL ZONES 
In every residential zone, there shall be provided at least two off street parking spaces per dwelling unit unless as otherwise provided for elsewhere in the Zoning Ordinance. No required parking or maneuvering shall be located within any required front yard, with the exception of single family and two-family uses. 
6.11 PARKING, LOADING AND UNLOADING, NON RESIDENTIAL ZONES 
In any zone other than a residential zone, off street parking, loading or unloading areas may be permitted within the required front yard if there is sufficient depth between the street right-of-way line and the building line or other barrier to accommodate all parking and maneuvering without the necessity of backing over the street right-of-way line. 
6.12 LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACES 
In any zone, every building or part thereof hereafter erected, having a floor area of 10,000 square feet or more, which is to be occupied by manufacturing, compounding, processing, storage, warehousing, goods or other similar uses, requiring the receipt or distribution by vehicles of material, objects or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained, on the same premises with such building, at least one (1) off street loading space for every 20,000 square feet or fraction thereof of floor area so used in excess of 20,000 square feet. Loading spaces shall be no smaller than 12 feet by 35 feet. They shall not be included in calculating V.U. A. landscaping requirements. 
6.13 VEHICULAR STORAGE AREAS 
Areas for storage of commercial vehicles and items such as trailers, farm machinery, construction equipment and similar items, when located in the C-4, MAZ, I-1 and I-2 zones, shall not be required to be paved. However, they shall be maintained in such a manner that they do not become a nuisance in terms of dust, mud, or drainage. 
6.14 OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS 
6.14.1 Off Street Parking Requirements for All Zones Except C-5 Permitted uses within the C-5 Downtown Mixed Use Zone shall not be required to comply with the provisions of this Section requiring off street parking unless 10 or more spaces are provided. 10 
6.14.211 Waiver of Parking Standards A property owner may request a waiver from the off street parking requirements contained within the Zoning Ordinance by filing and application for parking waiver with the Commission. A request for a waiver may be made for any permitted use in any zone. Waivers granted will be for the specific use stated in the request only. Waivers will not run with the land and are not transferable to other uses or other lots. 
A request for parking waiver shall be accompanied by a development plan and completed application form. The application shall contain the name of all adjoining property owners, so that notification of the waiver request may be sent to those owners. As part of the waiver request, the applicant shall have the burden of proof in showing that there will be no adverse impact upon the neighborhood or general area by the granting of the waiver. In granting a waiver for parking, the Commission shall consider the following: 
1. 	
The special circumstance of the proposed use; and 

2. 	
The peak demand for parking that the proposed use would require; and 

3. 	
The potential for on street parking or public parking in the general area: and 

4. 	
The guidelines listed in the Transportation and Land Use sections of the Comprehensive Plan. 


145 

The Commission may also consider other factors it may deem relevant in making its decision. In granting a waiver, the Commission shall not reduce the number of parking spaces by more than 50%, or increase the number of parking spaces by more than 50% of the required number of parking spaces as provided by the Zoning Ordinance. A waiver of the required number of parking spaces does not exempt the parking area and development from any other requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. 
6.14.3 Waiver Not Required A property owner does not have to request a waiver from the off street parking requirements when there is a reciprocal (joint use) parking agreement on file with the Department, the properties involved in the agreement are adjacent or are part of a shopping center or other common development project and the properties involved in the agreement jointly meet the minimum off street parking requirements for all properties involved in the agreement.14 
6.15 LARGE VEHICLE PARKING 
6.15.1 IHSB Zone Within the Interstate Highway Service Business (IHSB) Over Zone, any hotel, motel, fast-food restaurant, museum, rest areas or convention centers shall install onsite parking for buses, recreational vehicles, or other large vehicles. There shall be one space for every 25 required spaces. Each space shall be a minimum of 10 feet in width and 45 feet in length. Aisle widths shall be determined by the Department. 
6.15.2 Parking Prohibition Within commercial zones large commercial vehicles (e.g. buses, tractor/trailer rigs, recreational vehicles) may not park on or across parking spaces overnight. Vehicles waiting to make deliveries or for display for sale as part of the normal business operation are exempted from this regulation. 
6.16 BICYCLE PARKING 
Bicycle racks shall be required with the following uses when located along a designated bicycle route: Government Parks, private parks, outdoor commercial recreation facilities, schools, libraries, community centers, museums, pharmacies, convenience stores, theaters, regional enclosed malls, shopping centers, outdoor athletic facilities and health clubs. 
PARKING TABLES Table 6.0 Parking Spaces (Angle/Aisle Width) 
PARKING ANGLE (In Degrees)  900  600  Parallel 00  
Aisle Width  One way traffic  24  18  11  
Aisle Width  Two way traffic  24  23  19  

Parking angles other than those shown above shall be reviewed by the Department and Engineering Department and may be approved. 
Table 6.1 Minimum Parking Allowed 10 
Number of Spaces  Minimum Parking Allowed  
0 – 50 spaces  No more than 50% reduction10  
More than 51 spaces  No more than 30% reduction10  

Table 6.2 Accessible Parking Space Requirements 

Minimum Number of Accessible Parking Spaces ADA Accessibility Guidelines 4.1.2 (5)  
Total Number of Parking Spaces Provided (per lot)  Total Minimum Number of Accessible Parking Spaces (60” & 96” aisles)  Van Accessible Parking Spaces with min. 96” wide access aisle  Accessible Parking Spaces with min. 60” wide access aisle  
Column A  Column B  
1 to 25  2  2  0  
26 to 50  2  2  0  
51 to 75  3  2  2  
76 to 100  4  2  3  
101 to 150  5  2  4  
151 to 200  6  2  5  
201 to 300  7  4  3  
301 to 400  8  4  4  
401 to 500  9  4  5  
501 to 1000  2% of total parking provided in each lot  2 van accessible spaces for every 6 or fraction of 6  
1001 and over  20 plus 1 for each 100 over 1000  2 van accessible spaces for every 6 or fraction of 6  

147 


Figure 6.2 Parking Aisle Widths 



90O 2Way 90O1Way 


CHAPTER 7 

GENERAL SIGN STANDARDS 

7.0 INTENT AND PURPOSE 
The intent of this Chapter is: 
1. 	
To encourage an attractive visual environment for business and to promote a healthy economy through informing and directing the general public. 

2. 	
To protect and enhance the physical appearance of the City. 

3. 	
To ensure public safety along public and private streets within the City. 

4. 	
To provide businesses with a format for on-premises street advertising. 


In order to establish these objectives, the City has determined: 
1. 	
Without adequate regulation and design standards, signs may become a nuisance. Signs are a nuisance when they are excessive in number and are unduly distracting to motorists and pedestrians, creating a traffic hazard and in some places reduce the effectiveness of other signs needed to direct and inform the public. 

2. 	
The appearance of the community is marred by the excessive number, oversized and poorly designed signs, so that both residential and business property values are adversely affected. 

3. 	
The number of such distracting signs ought to be reduced and signs that are permitted should comply with the standards of this ordinance in order to reduce the aforementioned effects; and in view of the foregoing, all signs not in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared a nuisance.4 


7.1 SIGN PERMIT PROCEDURES 
No sign, except as specifically exempted herein, shall be displayed, erected, relocated or altered until a permit has been issued by the Department. Applications shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
1. 	
A completed application form. 

2. 	
A site plan and/or building elevations showing the location of the proposed sign(s) on the lot and/or building, including setbacks. 

3. 	
Detailed sign information including type of construction, method of illumination, dimensions, copy, method of mounting and/or erecting and other similar information. NOTE: The content of the message or speech displayed on the sign shall not be considered when approving or denying a sign permit. However, the content must be submitted to evaluate the sign copy area. 

4. 	
The written consent of the owner of the underlying property or authorized agent. 

5. 	
A permit fee. 


The Department shall maintain written records of all permits issued or denied and any condition(s) attached to the approval of each permit request. Signs may be erected or constructed only in compliance with the approved permit. 
7.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS 
1. 	
No light, sign or other advertising device shall be designed or erected in such a manner or location as to imitate or resemble any official traffic sign, signal or device, or use words, phrases, symbols or characters implying the existence of danger, the need to stop or maneuver the vehicle or create an unsafe distraction for the vehicle operator. 

2. 	
No sign shall be placed or located in or extend over a street, right-of-way, roadway, sidewalk, public or private access easement, or alley except as provided herein. 

3. 	
No sign shall be attached to or painted on the surface of any tree, utility pole, streetlight standard or dilapidated structure. 

4. 	
No sign shall be allowed to be illuminated except as expressly provided herein. Signs which are otherwise allowed to be illuminated are not allowed if it is determined that the lighting causes glare or otherwise interferes with the vision of persons operating motor vehicles on any public way or interferes with any adjacent property. 

5. 	
Neon lighting and tubing and other exposed light sources may be used in signs where signs are permitted to be directly illuminated. 

6. 	
No sign may be located or constructed so as to obstruct sight lines for persons using streets, alleys, pedestrian rights-of-way and driveways. 

7. 	
Signs accessory to nonconforming uses shall be permitted and shall be subject to the regulations for the use. 

8. 	
Where more than one free standing sign is permitted on a lot, such signs shall be located and oriented to the distinct street frontage by which the signs are permitted. Signs may not be closer than 75 feet from each other as measured in a straight line. 

9. 	
On lots with multiple street frontages, and/or where multiple freestanding signs are permitted, the total square footage in area per side of a freestanding sign may be increased by 50% over the maximum permitted square footage if only one freestanding sign is erected. 

10. 
Sign materials should coordinate with building materials. 

11. 
Wall mounted tenant signs must be placed on the wall of the tenant’s leased space. 

12. 
Signs placed on fences are considered to be and are counted as freestanding signs. 

13. 	
Residential signs should use more natural or earth tones in their colors to lessen impact on the surrounding uses. 

14. 
All residential signs may be externally illuminated only. 

15. 	
All free standing signs shall contain the numerical street address of the business on the sign. The street address shall be displayed in numbers in contrast to the sign at least six (6) inches in height.11 

16. 	
Sign permit shall become null and void if not installed within six (6) months from the original issue date of the permit. 4 


149 

7.3 SIGNS EXEMPT FROM PERMIT 
The following signs shall not require a permit; however, such signs are subject to applicable restrictions contained within the Zoning Ordinance: 
1. 	
Changing copy of off premise signs, attraction board, marquee or electronic message display system. 4 

2. 	
Church directional signs. 4 

3. 	
Community identification signs and community beautification project signs. 

4. 	
Construction signs. 

5. 	
Government signs, including but not limited to traffic signs and traffic control signs. 

6. 	
Historic markers. 

7. 	
Incidental signs. 

8. 	
Nameplates. 

9. 	
Noncommercial signs. 

10. 
On site real estate signs, including auction signs. 

11. 	
Public utility warning signs for the safety and welfare of the public, including but not limited to signs identifying high voltage, public telephone or underground cable. 

12. 	
Signs not visible from the public right-of-way provided however that if the sign becomes visible from the right-of-way at any time, it shall meet all the applicable requirements of this 


4
Ordinance. 
13. 	
Special events signs associated with community festivals or events of a cultural, civic, or educational nature. 

14. 
Tract signs. 

15. 
Booth (Flea Market & Farmers Market) Signs.14 


7.4 PROHIBITED SIGNS, ALL ZONES 
The following signs and/or sign features shall be prohibited in all zones: 
1. 	
Abandoned signs. 

2. 	
Any sign which emits any noise, odor or visible matter for the purpose of attracting attention to the sign. 

3. 	
Flashing or blinking signs, except for permitted informational signs. 

4. 	
Mobile or portable signs. 

5. 	
Offsite real estate signs. 

6. 	
Rotating or moving signs. 

7. 	
Signs attached or placed on a tent structure, where the placement of such signs adversely affects the fire resistance rating of the structure. 

8. 	
Streamers, pennants, balloons, inflatables and similar signs or devices. 

9. 	
Tag signs. 

10. 
Temporary signs. 4 

11. 
Vehicle signs, when attached to a vehicle not normally driven daily. 


7.5 PERMITTED SIGNS, ALL ZONES 
The following signs shall be permitted within all zones subject to the restrictions specified: 
1. 	
Church directional signs. 4 

2. 	
Community identification signs and community beautification project signs. 

3. 	
Construction signs. 

4. 	
Government signs and historic markers. 

5. 	
Incidental signs. 

6. 	
Noncommercial signage, including but not limited to political signs. 

7. 	
On site real estate signs, including auction signs. 

8. 	
Signs associated with temporary structures when the sign is permanently attached to the temporary structure and not exceeding 15% of the exposed building face of the wall to which it is attached. Each installation of a temporary structure and the associated signage shall require the issuance of all applicable permits. 

9. 	
Special events signs associated with community festivals or events of a cultural, civic, or educational nature. 

10. 
Subdivision Identification Sign/Signature Entrance. 

11. 
Tract signs. 


7.6 TEMPORARY BANNER SIGNS 
Temporary banners shall be allowed in all commercial, industrial and specialized use zones. Any business shall be allowed one temporary banner, not to exceed 50 square feet in area, to be placed on premise. No person shall place a banner on their business premise without first receiving a permit from the Department. Permits shall be for a period not to exceed thirty (30) consecutive days and for a cumulative period not to exceed one hundred twenty (120) days in any calendar year. Immediately upon expiration of the permit the applicable temporary banner shall be removed. The permit for the temporary banner shall be kept on the business premises and shall be available for inspection by the Department. Temporary banners shall be securely installed and properly maintained the entire time period of their display. Failure to properly maintain a temporary banner or if the temporary banner is determined to cause a safety hazard for pedestrians or vehicles is reason for the department to order removal of the temporary banner or to cite the property owner. 
7.7 SCENIC PARKWAY SIGNAGE 
It is the intent of this regulation to implement the goals of the Comprehensive Plan through the recognition that certain entryways/roadways to the City are determined to be scenic in nature and therefore should be protected from visual blight from excessive signage. To meet this community concern, no off premise signs shall be permitted along a designated scenic parkway. Scenic parkways include Veterans Way, KY 3005 (Ring Road), KY 61 (Lincoln Parkway) and KY 361 (E2RC). 10 
7.8 INTERSTATE OFF PREMISE SIGNAGE 
In addition to other off premise signage allowed elsewhere in the Zoning Ordinance, there is to be the provision for off premise signage along and adjacent to Interstate 65, within 100 feet of the right­of-way and oriented towards I 65 traffic. Signage shall be allowed in areas zoned C-3, C-4, I-1 or I-2 as of July 1, 2008. Off premise signs may be located: a) Not closer than 2,000 feet from any other such sign as measured along the near curbside of any adjacent street in either direction from the sign, and b) not closer than 250 feet from any other such sign as measured from a point across the street from the sign along the opposite curbside in either direction, and c) for signs located on lots at intersections, the measurement of sub paragraphs A and B above shall apply to both intersection streets, regardless of sign face orientation. 
151 

7.9 CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE 

Every sign shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of the Kentucky Building Code and standards and guidelines adopted by the Department. Every sign, including those for which a permit is not required, shall be maintained in good condition at all times. The Department shall have the authority to order the repair, repainting, alteration or removal of any sign which is a nuisance to the community by reason of dilapidation, obsolescence or inadequate maintenance. 
7.10 NONCONFORMING SIGNS 
The following provisions shall apply to nonconforming signs. 
7.10.1 Continuation, Off Premises Signs With the exception of those signs which are prohibited, a nonconforming off premises sign may continue in existence and shall be properly maintained in good condition but it shall not be: 1) Changed to another nonconforming sign; 2) Structurally altered (except to meet safety requirements) so as to prolong the life of the sign; 3) Altered so as to increase the degree of nonconformity of the sign; 4) Expanded or enlarged; 5) Reestablished after its discontinuance of 90 days; 6) Moved to a new location on the same building lot; or 6) Reestablished after substantial damage or destruction.11 
7.10.2 Continuation, On Premises Sign With the exception of those signs which are prohibited, a nonconforming on premise sign may continue in existence and shall be properly maintained in good condition. Should a legal nonconforming sign be replaced, the sign may not increase its degree of nonconformity, but may decrease in degree of nonconformity. 
7.10.3 Continuation, Status Change When a legal on premise sign becomes an off premise sign due to the sale of the property on which the sign is located it may continue to exist if all the following conditions are met 
1) The sign may only advertise a single business and it shall be the business that was formerly 
located on the property; 
2) The business to which the sign pertains is located within 750’ of the sign as measured along 
the near curbside of the adjacent street; 
3) The sign is less than 100 square feet in area; 
4) The sign is located within a commercial zoning district; 
5) The sign is in conformance with the spacing requirements for off premise signs as found in 
this ordinance; 
6) The sign shall be located on the existing pole or monument; 
7) The sign shall be properly maintained in good condition; 4 

7.11 DISCONTINUATION, PROHIBITED SIGNS 
Any prohibited sign as defined in the Zoning Ordinance shall be removed within two days of notification of violation. Failure to remove the sign may result in the issuance of a citation to the Elizabethtown Code Enforcement Board (CEB) or other enforcement action that may be appropriate. 
7.12 SIGN TYPES 

The following sign types are permitted by this ordinance. 
Figure 7.0 Sign Types Freestanding Signs, Wall Signs, Projecting Signs, Roof Signs 

OTHER SIGN TYPES  
TYPE  ALLOWED TYPES  MAXIMUM NUMBER  MAXIMUM SIGN AREA  MAXIMUM HEIGHT  LOCATION REQUIREMENTS  LIGHTING ALLOWED  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS  
Banners  Wall Pole  1  50 S.F.  N/A  Must be securely attached 11  No  May not be attached to light poles, flag poles, utility poles  
Booth (Flea Market & Farmers Market  Wall-mount  1  15 s.f.  3’  Must be located directly adjacent to booth space  No  Cannot block pedestrian access.14  
Canopy  1/canopy face  15% of face  N/A  Yes  
Construction  Monument Pole  1/street  64 s.f.  8’  Monument & Pole 10’ off paved surface  No  No permit required.  
Directional, Commercial  Monument Pole  2/ent.  6 s.f.  3’  May not project into right-of-way  Yes  May contain corporate logo.10  
Directional, Industrial  Monument Pole  2/ent.  50 s.f.14  10’14  Yes  May only contain directional information and corporate logo.  

153 

TYPE  ALLOWED TYPES  MAXIMUM NUMBER  MAXIMUM SIGN AREA  MAXIMUM HEIGHT  LOCATION REQUIREMENTS  LIGHTING ALLOWED  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS  
Directional, Travelers  Monument  1  100 s.f.  25’  At intersection of arterial & commercial collector streets  Yes  Sign erected by City. Spaces on sign filled on a first come, first served basis.  
Incidental  Wall Monument Pole  N/A  10 s.f. 10  N/A15  N/A  No  No permit required. Maximum of two (2) signs displayed at any time. 15  
Industrial Park Identification  Monument Pole  1/ent. to Ind. Area  100 s.f.  25’  10’ off paved surface  Yes  May contain tenant signs  
Message Board  Wall Monument Pole  Wall 1 Mon. 1 Pole 1  Not to exceed 50% of total allowed sign face when pole or monument, maximum of 75 s.f. 4  Monument & Pole 10’ off paved surface  Yes  May be electronic or manual copy change. Must be accompanied by permanent business identification signage if pole or monument. 4  
Projecting  Wall  1/wall  15% of wall face  20’  Cannot project into right-of-way  Yes  Bottom of sign must be minimum 7’ above finish grade.17  
Real Estate  Monument Pole Wall  1 per street frontage  16 s.f., residential; 32 s.f. comm./ Ind.  6’  Removed within 10 days of completion of sales or lease activity. No permit required  
Subdivision Identification  Monument  2/street entrance  48 s.f.  16’  No less than 10’ from paved surface of primary intersecting street  Yes, External only  Additional requirements are located in Section 8.2  
Tract Sign  Monument Pole  1/street frontage  72 s.f.  12’  MON. & F.S. 10’ off paved surface  No  Total not to exceed four signs. No permit required.  
Sidewalk Food Vendors  Pole Cart7  1  15 s.f.  5’  Must be located directly adjacent to vending cart  No  Cannot block pedestrian access and must be removed each day.  
Temporary Structure  Wall  1/wall  15%  No  

Table 7.1 Off Premise Sign 

OFF PREMISE SIGN  
TYPE  ALLOWED TYPES  MAXIMUM SIGN AREA  MAXIMUM HEIGHT  LOCATION REQUIREMENTS  LIGHTING ALLOWED  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS  
Off Premise  Mon. Pole  300 s.f. excluding structural supports May be placed back to back or in a “V” type construction  45’  20’ off street right of way; In areas zoned C-3, C-4, I-1, I-2  Yes  Spacing: 1. No closer than 2000’ from any other off premise sign as measured along the near curbside of any adjacent street in either direction from the sign. 2. No closer than 250’ from any other such sign as measured from a point across the street from the sign along the opposite curbside in either direction. 3. For signs located at intersections, the measurements of items 1 & 2 apply to both intersecting streets, regardless of sign face orientation. 4. No closer than 500’ from any  
residential zone, measured along either side of the street 5. No closer than 100’ from any residential zone as measured in a radius from the sign.  
Table 7.2 IHSB Signs 



INTERSTATE HIGHWAY SERVICE BUSINESS OVERZONE  
TYPE  ALLOWED TYPES  MAXIMUM SIGN AREA  MAXIMUM HEIGHT  LOCATION REQUIREMENTS  LIGHTING ALLOWED  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS  
1. One additional sign, at a height no greater than 45’  
225 s.f. for signs between 45’  (replaces 1 permitted free  
Interstate  and 74’ in height.  In areas within  standing sign). 2. Two adjacent parcels, either  
Highway Service Business  Mon. Pole  325 s.f. for signs between 75’ and 99’ in height.  the IHSB as found on the Zoning Map  Yes  sharing a boundary line or those separated by a public or private right-of-way, may  
400 s.f. for signs between  place signage on one pole, on  
100’ and 125’ in height.  either parcel. Allowed square feet requirements remain in effect.  
Restricted Access Parcels  Mon. Pole  Based on Use  Based on Use  In areas within the IHSB as found on the Zoning Map (On either parcel)  Yes  When one parcel restricted to access through adjacent parcel and a) lots share ingress/egress; b) Located on commercial collector or arterial street; c) reciprocal parking agreements are executed.  

155 

CHAPTER 8 

FENCE & WALL REGULATIONS 

8.0 INTENT AND PURPOSE 
The intent of this Section is to improve the appearance and safety of property by ensuring that fences are erected in a manner so that they do not become a visual nuisance or safety hazard and to promote public health and safety. 
8.1 FENCES AND WALLS 
Walls and Fences shall not be permitted any closer to the street than the yard setback as established by the record subdivision restrictions or any closer than the house/principal structure when no private subdivision restrictions are recorded in a residential or business zone, except for permitted schools, cemeteries and government buildings. Permitted side and rear yard fencing and walls shall not contain any barbed wire or electric fencing when in a residential zone. Maximum fence height shall not exceed eight (8’) feet.3 
Where a lot abuts a publicly dedicated alley, a wall or fence shall be permitted to be located on the property line in the yard that abuts the alley, provided any gate swings in toward the property. 
Walls and fences shall be permitted in any yard in an industrial zone. There shall be no height restriction placed on any wall or fence erected or maintained in industrial zones, and any barbed wire construction shall be not less than six feet above ground level. 
8.1.1 Walls and Fences, Corner Lots When a lot is a corner lot, it shall have two front yards. For the purposes of fencing regulations only, the yards are defined as follows: The primary front yard (the front yard adjacent to the principal exposure of the principal structure) and the secondary front yard (the front yard adjacent to the side exposure of the principal structure). Fences may be allowed in the secondary front yard in conformance with the following provisions: 
• 	
No closer to the street than the yard setback as established by the record subdivision restrictions or any closer than one-half the distance between the house/principal structure and the lot line, whichever is less restrictive. 

• 	
Permitted secondary front yard fencing and walls shall not exceed six feet in height and shall not contain any barbed wire. 

• 	
No fencing or walls shall be allowed in the primary front yard unless meeting the requirements for primary front yard fencing as found elsewhere in this chapter. 


8.1.2 Walls and Fences, Double Frontage Lots When a lot is a double frontage lot, it shall have two front yards. For the purposes of fencing regulations only, the yards are defined as follows: The primary front yard (the front yard adjacent to the principal exposure of the principal structure) and the secondary front yard (the front yard adjacent to the rear exposure of the principal structure). Fences may be allowed in the secondary front yard in conformance with the following provisions: 
• 	
No closer to the street than the yard setback as established by the record subdivision restrictions or any closer than one-half the distance between the house/principal structure and the lot line, whichever is less restrictive. 

• 	
Permitted secondary front yard fencing and walls shall not exceed six feet in height and shall not contain any barbed wire. 

• 	
No fencing or walls shall be allowed in the primary front yard unless meeting the requirements for primary front yard fencing as found elsewhere in this chapter. 


8.1.3 Decorative/Ornamental Fences Decorative/Ornamental fencing may be placed in the primary and secondary front yards under all the following conditions: 
1. 	
Maximum height shall not exceed forty-two (42”) inches, measured from the adjacent finished grade to the top of any vertical or horizontal slat/picket or similar member. No variance from this maximum restriction may be obtained. 

2. 	
Corner posts and/or columns may have a maximum height of forty-eight (48”) inches, measured from the adjacent finish grade to the top of the post or column. Lighting fixtures are exempted from this maximum height. No similar ornamental features may exceed this height. 

3. 	
Fencing material may not block access to any public sidewalk or way. 

4. 	
Fencing material may not project into any sight triangle as defined elsewhere in this ordinance. 

5. 	
Decorative ornamental fencing may include wrought iron, wood, vinyl, extruded polymer, aluminum or similar materials. Materials other than those noted require Commission approval before installation may take place. 

6. 	
Columns/posts may include wrought iron, wood, vinyl, extruded polymer, aluminum, brick, natural or cultured stone, split face masonry units or other similar materials. Materials other than those noted require Commission approval before installation may take place. 

7. 	
Materials not approved as decorative fencing include chain link, vinyl coated chain link, rolled (welded) wire, chicken wire, warning barrier, rabbit guard, garden netting, poultry netting or other similar materials. 


157 

8.2 SUBDIVISON IDENTIFICATION SIGN/SIGNATURE ENTRANCE Each entrance to the subdivision or section of the subdivision may have no more than two signs per entrance. A subdivision identification sign/signature entrance is any wall(s), fence(s), guard house or similar structure at an entrance to any subdivision. 
1. 	
The sign/entrance shall not obstruct the natural roadside drainage or through drainage facilities and allow for adequate sight distance. The Engineering Department may require the location of the proposed sign/entrance be staked in the field and approved prior to construction. 

2. 	
Signs/entrances shall not be permitted within utility or drainage easements without prior approval from the agency to which the easement has been dedicated. 

3. 	
Signs/entrances shall not be permitted within the right-of-way of an arterial or collector street except those collector streets functioning as the primary entrance to the proposed development and provided that approval from the Engineering Department and any other appropriate authority is obtained. 

4. 	
Signs/entrances may be located within the right-of-way of a local street if approved by the Engineering Department. 

5. 	
Encroachment permits and proof of permanent maintenance must be received for any sign/entrance to be located within a right-of-way prior to permit approval. 

6. 	
Prior to construction of any sign/entrance within a right-of-way, an indemnity agreement must be provided by the developer or owner to the City. Such agreement shall conform to the format approved by the Commission. 

7. 	
Any public agency responsible for maintenance of facilities within the right-of-way may require, for any reason, the removal of a sign/entrance located within the right-of-way. The removal shall be done at the owner(s) expense and within 30 days from receiving written notice. 

8. 	
Length: The maximum length of a sign/signature entrance shall not exceed 100 feet on each side of the entrance roadway. Any structure extending beyond this length shall be considered a fence or wall and the requirements for walls and fences shall apply. 

9. 	
Proximity to Structure on Lot and Driveways: Signs/entrance shall be constructed a minimum of 20 feet from any dwelling or driveway entrance, 

10. 	
Landscaping: In order to mitigate the visual impact of sign structures on adjacent vehicular corridors and land uses, any sign/entrance equal to or greater than eight feet in height shall have plantings adjacent to at least 50% of its exterior façade. Such plantings shall conform to the standards of size, materials and quality as set forth in the landscaping regulations of the Zoning Ordinance. 


CHAPTER 9 
GENERAL DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 

9.0 INTENT AND PURPOSE 
The intent of this Section is to set minimum and maximum requirements for lots, yards, heights of buildings and other structures, protect environmentally sensitive and geologic hazard areas and to promote public health and safety through the provision of adequate public facilities. 
9.1 MINIMUM LOT AREA 
Except as otherwise specifically provided, no principal building shall hereafter be erected on a lot which has less than the minimum area or width specified for the respective zone, and no building shall hereafter be erected or converted for dwelling use on a lot containing less than the minimum lot area so specified. The total gross floor area in all buildings on the lot shall be considered in determining the adequacy of lot area. 
9.2 YARDS 
Except as otherwise specified herein, every lot shall have a front yard and a rear yard the least depths of which shall not be less than those specified for the respective zone and every lot shall have a side yard on each side, which shall not be less than a side yard as specified for this respective zone. 
9.2.1 Front Yards All lots require a front yard to be provided along each street lot line. 
Where the front wall of a building is not parallel with the front lot line or is broken or otherwise irregular, the average depth of the front yard shall not be less than the otherwise required front yard; provided, however, that such front wall shall at all points be within five feet of the otherwise required front yard depth. 
Large commercial or industrial developments consisting of a structure containing 40,000 square feet or more, having a height of 25 feet or more at street grade on major arterial streets may be required to provide additional building setbacks to reduce visual impact of the large buildings on the surrounding landscape. 
9.2.2 Side Yards In any zone where a side yard is required, the least width of each side yard shall be increased by six inches for each foot where the side wall of a building exceeds 50’ feet in height. 
In the case of attached dwelling units, the entire structure shall be considered as a single building with respect to side yard requirements. 
Where the side wall of a building is not parallel with the side lot line or is broken or otherwise irregular, the average width of the side yard shall not be less than the required side yard; provided, however, that the side yard shall not be narrower at any point than three feet. 
9.2.3 Rear Yards Where the rear wall of a building is not parallel with the rear lot line or is otherwise irregular, the average depth of the rear yard shall not be less than the required rear yard; provided however, that the rear yard shall not be narrower at any point than 10’ feet. 
9.2.4 Yard Requirements for Shopping Centers and Regional Enclosed Shopping Centers For shopping centers and regional enclosed shopping centers which are designed to be one continuous structure and placed on two or more lots, it shall be permitted to place the structure on or above the side lot line of two adjoining properties. To qualify, the structure must project onto the adjoining lot no less than 10 feet. The developer shall provide a reciprocal parking agreement and any common area agreements along with satisfying all other section of this Ordinance as required. 
9.2.5 Special Yard Requirements It is recognized that in certain developments, it is beneficial to create larger side and rear yard setbacks, in order to buffer land uses of differing density and intensity, which abut along the side and rear lot lines. In such developments, if a 75 foot or greater yard setback is provided, development shall be permitted through the highest density allowed in this Ordinance. Density determinations will be based on the lot area less the increased yard area.3 
9.2.6 Open Space Yard Requirements When a lot or parcel is subdivided for the purpose of creating a permanent open space, or becoming a conservation area, or nature preserve, or linear greenbelt park, then the minimum requirements for lot criteria standards of this Ordinance shall not apply. The exception to these standards is only for land purchased by the City of Elizabethtown, an 
159 

organization or entity created by the City of Elizabethtown, a not for profit organization or a neighborhood association recognized by the City. 
9.2.7 Public Utility Lots When a lot or parcel is subdivided for the purpose of creating a lot for the location of a public utility, including but not limited to natural gas regulating station, potable water storage facility, electrical substation, rail facility, stormwater storage facility, the following requirements apply 
9.2.7.1 
Minimum Areas and Setbacks 

1. 
Minimum Lot Area: No minimum lot area. 

2. 
Minimum Street Frontage: Fifty (50’) feet. 

3. 
Minimum Front Yard Setback: Twenty (20’) feet. 

4. 
Minimum Side Yard Setback: Ten (10’) feet. 



5. 
Minimum Rear Yard Setback: Fifteen (15’) feet. These lots may only be used for locating public utility facilities. No habitable structures shall be permitted on any of these parcels. 7 


9.3 HEIGHT OF STRUCTURES 
9.3.1 Maximum Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure, or part thereof, shall hereafter be erected or altered to a height greater than the maximum specified for the respective category. 
9.3.2 How Measured For the purpose of this Ordinance, the “height” of a wall or structure or a part of a building is the mean vertical distance from the average established grade in front of the lot, or from the average natural grade at the building line, if higher, to the average height of the top of the cornice of flat roofs, or roof line, or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the middle height of the highest gable or dormer in a pitched or hipped roof, or if there are no gables or dormers, to the middle height of such pitched or hipped roof. 
Where a lot abuts on two or more streets or alleys of different average established grades in front of the lot, the higher of such grades shall control only for a depth of 120 feet measured perpendicularly back from the line of the higher street or alley. 
On a corner lot the height of the mean vertical distance from the average natural grade at the building line, if higher, in the street of greatest width, or if two or more such streets are of the same width, form the highest of such grades. The height limitations as controlled by the wider street shall govern for a distance of 120 feet measured at right angles back from such wider street, except on parts of such 120 feet as may be within a more restricted height. 
9.3.3 Exceptions of Height Limits Notwithstanding other regulations in this Ordinance or the maximum specified for the respective category, the height limits of this Ordinance shall not apply for the following: Barns, silos or other farm structures on farms, church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes, monuments, water towers, observation towers, transmission towers, windmills, chimneys, smokestacks, derricks, conveyors, flag poles, radio towers, masts and aerials, bulkheads, elevator penthouses, fire towers, hose towers, cooling towers, grain elevators, and other structures, where the manufacturing process requires a greater height, provided, however, that all such structures above the limiting heights specified in this Zoning Ordinance shall not be closer than 25 feet from every lot line not a street lot line, and shall be set back one foot from the otherwise required set back at the limiting height, for each foot of vertical height above the limiting height. EXCEPTION: Structures designed with a maximum collapsible fall zone contained within the boundaries of the parcel on which they are located shall only be required to meet the minimum yard setbacks for structures in that zone.6/12 
Solar heating and solar collection devices, provided such devices do not exceed by more than five feet the otherwise permitted maximum height for the zone in which they are located. 
9.4 ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREAS AND GEOLOGIC HAZARD AREAS 
It is recognized that certain areas in Elizabethtown, due to environmental or geologic conditions, may pose problems providing safe development where such conditions are encountered on the land to be developed. These areas are defined and described as follows: 
9.4.1 Environmentally Sensitive Area This term applies to any area which, due to its natural or physical setting, may have environmental problems with regard to their development. This is not to say that the land cannot be developed, but if it is determined that development can occur, then some safeguards such as detailed site planning will be necessary to overcome the physical limitation of the land. Lands in question shall include (but not be limited to) areas of poor soils, improper fill, wetlands, significant areas of tree stands, aquifer recharge areas, well-head protection areas, riparian areas, streams, creeks, lakes and other natural waterways. 
9.4.2 Geologic Hazard Areas A geologic hazard area differs from an environmentally sensitive area in that the environmental problems are so numerous that development, even with severe limitations, would pose a severe problem to the immediate area or the surrounding areas. Examples of these areas are areas of excessive floodplain, areas that have clustering of sinkholes, areas of severe slope (over 20%) and areas that have potential collapse problems due to caves underneath the rock strata but close to the surface. 
Location of most of the environmentally sensitive and geologic hazard areas are shown in the Hardin County Soil Survey prepared by the U. S. Soil Conservation Service. Additional maps and other information regarding such areas are on file with the City. 
9.4.3 Procedures The developer shall submit the following materials to the Department for any development involving an environmentally sensitive or geologic hazard area: An application, containing a general statement of development activity and mitigation plans; a development plan or subdivision plat as required by the Zoning Ordinance, which shall locate and identify such areas. Additionally, the following materials may be required after initial review by the Department: Engineering studies of sub surface conditions, erosion and sedimentation control plans, drainage plans, soil analysis or grading plans. 
9.4.4 Standards Whenever a development is proposed on land containing such areas the 
following requirements shall apply: Environmentally Sensitive Areas All such areas shall be protected by special design measures taken by the developer to attempt to minimize the developments impact. Acceptable design measures are: 
• 	
Non disturbance of area; 

• 	
Provisions of additional building setbacks (at a minimum, a 50 foot setback), so that site disturbance is minimal; 

• 	
Provision of easements in such areas as may be appropriate, so that an open space area is provided; 

• 	
Provision of storm water retention areas; 

• 	
Re-contouring and excavation of the area, only when an erosion control plan is approved by the Storm Water Management Department and when appropriate performance surety has been posted with the City. 


Geologic Hazard Areas All such areas shall be protected by generously designing the development such that a geologic hazard area shall be left in its natural state as a permanent open space for a distance of 100 feet from such areas. 
9.4.5 Commission Review After review of the applications general statement and applicable plans, if the Department finds that questions remain concerning the developments impact on the environmentally sensitive area or the health and safety of future users of the area, the plan will be referred to the Commission for action. The Commission shall refuse to fully approve a plan or plat until it is satisfied that the hazards have been eliminated or adequate safeguards have been provided to ensure the least negative impact on the area. 
9.5 PUBLIC FACILITIES 
9.5.1 Water Supply System Every development shall be provided with a complete water distribution system adequate to serve the proposed development, including adequate fire protection facilities (as required by the City of Elizabethtown Fire Protection and Prevention Ordinance). The entire water system shall be provided by the developer and shall be designed and constructed to meet the approval of the City of Elizabethtown and/or appropriate utility. 
9.5.2 Storm Water Drainage System Provisions shall be made for satisfactory drainage of storm water by means of underground pipes and/or surface ditches. The storm water drainage system shall be provided by the developer and shall be designed to standards adopted by the City of Elizabethtown and in all aspects shall meet the approval of the City of Elizabethtown, Storm Water Management Department. 
161 

9.5.3 Sanitary Sewage Disposal System Provisions shall be made for satisfactory sanitary sewer in all developments. The developer shall provide a complete public sanitary sewer system designed and constructed according to the specifications of the City of Elizabethtown, unless it is determined by the Engineering Department that sanitary sewer is not readily available. If public sanitary sewer service is not readily available, then a private sanitary sewer (septic system) shall be provided in conformance with the requirements of the Hardin County Health Department and the requirements listed in this section. 
9.5.4 Natural Gas System Where natural gas service is desired in a development, application must be made to the City of Elizabethtown. Gas line extension shall conform to the policies of the Gas Department and shall be designed and constructed according to the specifications of the City of Elizabethtown. 
9.5.5 Electric and Telephone Supply System Provisions shall be made in every development for satisfactory electrical and telephone supply system approved by the appropriate utility. 
9.5.6 Sidewalks Sidewalks shall be provided in accordance with the following requirements. 
9.5.6.1 Installation Requirements No new site development or building shall hereinafter be constructed without the provision of a sidewalk across or adjoining the site. These requirements shall apply to any and all residential and commercial uses, regardless of their zoning classification. Excepted from this requirement is: 1) Suburban Residential-1 (R-1) zoned property with 200 feet or greater street frontage; 2) Industrial uses; and 3) Single family residential uses when more than 75% of the lots in the applicable section of the subdivision are developed without sidewalks. If sufficient right-of-way or easements do not exist, an easement shall be dedicated by the owner of record to the City for the provision of public access for the sidewalks. 
9.5.6.2 Construction Standards Sidewalks shall be constructed to comply with the design improvement standards for sidewalks as listed in the Elizabethtown Subdivision Regulations Design and Improvement Standards. However, the sidewalk width may be increased to allow for safer pedestrian access along high volume streets or to provide for handicap accessibility, upon determination of such need by the reviewing authority. 
9.5.6.3 Waiver/Delay of Sidewalk Installation A property owner may request a waiver or delay from the requirement of sidewalk installation contained within the Zoning Ordinance by filing an application for sidewalk installation waiver with the Commission. A request for a waiver/delay may be made for any permitted use in any zone. 
If waivers have been granted previously on a parcel on the same street within 250 ft. of the site the staff may grant the waiver administratively. Should the waiver not be granted administratively, an application may still be filed with the Commission as set out in the previous paragraph.3 
9.5.6.4 Waiver Process As part of the waiver request, the applicant shall have the burden of proof in showing that there will be no adverse impact upon the neighborhood or general area by the granting of the waiver. In granting a waiver, the Planning Commission shall consider the following: 
1. 	
The special circumstances of the proposed use; and 

2. 	
Site constraints that would make the installation economically unfeasible; and 

3. 	
The absence of a sidewalk network in the general vicinity and remote prospects for installation of a sidewalk network in the near future; and 

4. 	
Whether the installation of sidewalks would serve the purpose of enhancing the public welfare; and3 


The Commission may also consider other factors it may deem relevant in making its decision. A waiver of the requirement for sidewalk installation does not exempt the development from any other requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. 
9.5.6.5 Delayed Installation As part of a waiver/delay request, the Commission may determine that it is in the community’s best interest to delay the installation of the sidewalks instead of waiving the requirement. In granting a delay, the Commission shall consider the following: 
1. 	
Any proposed or planned public improvement project that would affect the design and location of the sidewalk on the property, and; 

2. 	
The desirability of a sidewalk network in the near future and probability for the installation of a sidewalk network, and; 

3. 
Whether the delay of installation of sidewalks would better serve the purpose of 



enhancing public welfare. 
The Commission may also consider other factors it may deem relevant in making its decision. In these instances, the Commission may release the applicant from the requirement for sidewalk installation at the time of the applicant’s request by allowing the applicant to pay to the City the cost for installation. 
The cost of installation shall be determined by the City Engineer. The City shall hold these funds and use them to install such sidewalks when it deems appropriate. 
A waiver/delay of the requirement for sidewalk installation does not exempt the development 
from any other requirements of the Zoning Ordinance, specifically including, but not limited to, 
the requirement of granting sidewalk easements as herein provided. 
9.5.6.6 Exemptions The following right of ways are exempted from the requirement of sidewalks. 1) Interstate 65; 2) Western Kentucky Parkway; 3) Lincoln Parkway; 4) US 31W Bypass; 5) New Glendale Road; 6) Bluegrass Parkway; 7) KY 361.10 Also exempted are frontages adjacent to the above named right of ways where access control fences are present.3 
9.6 SIGHT TRIANGLE/CLEAR DISTANCE 
9.6.1 Sight Triangle The sight triangle is an area formed by joining with a straight line, points along intersecting street right-of-ways, from their intersection, a clear area is hereby created and no plant materials or manmade objects may be constructed which obstruct visibility from 30 inches high upwards to the sky. Along arterial and commercial collector streets the triangle shall be 50’ and will be measured along the back of curb/edge of street pavement. Along residential collector and local streets the triangle shall be 25’ and will be measured from the back of curb/edge of street pavement.10/11 
9.7 ENTRANCE STANDARDS 
9.7.1 Entrance Widths Entrance widths shall be as follows: 
• 	
Single family and two family – No minimum, (30’) feet maximum. 6 

• 	
Multifamily Residential Complexes—(20’)11 feet minimum, 30 feet maximum. 

• 	
Commercial—(20’) 11 feet minimum, (50’) feet maximum. 

• 	
Industrial— (24’) 11 feet minimum, (60’) feet maximum. 

• 	
The Commission or their designee shall review all proposals for entrances and encroachments using the standards set forth in the Comprehensive Plan, for spacing, location and safe traffic movement. 

• 	
Entrances shall be from the street having the lower classification and/or Average Daily Traffic (ADT). In the event that both streets are of the same classification, the entrance shall be located on the street with the lower ADT. 

• 	
Through the encroachment permitting process entrances with a greater width than listed above shall be submitted to the Engineering Department for review and may be approved when extenuating circumstances exist.12 


9.7.2 Entrance Distance From Street Intersections 
9.7.2.1 Residential Entrances The minimum distance from the intersection of two or more streets to an entrance shall be (50’)11 feet on local streets and (100’)11 feet on collector streets, measured from the nearest edge of the pavement/curb line. Entrances with spacing less than these minimums shall be submitted to the Engineering11 Department for review and may be approved when extenuating circumstances exist. 6 
9.7.2.2 Multi Family, Commercial & Industrial Entrances The minimum distance from the intersection of two or more streets to an entrance shall be (150’)11, measured from the nearest curb lines. Entrances with spacing less than 150’ shall be submitted to the Engineering11 Department for review and may be approved when extenuating circumstances exist. 6 
9.7.3 Entrance Grade The maximum grade for an entrance to a multifamily, commercial or industrial use shall be no greater than ten (10) percent. When an entrance grade at its intersection with the public street exceeds three (3) percent, a leveling area shall be provided with grades no greater than three (3) percent for a distance of 50 feet from the intersection with the street. 
163 

9.7.4 Entrance, Limited Access Limited access entrances (e.g. right in/right out, right in only) shall be permitted only when there is a non mountable median present that prohibits illegal turns from being executed.3 
9.7.5 Entrance Location Entrances shall be designed and located to provide an exiting vehicle with an unobstructed view. Entrances along acceleration or deceleration lanes and tapers are discouraged and may only be approved when extenuating circumstances exist. 
9.7.6 Entrance Visibility Time Entrances shall be located to provide for the minimum visibility time sight distance of six seconds. The six second rule is to be calculated based on standards established by AASHTO. 
9.7.7 Entrance Traffic Control All entrances shall be provided with traffic control measures to assure safe access onto the public right-of-way. Traffic control measures shall include, but are not limited to, stop signs, stop bars, curbs and yield signs. 
9.7.8 Gated Entrances Access to private developments may be controlled or limited by gates or other mechanical devices but shall be accessible by emergency personnel and the access device shall be approved by the Elizabethtown Fire Marshall and the Elizabethtown Police Chief. Public streets or access to developments that also provides access by easement to other properties may not be gated or limited in any manner. 
CHAPTER 10 

ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND BUILDING PROJECTIONS 

10.0 INTENT AND PURPOSE 
10.1 ACCESSORY STRUCTURE LOCATIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
The following provisions shall regulate the location of accessory structures with respect to required yards: 
1. 	
Accessory structures shall be prohibited in any front yard, in any recorded or platted easement in side or rear yards and shall be a minimum of five (5’) feet from a side or rear lot line if no easements exist. 

2. 	
Accessory structures shall be no less than five feet from any lot line, except that additions to accessory structures may be made which have the same yard setback as the original structure. 

3. 	
Accessory structures shall not exceed the maximum height restriction for the zone in which they are located. 

4. 	
Accessory structures in residential zones shall not exceed the total square footage of the principal structure to which it is accessory. 11 The total square footage shall be an aggregate square footage of all accessory structures on the residential lot.14 

5. 	
For lots with multiple front yards, accessory structures may be located in the functional rear yard. The Department shall determine which yard area(s) is/are the functional rear yard and the applicable setback requirements. 

6. 	
It shall be prohibited to use any manufactured home, mobile home, trailer or motor vehicle as an accessory structure for storage purposes in any zone. 11 

7. 	
Storage containers, associated with a permitted commercial or industrial use shall be screened from any adjacent property and not inhibit fire and other emergency personnel. 


10.2 PORCHES, STAIRWAYS, TERRACES 
When open and unenclosed, these types of features may project into a required front, side or rear yard not more than eight feet and provided that such covered porches, stairways, terraces or other similar features conform to the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. Steps and overhangs shall be measured as part of the projection into the yard (setback).14 EXCEPTION: When adjacent properties have structures with existing porches or other similar projections, the porch may be placed with setbacks similar, but no closer to the property line than the existing structures. 
10.3 CHIMNEYS, EAVES, ORNAMENTAL FEATURES AND SIMILAR FEATURES 
Chimneys, flues, belt courses, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features, cornices, eaves, gutters and similar features, may extend not more than 24 inches into any required yard. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, no projection as listed in the above paragraph shall extend into any required side yard more than one-half the width of such yard, not within 10 feet of the front lot line, not within five feet of the rear lot line, not within three feet of any accessory structure; provided, however, that such limitations shall not apply to terrace and steps, or to a loading dock or tailboard in connection with an industrial use. 
10.4 HANDICAP RAMPS 
Any ramp or similar feature used to provide accessibility to persons with disabilities is exempt from this regulation and may project into any yard to the extent necessary to provide access to structures in compliance with building or other applicable codes. 
10.5 CANOPIES 
Canopies, as defined in the Zoning Ordinance, shall be a minimum of five feet from any property line but shall not be located within any easement areas. 
10.6 TEMPORARY STRUCTURE LOCATIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
The following provisions shall regulate the location of temporary structures unless otherwise regulated in this Zoning Ordinance: 
1. 	Temporary structures may not be placed in any required front yard. 
165 

2. 	
Temporary structures may not be placed in any recorded easement area. 

3. 	
Temporary structures may not be placed so as to obstruct any ingress/egress from the site and shall not inhibit fire and other emergency personnel. 

4. 	
Temporary structures must be a minimum of five (5’) feet from any lot line. 

5. 	
Temporary structures shall be located in designated areas if located in a shopping center or other planned development. Designated areas to be shown on development plan or master plan. 


Final location of temporary structures shall be reviewed and approved by the Department prior to issuance of a permit. 
10.7 NEIGHBORHOOD STRUCUTURES 
Structures used for neighborhood recycling drop-off bins, composting, cluster mailboxes, neighborhood/subdivision message boards or other similar neighborhood subdivision improvements and any associated enclosure or roof over such structures may be permitted in the front yard and may be subject to other restrictions for accessory structures as outlined in this chapter. The location, design, construction materials and appearance of such structures may be approved by the Department or may be approved by the Commission at the time of preliminary plat approval for new subdivisions. Such structures shall comply with applicable construction codes and other City ordinances. 11 
CHAPTER 11 

NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS 

11.0 NONCONFORMING USE PROVISIONS 

The provisions as set forth in the following section are to ensure the viability of uses and structures by setting standards whereby nonconforming uses, structures and lots are eliminated over the course of time. 
11.1 KENTUCKY REVISED STATUTES REQUIREMENTS 
As mandated by Kentucky Revised Statutes, nonconformities shall not be enlarged or extended beyond their scope and areas of operation at the time of the adoption of this ordinance and shall not be used as the basis for adding additional structures or uses not permitted in the same zone. Nonconforming uses are declared by the Zoning Ordinance to be incompatible with permitted uses in the zones and districts in which they are located. 
11.2 REGULATION OF NONCONFORMING USES 
A nonconforming use shall be permitted to continue provided it remains otherwise lawful and shall be regulated as follows: 
1. 	
A nonconforming use shall not be enlarged or extended, so as to occupy a greater area of the land than was occupied at the date of the adoption or amendment of the Zoning Ordinance, nor altered in any way so as to extend or enlarge the scope or area of its operation. 

2. 	
When a nonconforming use is replaced by a permitted use for any period of time, it shall thereafter conform to the Zoning Ordinance. 

3. 	
A nonconforming use shall not be permitted to change from one nonconforming use to another nonconforming use unless the new use is in the same or more restrictive classification and the new nonconforming use is not an enlargement or extension of the scope of the existing nonconforming use. 

4. 	
When a nonconforming use is abandoned or nonuse is continued for a period of 12 months, or if nonuse is continued through a lack of diligence as to amount to abandonment, then it shall thereafter conform to the Zoning Ordinance. 


11.3 REGULATION OF NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES 
A nonconforming structure may continue to exist provided it remains otherwise lawful and shall be regulated as follows: 
1. 	
On any nonconforming structure, or portion of a structure, work may be done for ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of walls, fixtures, wiring, plumbing or other parts of the building, and additions made, provided that the extent of the nonconformity shall not be increased. The Zoning Ordinance shall not be construed to prevent the strengthening, repairing or restoring to a safe condition of any structure or parts thereof. 

2. 	
Should a nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of a structure be demolished by any means, it shall not be reconstructed except in a manner to make it a conforming structure under the Zoning Ordinance. 

3. 	
A structure may be altered to decrease its nonconformity. 

4. 	
Should a nonconforming structure be moved for any reason, for any distance, it shall thereafter conform to the Zoning Ordinance. 

5. 	
On any lot where the principal structure does not meet the minimum required side yard for that zone, and the side yard is legally nonconforming, additions to the principal structure may be made which have the same side yard as the original structure. 

6. 	
On any lot where the principal structure does not meet the minimum required rear yard for that zone, and the rear yard is legally nonconforming, additions to the principal structure may be made which have the same rear yard as the original structure. 


11.4 REGULATION OF NONCONFORMING LOTS 
A nonconforming lot shall be permitted to continue and shall be regulated as follows: 
1. 	A nonconforming lot shall not be further subdivided or consolidated, in whole or in part, with another parcel, in a manner which increases its nonconformity. It may, however, be altered 
167 

so as to decrease its nonconformity. However, the Commission may approve the subdivision of a lot which has two (2) or more legally constructed principal structures into separate parcels for the purpose of the sale or transfer of the individual structures, if the Commission finds that the properties have been used in a separate and distinct manner with separate utilities and other facilities so that the resulting re-subdivision will not constitute a material change in use of the property. 
2. 	
Notwithstanding any portion of the Zoning Ordinance, a nonconforming lot may be used for construction of any otherwise lawfully permitted structure in a zone in which the lot is located. Such a nonconforming lot must be in separate ownership and not in contiguous frontage with other lots in the same ownership. 

3. 	
If two (2) or more lots with continuous frontage are in single ownership, and if any of the lots have less than fifty (50’) feet of street frontage, the land involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel. No subdivision or consolidation in whole or in part with another lot shall be made of such parcels which reduce the parcel below the requirement for a permitted lot in a zone in which the parcel is located. However, the Commission may permit the sale or transfer of lots where each has a legally constructed principal structure. 6 


11.5 CONDITIONAL USES ARE NOT NONCONFORMING USES 
Any existing principal use at the date of the adoption or amendment of the Ordinance which would thereafter require a conditional use permit shall be deemed a conforming use, but any enlargement or replacement of such use shall require a Conditional Use Permit as provided by the Zoning Ordinance. 
11.6 PROCEDURE FOR DETERMINATION OF NONCONFORMING USE 
To meet the intent of KRS 100 in determining nonconforming use and to allow all affected parties fair due process, it is declared that the nonconforming use status for property in Elizabethtown shall be determined through the following procedures. 
11.6.1 Determination of Nonconforming Use Status To request a determination of nonconforming use, an application shall be filed with the Department in such form and accompanied by such information necessary to make a determination, which includes, but is not limited to, property ownership, length of operations/occupancy, building design/construction and zoning history. 
The Department shall review all pertinent information for the request and make a written determination of the nonconforming use status. Notice of an administrative determination by the Department will be given in the following manner: 
1. 	
Written notice to the applicant and owner, if different from applicant; 

2. 	
Written notice to adjoining property owners; 

3. 	
Notice to the general public by placing a notice in the local newspaper of largest circulation in Elizabethtown; and, 

4. 	
Written notice to the Board of Zoning Adjustment. 


Any aggrieved party may appeal the administrative determination to the Board, pursuant to the procedures of KRS 100 and upon a hearing before the Board may submit information into evidence to be considered. 
11.6.2 Determination for Change in Nonconforming Use Status To request a determination for a change in use for property with nonconforming use status, an application shall be filed with the Department in such form and accompanied by such information necessary to make a determination. The Department shall review the application for compliance with the submission requirements of the Ordinance and the policies of the Board. Upon determination that all submission requirements have been met, a public hearing shall be scheduled before the Board. The Board shall review the change in use request through the consideration of the requirements of KRS 100. Upon determination and final action by the Board, any aggrieved party may appeal the action pursuant to the procedures of KRS 100. 
APPENDIX A: PLANT MATERIALS LIST 

PLANTING STANDARDS 

SHRUBS 
Spacing 30” Unless nursery specifications require greater spacing 

3” mulch or similar cover Container stock, size varies 12” minimum backfill w/amended topsoil Undisturbed or compacted sub grade 
TREES 


ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS 
1 November 17, 2008 (Ordinance 14-2008): The Department may issue building permits conforming to building setbacks established for lots of record created by preliminary subdivision plats and record plats approved between January 1, 2004 and the date of the adoption of the Zoning Ordinance.) 
NOTE: This language relocated into section 1.6.1 of the ordinance by adoption of amended language on May 18, 2009. (Ordinance 05-2009) 
2 May 18, 2009 (Ordinance 05-2009): Amendments included language to allow construction permits to be issued for phased multifamily developments 
3 July 6, 2009 (Ordinance 08-2009): Amendments included: 1) Adding and amending definitions in Chapter 1. 2) Amended tables relating to Perimeter Landscape Buffer Area, Special Provisions in R-5 and 
R-6 zone, Lot Criteria R-6 & C-5 zones, additional uses added to C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-5, WCD-1, WCD-2 and I-1 zones, tables for parking standards amended for added uses, tables for Signs amended. 
3) Amended Chapter 4, Section 4.6 Waiver Procedure. 
4) Amended Chapter 5; added section 5.9.5. 
5) Clarified landscaping areas in Chapter 6. 
6) Added maximum fence height in Chapter 8. 
7) Amended Chapter 9, Special Yard Requirements (9.2.5), Sidewalk Waiver (9.5.6.3 & 

9.5.6.4), added exemptions (9.5.6.6) and added Limited Access Entrance (9.7.4) 
4 September 8, 2009 (Ordinance 12-2009): Amendments included: 1) Amended uses in the C-3 zone. 2) Added retail parking standards to the C-3 & C-4 zones. 3) Added multifamily identification sign to Table 2.63. 4) Changes to Chapter 7, which included 7.0 (Intent & Purpose), 7.2 (General Provisions), 7.3 
(Signs Exempt from Permit), 7.4 (Prohibited Signs), 7.5 (Permitted Signs, All Zones), added Section 7.10.3 (Continuation, Status Change), amended Message Board (Table 7.0) and removed Multifamily Identification Sign (Table 7.0). 
5 November 16, 2009 (Ordinance 23-2009): 1) Changed language regarding message boards in the C-5 zone. 2) Added the National Register Historic District Overlay Zone. 
6 February 7, 2011 (Ordinance 05-2011): 1) Chapter 1: Amended definitions regarding canopies, signs and deleted duplicate definition of accessory use. 
2) Chapter 2: Added communications towers in residential zones when on publicly owned property; Increased frontage requirements for corner lots in residential zones; Deleted resort hotels & restaurants when associated with golf course from residential zones(R-3 thru R-6); Deleted golf course from parking standards in residential zones; Added special provision to R-5 & R-6 (re: density calculations when abutting publicly owned property); Added Cemetery & Private Club to commercial zones; Amended Special Provisions in C-2 (re: maximum building size limitations); Added parking standards for Cemetery & Private Club; Amended Special Provisions, Signs (re: number of tenants); Added Homeless Shelter to C-3 & C-4; Added tattoo parlor to C-3; Amended C-4, C-5, I-1, I-2, PNR-1, PNR-2, PNC parking standards; Added commercial uses in I-1 & I-2 zones. 
3) Chapter 4: Amended Predominant & Prohibited materials; Added language (re: corner 
building entrances); Amended Landscape provisions. 4) Chapter 5: Deleted Street Tree requirements; Amended basin screening requirements. 5) Chapter 9: Amended Height Limitation Exception; Added language (re: residential 
entrances). 
6) Chapter 11: Amended language (re: non-conforming lots). 
7 September 6, 2011 1) Chapter 2: Amended to allow roof signs in certain zones and with certain uses. 2) Chapter 7: Removed requirement of landscaping around base of pole and monument signs. Removed roof signs from prohibited list. Amended Table 7.0 (Canopy signs & Sidewalk Food Vendors) 3) Chapter 9: Added public utility lots and setbacks for these lots. 
8 October 17, 2011 (Ordinance 20-2011) 1) Chapter 1: Amended definitions of Average Setback, Basement, Principal Use & added definition of Mural. 2) Chapter 2: Changed Multiple Frontage Lots to Corner Lots, added Building Heights, FAR’s & ISR’s to residential uses in Lot Criteria; Changed Multiple Frontage Lots to Corner Lots in PNR & PNC Zones; Amended language, Accessory Use #1 in C-1, C-2 & C-3; Added parking standard for residential storage in R-6 zone. 3) Chapter 3: Added expiration timeframe for Conceptual Development Plans; Amended language for submission of Master Plans, approval of amended Master Plans & expiration timeframe for Master Plans. 4) Chapter 4: Added language regarding waiving of portions of submission requirements under Commercial Design Guidelines. 
9 November 21, 2011 (Ordinance 26-2011) 1) Chapter 1: Amended definition of Agricultural Use based on repeal of KRS 241.156; Added definitions for Brewery, Distillery, Winery, Retail Malt Beverage Sales, Retail Package Liquor Sales. 2) Chapter 2: Added Assembly & Commercial frontages and setbacks to Lot Criteria of Residential Zones; Added uses to C-2, C-3, C-4, C-5, I-1, I-2, PNR-1 and PNC Zones; Added parking standards to C-2, C-3. C-4, C-5. I-1, I-2 and PNC zones; Removed Brewery, Distillery and Microbrewery from prohibited uses. 3) Chapter 5: Changed quantity of required trees in Vehicular Use Areas; Amended Table 
5.0 to reflect changes. 
10 December 3, 2012 (Ordinance 27-2012) 1) Chapter 1: Added definition for Specialty Retail. 2) Chapter 2: Added language in signage special provisions of all residential zones regarding message boards; Increased sizes of outparcel monument signs and reduced maximum heights & clarified where additional monument sign could be located; Added parking standard for specialty retail in C-3 zone; Changed parking standards in the C-5 zone to recommendations; Added the Commercial Transition Overzone; 3) Chapter 4: Added language regarding acceptable building materials. 4) Chapter 6: Changed language regarding off street parking requirements in the C-5 zone; Removed maximum parking allowed standards from the ordinance & reduced maximum waiver to 30% when lot contains more than 50 spaces. 5) Chapter 7: Added KY 361 to the Scenic Parkway Signage regulation; Removed requirement that Commercial Directional signs contain directional only information; Increased maximum sign area on incidental signs to 10 s.f. 6) Chapter 9: Exempted KY 361 from the requirement to provide sidewalks; Changed language on site triangle and deleted Figure 9.0 
11 April 7, 2014 (Ordinance 10-2014) 1) Chapter 1: Add definitions for Single Family Attached, Neighborhood center; changed definition of duplex. 2) Chapter 2: Added principal uses, Single Family Attached, Assisted Living Facility, Neighborhood Center, Nursing Home, Parking Lot/Structure, Call Center or Data Processing 
Center; Changed Single Family to Single Family Detached; Added terminology for Single 
Family Attached to lot criteria; Combined signage regulation for Duplex & Multi-Family; 
Deleted requirement for fenced storage yards in industrial zones. 
3) Chapter 3: Added requirement for Development Plan for institutional uses, uses requiring 5 
or more parking spaces and Commercial Design Guideline reviews; Added requirement for 
pre-application conference for Commercial Design Review. 
4) Chapter 4: Clarified applicability of guidelines within Historic District Overzone; Added pre­application conference requirement; Set level at which staff approval can occur. 
5) Chapter 5: Changed landscaping standard locations in industrial zones. 
6) Chapter 6: Deleted Maximum Parking restriction language. 
7) Chapter 7: Changed language regarding address numbers; Removed Item #6 from 
Continuation of Off Premise Sign; Deleted location of banner on permanent structure 
requirement. 
8) Chapter 9: Deleted reference to sight distance table; Changed measurement location for 
sight triangle; Clarified review responsibility for entrances. 
9) Chapter 10: Deleted provision that accessory structures shall not exceed lot coverage in 
residential zones; Added Section 10.7 to address structures such as cluster mail boxes, 
recycling/composting stations. 

12December 15, 2014 (Ordinance 28-2014) 1) Chapter 1: Amended definitions of Community Residence and Home Occupation; added definition of Halfway House. 2) Chapter 2: Added Halfway House to commercial zones; Added Hotel, Restaurant and several agricultural uses to commercial zones; Added Electrical Contractors, Employment/Job Training Centers and Offices to industrial zones; Added parking standards for uses that were added to these zones; Amended IHSB to include Western Kentucky Parkway and Ring Road intersection; Placed waiver limitation in CTO. 3) Chapter 4: Amended materials and colors to include tilt-up concrete panels; Amended detail features, entryways and building entrance requirements. 4) Chapter 9: Amended and clarified exceptions to height limitations; Amended entrance widths to allow for waivers. 
13May 4, 2015 (Ordinance 05-2015) 1) Chapter 1: Added definition of Retail Drink Liquor Establishment; Deleted definition of “Floor Area Ratio”. 
2) Chapter 2: Added Private Club to Principal and Conditional Uses; Added Retail Drink Liquor Establishment to C-5 zone; Removed “Floor Area Ratio” from all zones; Amended Sign Tables regarding numbers of signs allowed; Added parking standard for “Private Club”. 
3) Chapter 6: Changed Accessible Parking Requirements Table to reflect new ADA requirements; Added Figure to show 60o Accessible Parking Layout. 
14December 19, 2016 (Ordinance 24-2016) 
1) Chapter 2: Added event or convention center to C-4 zone and Pet Crematorium to C-5 zone; Added language for frontage on corner lots to Special Provisions in all zoning districts. 
2) Chapter 3: Added EXCEPTION for temporary structures requiring Development Plan; Added pre-application conference for building additions exceeding 15,000 s.f. 3) Chapter 6: 6.14, Added language on parking waiver requirements (removing need in some cases). 4) Chapter 7: Exempted Flea/Farmers Market booths from permit requirement; Added Flea/Farmers Market sign & changed size of Directional Industrial sign in Table 7.0. 5) Chapter 10: Added language on aggregate square footage to accessory structures; Added language regarding steps and overhangs to be measured as part of projections. 
15June 5, 2017 (Ordinance 05-2017) 1) Chapter 1: Added definition for events center; Amended definition of agricultural use to include raising of animals for human consumption. 2) Chapter 2: Principal Uses: Added Events Center” use (C-1, C-2, PNR-1, PNC); Added “Beauty Shop, Barber Shop, Shoe Repair Shop” use (C-1); Separated “Events Center” & “Convention Center” into two distinct uses (C-3, C-4, C-5); Removed “Community Residence” use (R-3, R-4); Added Agri-Business Zone (AG). Accessory Uses: Added Agri-Business Zone (AG); Removed “Neighborhood Center” use (R-4, R-5, R-6). Conditional Uses: Added “Events Center” use (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6); Added Agri-Business Zone (AG). Special Provisions: Added Special Provision for “Events Center” (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R­5, R-6). Sign Tables: Added signage table for Agri-Business Zone (AG); Amended signage (special provision) for lots fronting on both North Dixie Avenue & Woodland Drive (WCD). Parking Tables: Added parking table for Agri-Business Zone (AG); Added parking standard for “Events Center” (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6. C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-5, PNR-1, PNC); Amended parking tables to add parking standard for uses already listed (R-4, R-5, R-6, C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-5); Amended parking tables to remove parking standard for uses not permitted (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6). 3) Chapter 5: Section 5.10 Interior & Vehicular Use Area Landscaping, Amended to allow expansion of parking areas where current paving does not meet setback requirement as long as additional landscaping is installed. 4) Chapter 7: Table 7.0 Other Sign Types, Amended incidental signs to remove height limitation and place a maximum of two (2) displayed at any time. 
16September 5, 2017 (Ordinance 11-2017) 1) Chapter 2: Changed Tattoo “Parlor” to Tattoo “Shop “ in the C-3 & C-4 uses and parking standards. 
17September 18, 2017 (Ordinance 15-2017) 1) Chapter 2: Added parking lots & structures as a principal use in the C-2 Zone; Added Retail Drink Liquor Establishment as an accessory use in the C-2 Zone: Added Special Provision 8 to Table 2.62 WCD Signs. 2) Chapter 7: Amended Table 7.0 to reduce minimum height above grade of projecting sign to 7’. 
18June 4, 2018 (Ordinance 14-2018)
1) Chapter 2: Amended C-5 zone to add/delete uses, Delete Parking and Landscape Tables; Added 2.11 Cellular Antenna Tower Regulations.
2) Chapter 3: Amended Improvement Certification on Development Plans.
3) Chapter 9: Removed exception to height limits (based on Cellular Antenna Regulation inclusion. 

City of Elizabethtown
Subdivision Regulations
Design and Improvement Standards
City of Elizabethtown
Planning Commission
January 2019

City of Elizabethtown
Subdivision Regulations
Design and Improvement Standards
Approved
January 23, 1996
Amended
October 22, 1996
Amended
March 14, 2000
Amended
December 11, 2001
Amended
January 13, 2004
Amended
June 8, 2004
Amended
August 24, 2004
Amended
January 10, 2006
Amended
October 24, 2006
Amended
June 10, 2008
Amended
September 13, 2011
Amended
September 23, 2014
Amended
December 9, 2014
Amended
April 14, 2015
Amended
January 12, 2016
Amended
June 12, 2018
Amended
January 22, 2019
City of Elizabethtown
Department of Planning & Development
200 West Dixie Avenue
P.O. Box 550
Elizabethtown, Kentucky 42702
(270) 765-6121 Fax: (270) 765-4954

Table of Contents
Article I General Provisions 1-1
1.1 Purpose 1-1
1.2 Title 1-1
1.3 Authority 1-1
1.4 Area of Jurisdiction 1-1
1.5 Compliance with other Codes, Statutes and Regulations 1-1
1.6 Variance 1-1
1.7 Disclaimer of Liability 1-2
1.8 Complaints Regarding Violations 1-2
1.9 Penalties for Violation 1-2
1.10 Conflict of Regulations 1-2
1.11 Separability 1-3
1.12 Amendments 1-3
1.13 Definitions 1-3
Article II Subdivision Procedure 2-1
2.1 Purpose 2-1
2.2 Minor Subdivision Procedure 2-1
2.3 Major Subdivision Procedure 2-1
2.4 Preliminary Plat Procedure 2-3
2.5 Improvement Plan Procedure 2-6
2.6 Record Plat Procedure 2-7
2.7 Completion of Public Improvements 2-9
2.8 Procedures for Environmentally Sensitive Areas 2-11
2.9 Amendments to Plans 2-11
Article III Subdivision Plat Content 3-1
3.1 Purpose 3-1
3.2 Minor Subdivision Plat Requirements 3-1
3.3 Preliminary Plat Requirements 3-1
3.4 Improvement Plan Requirements 3-4
3.5 Record Plat Requirements 3-6
3.6 As-Built Improvement Plans 3-12
Article IV Improvement and Design Standards 4-1
4.0 Purpose 4-1
4.1 General Requirements 4-1
4.2 Block and Lot Standards 4-1
4.3 Street and Sidewalk Standards 4-3
4.4 Utility Standards 4-15
4.5 Community Facilities Design Standards 4-24
4.6 Surveying and Monumentation Standards 4-25
4.7 Miscellaneous Standards 4-26
Subdivision Regulations
Design and Improvement Standards
Appendices A-1
Appendix A A-1
Table 1: ADT Trip Generation Table A-2
Table 2: Street Geometrics A-2
Appendix B
Subdivision Application A-3
Construction Cost Estimates Worksheet Subdivision Standards Waiver Application
Development in Environmentally Sensitive or Geologic Hazard Areas Application
Appendix C
Typical Street Cross-Sections A-11
Typical Street/Sidewalk Transitions A-12
Typical Residential Driveway Plan A-13
Typical Residential Driveway Profile A-14
Typical Curb Details A-15
Typical Survey Control Monument A-16
Article I
General Provisions
1.1 Purpose
These standards are designed to encourage the development of sound and economically stable residential, commercial, industrial and public areas; to provide for safe, convenient and efficient traffic circulation; to enhance the unique aesthetics of the community; and to provide for the overall harmonious development of the community in accordance with the adopted comprehensive plan for the City of Elizabethtown.
1.2 Title
The full title of these regulations shall be “The Subdivision Regulations, Design and Improvement Standards of the City of Elizabethtown, Kentucky. As a short title, these regulations shall be known, and may be cited, as the “Subdivision Regulations.”
1.3 Authority and Administrative Agency
These standards are adopted by the Elizabethtown Planning Commission, through these standards, shall have jurisdiction and control over the subdivision of all land within the corporate boundaries of the City of Elizabethtown.
1.4 Area of Jurisdiction
The Elizabethtown Planning Commission, through these standards, shall have jurisdiction and control over the subdivision of all land within the corporate boundaries of the City of Elizabethtown.
1.5 Compliance with Other Codes, Statutes and Regulations
Nothing in these standards shall be construed to exempt any applicant for a permit from compliance with all local, state and federal codes, statutes and regulations.
1.6 Variance
These standards are adopted only as minimum requirements, and all developers should consider developing their subdivisions at higher standards. The Planning Commission may require standards above the minimum standards contained herein whenever it finds that public health, safety or welfare purposes, and Comprehensive Plan justify such increase.
The Commission may also reduce or otherwise vary the requirements of these standards. Such variances may be granted if the Commission finds such to be true without detriment to the public good; without impairing the purposes, basic objectives of these standards; and without impairing the desirable general development of the neighborhood and the community as proposed by the Comprehensive Plan. In granting such variances, the Commission may attach and require whatever conditions it finds are necessary or reasonable to secure the basic objectives of these standards. Any variance granted by the Commission shall be noted in its official minutes along with the findings, which justify the granting of the variance.
1-1
Subdivision Regulations
Design and Improvement Standards
1.7 Disclaimer of Liability
Notwithstanding any provisions of these regulations, no approval of any improvement plat, subdivision plat, or portion thereof, by the Department of Planning and Development, the Engineering Department, the Planning Commission or any other public agency or official of the City of Elizabethtown, whether employed, elected or appointed, shall operate as a warranty or guarantee of the safety or reasonableness of any improvement plan, subdivision plat, or portion thereof, or act in any way to limit or alter any common-law duties imposed on the developers or authors of such plans.
1.8 Complaints Regarding Violations
Any person may file a written complaint alleging violation of these standards. Such complaint shall state fully the cause and base thereof and shall be filed with the Director of the Department of Planning and Development. The Director or his agent shall properly record such complaint and investigate and take action thereon as provided by these regulations. If found to be in violation, the Director shall notify the owner and give the developer reasonable time to correct any violations. If the violation is not corrected within a reasonable time, the Director may institute appropriate legal proceedings in the court of competent jurisdiction.
1.9 Penalties for Violation
Violation of the provisions of these regulations or failure to comply with any of the requirements contained herein shall constitute a violation.
Any person who so violates these regulations or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than $10 but not more than $500 for each offense. Each day of violations shall constitute a separate offense. Any person shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $100 but not more than $500 for each lot or parcel which was the subject of sale or transfer, or a contract for sale or transfer, where such sale or transfer, or contract therefore, constitutes a violation of these regulations.
1.10 Conflict of Regulations
Whenever these regulations, or subdivision plats or improvement plans approved in conformance with these regulations are in conflict with other local ordinances, regulations, or laws, the more restrictive ordinance, regulation, or law shall govern and be enforced by the appropriate agencies. When subdivision and development plans, approved by the Planning Commission or its appointed representative, contains setbacks or other features in excess of the minimum requirements, such features shown on the approved plans shall govern and shall be enforced by the Department of Planning and Development. Private deed restrictions or private covenants for a subdivision do not fall within the jurisdiction of enforcement by any local agency and cannot be enforced by the Department not the City.
1-2
1.11 Separability
If any clause, sentence, subdivision, paragraph, section or part of these regulations be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgement shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof, but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, subdivision, paragraph, section or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which said judgement shall have been rendered.
1.12 Amendments
The Elizabethtown Planning Commission may from time to time, revise, modify or amend these regulations by a majority vote of the entire membership of the Commission.
1.13 Definitions
The following words and phrases, when used in these regulations shall be defined and interpreted as indicated.
A. Average Daily Traffic (ADT)
The total volume of anticipated vehicular traffic passing at a street intersection during a 24-hour period. The anticipated ADT is determined by utilizing the trip generation tables published by the Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE). The ADT anticipated on a street is predicted by the number of vehicular trips generated by land use types.
B. Block
A surface land area, which is separated, and distinguished, from other surface land area by visible physical boundaries such as streets, railroads, or other physical barriers or property line.
C. Building Setback Line
A line in the interior of a lot, which is generally parallel to, and a specified distance from, the street right-of-way line or property lines. No building shall then be placed in the space between the building setback line and the right-of-way or property line.
D. Commission
The Planning Commission for the City of Elizabethtown, Kentucky.
E. Control Monument
City of Elizabethtown Geodetic Control Monument. See Appendix C for typical detail.1
F. Department
The Department of Planning and Development for the City of Elizabethtown, Kentucky.
G. Developer
An individual, partnership, corporation or other legal entity or agent thereof, which undertakes the activities covered by these regulations.
1-3
Subdivision Regulations
Design and Improvement Standards
H. Easement
The right to use another person(s) property, but only for a limited and specifically named purpose. The owner generally may continue to make restricted use of such land since he has given up only certain, and not all, ownership rights. There are two general types of easements as described below.
1. Exclusive Easement – An easement granted by a property owner to one or more specific named public utilities/service providers, or their successors and assigns. No other public utility/service provider may utilize this type of easement without the specific approval, in writing, of the utilities named in the grant of easement.
2. Multipurpose Easement – An easement granted by a property owner for use by any public utility/service provider, or their successors and assigns, certifying the applicable subdivision plat.51
I. Engineer
A registered, licensed engineer in the State of Kentucky.
J. Environmentally Sensitive Area
Any area which, due to its natural or physical setting, may present limitations for development. The types of environmental resources and natural or physical characteristics that distinguish environmentally sensitive areas include, but shall not be limited to areas of steep slopes, floodplains and floodways, sinkholes and karst formations (which includes caves), areas of poor soils, improper fill, wetlands, significant areas of tree stands, aquifer recharge areas, riparian areas, streams, creeks, lakes and other natural waterways.52
K. Improvements
Physical changes made to raw land, and the structures placed on or under the land’s surface, in order to make the land more usable for man’s activities. Typical improvements in these regulations would be grading, street pavement, curbs, gutters, drainage ditches, storm and sanitary sewers, and utility lines of all types.
L. Lot
A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for transfer of ownership for building development. Generally, “lots” are the basic unit of a subdivision plan, i.e.; the smallest division of a plan designed to be owned by one person.
1-4
Corner
Lot Double
Frontage
Lot
Lot
Figure 1.1 Lot, Corner Lot, and Double Frontage Lot
M. Lot, Corner
A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at a street intersection, or abutting upon two (2) adjoining and deflected lines of the same street and thereby forming an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. Corner lots shall be construed to have front yards along each abutting street, one rear yard and one side yard.
N. Lot Depth
The average horizontal distance between the front and rear property lines of a lot.
O. Lot Frontage
The distance measured along the right-of-way, between the side property lines. In the case of radii, the lot frontage is measured along the front building setback line.
1-5
Subdivision Regulations
Design and Improvement Standards
P. Lot, Double Frontage
A lot having two (2) or more of its non-adjoining property lines abutting upon a street or streets.
Figure 1.2 Building Setback Line, Front Lot Line, Lot Frontage,
Lot Depth, Rear Lot Line, Street Right-of-Way, and Street Pavement
Q. Lot Lines
The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
1. Front Lot Line - The property line dividing a lot from a street.
2. Rear Lot Line - The line opposite the front lot line.
3. Secondary Front Lot Line - The property line on a corner lot dividing the side exposure of a principal structure from a street, or the rear of the principle structure in the case of the lot with three front yards.
4. Side Lot Line - Any lot other than a front lot line or a rear lot line.
R. Parcel
A part or a piece of land that cannot be identified by a lot or tract number.
Street R.O.W.
Lot Frontage
Lot Depth
Street Pavement
Building
Front Lot Line
Rear Lot Line
Side Lot Line
Setback
1-6
S. Right-of-way
Land measuring between property lines which is dedicated for public use and usually contains the street pavement, sidewalks, grass area, drainage ways, and underground and above ground utilities.
T. Street
Any public vehicular way -- a general term used to describe right-of-way which provides a channel for vehicular and pedestrian movement between certain points in the community, which may provide for vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent properties, and which may also provide space for drainage ways and the location of under-or above-ground utilities. Streets are classified by function as follows:
1. Arterial Street - The streets and highways that serve major centers of activity. Arterials have the highest traffic volumes, speed limit, and right-of-way width. Arterial streets may be further divided into two classes:
a. Principal Arterials - Principal arterials carry the major portion of trips entering and leaving the community as well as the majority of through movements desiring to bypass the city. For principal arterials, the concept of service to abutting land should be subordinate to the provision of travel service for major traffic movements. Generally, principal arterials are State maintained roads.
b. Minor Arterials - Minor arterial streets interconnect with and augment principal arterials and provide service trips of moderate length at a somewhat lower level of travel mobility. This system includes all arterials not classified as principal arterial streets and includes facilities that place more emphasis on land access than the principal system and offers a lower level of traffic mobility.
2. Collector Street - A street which conducts traffic entirely through a development and connects the development to existing and future subdivisions. There are two types of collectors, as follows:
a. Commercial Collector - A collector street which primarily serves commercial and industrial development. This class of streets is intended to accommodate the business access needs of commercial and industrial areas, which have a variety of vehicle types and require a higher design level. Roadways in this classification may require wider lanes and travel clearances. Parking should generally be prohibited to maintain adequate visibility and operating level of service.2
1-7
Subdivision Regulations
Design and Improvement Standards
b. Residential Collector - A collector street which primarily serves residential development. Roadways within this classification are intended to convey traffic within a neighborhood to an adjoining collector or arterial street. Residential collectors are not intended to carry through traffic and should therefore be designed to discourage non-local traffic functions. Parking should be prohibited for this classification, except in cases where parking may be permitted if streets are wide enough to provide for safe traffic movement and high levels of service except near the approaches of intersections.3
3. Local Street - A street which provides access to the various lots which are not served by other streets and which are of minimum width and design containing certain safety features for the adjoining property. Vehicles moving on these streets should have an origin or destination in the immediate vicinity.
4. Cul-de-Sac Street - A type of local street that begins at an intersection with another street and dead-ends with an appropriate turnaround facility at the end.54
U. Subdivision
The division of land into two (2) or more lots or parcels for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, lease or building development, or if a new street is involved, any division of a parcel of land, provided that a division of land for agricultural use and not involving a new street shall not be deemed a subdivision. The term includes re-subdivision and when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdivision or to land subdivided; any division or re-division of land into parcels or less than one (1) acre occurring within twelve (12) months following a division of the same land shall be deemed a subdivision. For the purposes of these regulations, two classes of subdivisions shall be established as follows:
1. Minor Subdivision Class - Minor Subdivisions include only those subdivisions defined as follows:
2. Consolidation Subdivision - Consolidation subdivision shall be a subdivision in which one or more parcels are transferred between adjoining properties which share at least one common boundary for the purpose of changing the lot boundaries of one or more properties, or to combine at least two properties into a lesser number of lots than originally existed. No consolidation may result in there being more separate transferable lots after consolidation than prior to consolidation.
1-8
3. Future Development Subdivision - Future development subdivisions shall be a subdivision for the purpose of assisting developers in acquiring land for future development without having, at the time, to meet the requirements of a major subdivision. Except for alteration to existing buildings, no new building development shall be permitted for residential, commercial or industrial activities upon the tracts in the subdivision. Each tract shall be at least ten (10) acres in size.4
4. Minor Amendments to Existing Plans - The following defined types of amendments to approved plats shall be deemed as minor:
a. Corrected Subdivision Plats - Corrected subdivision plats shall be amendments to existing plats for the purpose of correcting an obvious error of an engineering, drafting or clerical nature, release or modification of existing easements, the addition of new easements, or other changes of a significant planning nature, such as, but not limited to, changes which affect building lines or street requirements. Such changes of a significant planning nature shall be considered as a major subdivision unless they meet the requirements for another type of amendment.
b. Lotted Subdivisions - Lotted subdivision shall be those subdivisions which have a maximum of five (5) lots and which do not propose the creation of a new street.
5. Major Subdivision Class - All subdivisions, which do not conform to the definition, established for minor subdivisions shall be considered as major subdivisions. Any subdivision proposing the creation of a new street shall automatically be considered as, and follow the requirements for, a major subdivision.
V. Subdivision Identification Sign
Any wall(s), fence, guardhouse or similar structure exceeding four (4) feet in height, constructed at an entrance to any subdivision.
W. Surety
A contract guaranteeing the developer’s obligation to the City to complete subdivision improvements.
X. Tract
A plot of land intended for development; the largest division of land.5
1-9
Subdivision Regulations
Design and Improvement Standards
Street Pavement
Figure 1.3 Front yards, Secondary Front Yard, Side Yards, and Rear Yards on a Corner Lot and an Interior Lot
Y. Yard
An open space extending the full width of the lot between a principle structure and the lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward.
1. Front Yard - An open space extending the full width of the lot between a principal structure and the front lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward. The depth of a front yard is the shortest distance measured perpendicularly between any part of a building and the front lot line.
2. Rear Yard - An open space extending the full width of a lot between a principal structure and the rear lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward. The depth of a rear yard is the shortest distance measured perpendicularly between any part of a building and the rear lot line.
3. Secondary Front Yard - An open space extending the full width of the lot line between a principal structure and the secondary front lot line of a corner lot, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward. The secondary front yard will be the front yard that is parallel to the side exposure of the principal structure, or the rear exposure of the principal in the case of a lot with three (3) front yards. The depth of the secondary front yard is the shortest distance measured perpendicularly between any part of a building and the secondary front lot line.
4. Side Yard - An open space between a principal structure and a side lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward. The width of a side yard is the shortest distance measured perpendicularly between any part of a building and the nearest side lot line.
1-10
Rear Yard
Rear Yard
Front Yard
Front Yard
Side Yard
Side Yard
Side Yard
Secondary Front Yard
Article II
Subdivision Procedure
2.1 Purpose
The purpose of this article is to establish the procedure to be followed by the developer and the Commission in reviewing and approving all minor and major subdivision plats.
2.2 Minor Subdivision Plat Procedure
The developer shall submit the following materials with the Department:
• an application filing fee;
• one copy of the deed(s) of the property to be subdivided;
• two (2) prints of the proposed plan/plat; and
• a digital PDF of the proposed plan/plat.55
Following staff approval of the proposed plan/plat, the developer shall submit the following materials with the Department:
• four (4) prints of the plan/plat with owner, surveyor and utility company representative signatures; and
• a digital mapping of the plan compatible with the City’s computer mapping system.6 & 56
The Department shall review the minor record plat for compliance with applicable requirements in the Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance and the Subdivision Regulations. Upon determination that all requirements have been met, the Director shall certify the minor record plats as approved. If any questions arise as to the compliance, however, the plat shall be referred to the Commission for action. After approval, the Department will record the minor record plat in the Hardin County Clerk’s office in a timely manner and notify the owner(s) of the plat cabinet and sheet number.
2.3 Major Subdivision Plat Overview
The following plan types are hereby created and defined as needed for a major subdivision:
2.3.1 Preliminary Subdivision Plat
All proposed major subdivisions, except as exempted in this Article, shall be first considered by the Commission as a preliminary subdivision plat. No lot may be sold or transferred, or building permit obtained, based on the approved preliminary subdivision plat.
2.3.2 Improvement Plan
The improvement plan is a detailed construction plan for public improvements to be developed in conjunction with the subdivision, such as streets (public or private), storm drainage, sanitary sewers, water systems and other public facilities. Upon approval of this plan by the Engineering Department, the developer may construct such improvements in accordance with the approved improvement plan. These plans may be submitted for concurrent review with the preliminary subdivision plat.
2-1
Subdivision Regulations
Design and Improvement Standards
Figure 2.1 Major Subdivision Plat Overview
2.3.3 Record Subdivision Plat
Following approval of the preliminary subdivision plat and the improvement plan, a major subdivision shall be reviewed by the Department as a record plat. After approval of the record plat by the Department and after recording, lots may be sold or transferred and building permits obtained in accordance with the approved record plat.
2.3.4 Bypassing Preliminary and Improvement Plans
In any major subdivision not involving new public or private streets or other public or private improvements, the developer may be permitted to omit the preliminary plat and improvement plan approval stages and proceed directly to the record plat submission stage. Whenever the developer bypasses the preliminary plat and improvement plans, the plat will be submitted to the Commission for final approval.
2-2
Preliminary
Plat
Planning Department
Improvement
Plans
Engineering Department
Record
Plat
Planning Department
Improvement
Plans
Engineering Department
2.4 Preliminary Plat Procedure
All preliminary subdivision plats shall be processed as follows:
2.4.1 Pre-Application Conference
At least ten (10) working days prior to the filing of a preliminary subdivision plat, the developer and his agent shall prepare a rough sketch of the proposal and meet with the Department and the Engineering Department to discuss subdivision requirements and procedures, and possible issues related to the development of the property in question. The developer or his agent shall present for discussion a rough sketch showing the boundaries of the proposed subdivision, the proposed location and widths of streets, lotting schemes, drainage patterns plus any other pertinent information. The Department shall not accept any application for a preliminary subdivision plat approval unless the provisions of this Article have been met.
2.4.2 Application and Distribution
To initiate formal review of a preliminary subdivision plat, the developer shall file the following no fewer than thirty (30) calendar days before the date of the Commission’s scheduled meeting at which the subdivision is to be considered:
• a completed application and filing fee,
• a copy of the deed(s) of the property to be subdivided, and
• two (2) prints and one (1) digital PDF of the Preliminary Subdivision Plan.57
The Department shall notify all concerned agencies of the submission of the preliminary subdivision plat.
2.4.3 Review
The Department and concerned agencies shall review the preliminary plat within fifteen (15) working days from the date of submission and meet to try to resolve all differences and to make recommendations to the Commission.
2-3
Subdivision Regulations
Design and Improvement Standards
2.4.4 Meeting Requirements
The Commission shall consider no preliminary plat for action until it has been reviewed and recommendations made by the Department. All preliminary plats shall be approved or disapproved within sixty (60) days from the date they are officially filed with the Department, if no action is taken by the Commission within sixty (60) days it shall be deemed disapproved.
For the Commission meeting, the developer shall provide the following at least one day prior to the scheduled meeting:
• two (2) prints of the plat.58
Within thirty (30) days of approval, the developer shall submit a digital mapping of the approved preliminary plat on diskette compatible with the City’s computer mapping system. No improvement plans or record plats will be reviewed until the diskette of the approved preliminary plat is received by the City.7
2.4.5 Commission Action
The Commission will review the Department’s recommendation and then act for approval, postponement or disapproval. Reasons for action of postponement or disapproval shall be fully incorporated in the Commission’s minutes and shall be available to the developer and the public.
Commission approval authorizes the developer to proceed with the preparation of the required improvement plan. Preliminary plat approval grants a developer two (2) years within which he shall submit record plats for approval for all properties shown on the preliminary plat. Before expiration, the Commission may extend the approval, in increments not to exceed one year at a time, provided that the Commission finds that progress has been made in the physical construction of improvements. In conjunction with such approval extensions, the Commission shall have the right to require changes in the development when it finds that time has necessitated such changes for the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the community, or when applicable ordinances and regulations have been changed. Upon the expiration of any approval periods specified under this Article, the plat shall be deemed not in conformance with these regulations and require re-subdivision.
The City Engineer shall not approve any improvement plans for a subdivision unless he has received a signed copy of the preliminary plat.
2-4
Figure 2.2 Preliminary Plat Procedure
2-5
Pre-Application
Conference
Planning Department
Application, Fee
and Preliminary
Plat Submitted
Planning Department
Review
Appropriate City
Departments
Staff Report
Completed
Planning Department
Planning Commission
Decision
Planning Department
Notice of
Decision Sent
Planning Department
Approved
Preliminary Plat
Distribution
Planning Department
If
disapproved
Subdivision Regulations
Design and Improvement Standards
2.5 Improvement Plan Procedure
All improvement plans shall be processed as follows:
2.5.1 Application and Distribution
The developer shall submit one complete set of improvement plans, showing all public improvements associated with the subdivision, prepared and stamped by a professional engineer registered to practice in the State of Kentucky, and fully conforming to these regulations.
2.5.2 Review
The Engineering Department shall review the proposed improvement plans and within thirty (30) days, notify the Department of the approval or disapproval of the plan. Failure of the Engineering Department to review plans within thirty (30) days does not constitute approval. If disapproved, the project engineer may resubmit the corrected improvement plans, accompanied by the copy previously reviewed. Upon approval of the improvement plans, the developer may proceed with the finalization of the record plat and the pre-construction meeting.
2.5.3 Pre-construction Meeting
Before construction begins, the project engineer and the contractor(s) completing the physical improvements shall meet with the Engineering Department to discuss improvement plans, schedule of construction phases, installation of erosion control, and difficulties that may arise during construction. After the pre-construction meeting, the developer is authorized to proceed with the construction of physical improvements.
2-6
Figure 2.3 Improvement Plan Procedure
2.6 Record Plat Procedure
All major record plats shall be filed with the Department within two (2) years of approval of the preliminary plat. The developer shall submit the following materials with the Department:
• a completed application and filing fees;
• four (4) blue line prints of the plat with original signatures affixed to each copy; and,
• a digital drawing of the plat compatible with the City’s computer mapping system.
The Department shall review the plat for compliance with applicable requirements in these regulations and the Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance. Upon determination that all requirements have been met, the Director of the Department shall certify the plat as approved. If any questions arise as to the compliance, however, this plat shall be referred to the full Commission for action. After approval, the Department will record the plat in the Hardin County Clerk’s office in a timely manner and notify the owner(s) of the plat cabinet and sheet number. 38
2-7
Improvement Plans
Submitted
Engineering Department
Review
Engineering Department
Letter of Decision
Sent
to Developer and Project Engineer
Engineering Department
Pre-Construction
Meeting
Engineering Department
If
disapproved
Subdivision Regulations
Design and Improvement Standards
Figure 2.4 Record Plat Procedure
2-8
Application, Fees,
and Record
Plat Submitted
Planning Department
Review
Planning Department
Return to Project
Engineer
Planning Department
Plat Corrections
Project Engineer
Record Plat
Signed
with assurance of improvements
Copies
Distributed
Planning Department
Plat Filed At
Hardin County
Clerk’s Office
Planning Department
2.6.1 Conformance with Preliminary Plat and Review
The record plat is a legal record of the subdivision as surveyed in the field and must agree with the approved preliminary plat, except that record plats covering a portion of the approved preliminary plat may be submitted. The Department shall review the record plats for conformance with the preliminary plat within ten (10) days of the date of submission. Upon determination that all requirements have been met and that the plats are in agreement, the Director of the Department shall certify the plats as approved. The Department will notify the Commission of its actions, and have the action recorded in the minutes of the Commission.
If the record plats are found to be in disagreement with these regulations and/or with the approved preliminary plats, the Department shall notify the applicant in writing of the reasons for disapproval.
The Department may approve a record plat that is found to be in disagreement with the approved preliminary plat if the Department determines the changes are of minor planning significance. Those changes deemed to be minor are: a decrease in density with street design remaining the same, decrease of number of lots by 10% or less with street design remaining the same, or an adjustment of lot lines with the street design remaining the same. The Department shall notify the Commission of its actions after approving a record plat that is in disagreement with the approved preliminary plat.8
2.7 Completion of Public Improvements
Developers may begin construction of public improvements after the preliminary plat and improvement plans have been fully approved. If such improvements have not been fully constructed at the time of consideration of the record plat, the Commission may, but is not required to do so, permit the plat to be approved and recorded prior to completion of such improvements. For any such case, an acceptable surety must be posted by the developer to cover the full cost of completing the incomplete public improvements. The following requirements and procedures shall apply to such surety.
2.7.1 Acceptable Sureties
Acceptable sureties shall be either an irrevocable letter of credit or a certificate of deposit in favor of the City, or a performance bond in favor of the City from a reputable bonding company acceptable to the City. Any surety shall establish a completion date after which the City of Elizabethtown shall call the surety and cause the work to be constructed.
2-9
Subdivision Regulations
Design and Improvement Standards
2.7.2 Determination of Surety Amount9
The Engineering Department shall determine the amount of the surety based upon the estimated cost which would be incurred by the City to construct the unfinished improvements including an estimated cost for engineering, contingencies and inflation. The developer’s engineer shall prepare and stamp an itemized list of all improvements to be bonded with estimated associated costs on the prescribed City form. This construction cost estimate form shall be reviewed and updated by the Engineering Department based on changes in construction costs on a regular basis. The Stormwater and Engineering Departments shall review this estimate for accuracy and conformance with the improvement plans and then establish the amount of the surety. Upon receipt of the surety in the established amount from the developer and the written agreement, the authorized City official will certify the record plat. The plat will then be forwarded to the Department for certification by the Director.
2.7.3 Surety Period
All required public improvements should be satisfactorily installed within (2) years of final plat approval by the Department.
In order to assure completion of and warranty of the approved public improvements, the developer shall maintain a surety through the completion of the warranty period of all improvements. If construction of the public improvements is completed within one (1) year, the surety period may be reduced in order to maintain a one-year warranty period.
2.7.4 Reduction of Surety
Two reductions in the amount of the surety will be permitted prior to the warranty period. At least 5% of the original values shall be maintained through the warranty period.
2.7.5 Release of Surety
Upon written request from the developer, the City will accept the new public improvements, streets, sidewalks, sanitary sewer lines, and water lines into the City’s street system, sewer system, and water system for ownership and continuous maintenance after approval by the City Council. This request shall be accompanied by the following:
• A letter from the developer’s engineer certifying that Control Monuments, materials, construction, and testing comply with City specifications.
• A copy of a letter addressed to the State of Kentucky Division of Water, certifying the completion of water and sewer improvements.
• One (1) mylar and two (2) blue line copies of “As Built” drawings.
2-10
• A digital drawing of the plan on diskette compatible with the City’s computer mapping system.
The developer shall be notified of the initial acceptance date. This date shall begin a one (1) year warranty period during which the City will periodically inspect the streets, water, and sewer lines and the developer or his contractor will be responsible for correction of any defects found. After the one-year warranty period expires and all defects are corrected, the City will permanently accept the streets for continuous maintenance and the surety may be released.
2.8 Procedures for Environmentally Sensitive Areas
Whenever a subdivision is proposed on land containing an environmentally sensitive area59, the developer shall submit the following materials to the Department:
• An application, containing a general statement of development activity and mitigation plans,
• A subdivision plat as required by these subdivision regulations, which shall locate and identify such areas.
Additionally, other materials may be required after initial review by the Department, including but not limited to:
• Engineering studies of sub-surface conditions,
• Erosion and sedimentation control plans,
• Drainage plans,
• Soil analysis, or
• Grading plans.
2.8.1 Commission Review
After review of the application’s general statement and applicable plans, if the Department finds that questions remain concerning the development’s impact on the environmentally sensitive or geologic hazard area or the health and safety of future users of the area, the plan will be referred to the Commission for action. The Commission may refuse to fully approve a plat until it is satisfied that the hazards have been eliminated or adequate safeguards have been provided to ensure the least negative impact on the area.
2.9 Amendments to Plans
Any amended preliminary plat, improvement plan, or record plat shall follow the same procedures as required for the original submission.
2-11
Article III
Subdivision Plat Content
3.1 Purpose
The purpose of this article is to describe the minimum content and format of required plan materials before they can be considered as officially filed for Commission review.
3.2 Minor Subdivision Plat Content Requirements
The developer is required to provide the information and follow the same requirements applicable to a record plat for a major subdivision. The following additional requirements shall be applicable to the type of minor subdivision so indicated.
3.2.1 Consolidation Plat
The developer or authorized agent shall consult with the Department to determine appropriate parcel labeling and wording of the consolidation note. Connotation shall be added stating that the transferred parcels shall not be available for future transfer without the newly created lots.
3.2.2 Future Development Plats
The following note shall be required to be placed on the plat:
“The tracts created by this subdivision shall be used for non-building purposes. Except for alterations to existing buildings, no new construction shall be permitted for any residential or non-residential activity and no further subdividing of these tracts is permitted until a major subdivision plat is approved by the Planning Commission and recorded.”10
3.3 Preliminary Plat Requirements
The following information and requirements shall be applicable to any submission for Commission consideration or a preliminary subdivision plat.
3.3.1 Drawing Size
The plat shall be 24”x 36”.
3.3.2 Authorization to Prepare Plats
Preliminary subdivision plats may be prepared only by a registered professional engineer, registered landscape architect, or registered land surveyor. However, certain information associated with the plat may be required to be provided only by a registered professional engineer, such as drainage calculations (including sizing of retention/detention basins, pipes and culverts), preliminary estimates of street grades and preliminary sanitary sewer design information. Plats will only be accepted by the Department if the registered professional owns a current copy of the Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance and the Subdivision Regulations.
3-1
Subdivision Regulations
Design and Improvement Standards
3.3.3 Title Block
The title block shall be placed on the bottom of the sheet and shall contain the following:
• the subdivision name, which shall not duplicate nor closely approximate the name of any other subdivision in Hardin County, preceded by the words “Preliminary Plat of (subdivision name)”,
• the record name and mailing address of the property being subdivided,
• the name and mailing address of the property owner(s),
• the name and mailing address of the developer(s),
• the name and mailing address of the registered professional engineer preparing the plans and any other persons directly involved in the transaction,
• graphic and written scale,
• north arrow,
• date of preparation,
• Property Valuation Administration (PVA) number of property being subdivided, and
• other pertinent legend data11
3.3.4 Vicinity Sketch
A sketch showing the general location of the subdivision in relation to the surrounding area and community features such as major traffic arteries, public transportation, schools, recreation areas, shopping areas, industrial areas and residential neighborhoods, with the sketch oriented in the same direction as the lotting scheme.
3.3.5 Lotting Scheme
The lotting scheme shall be drawn at scale of one hundred (100) feet or less to the inch, or other scale as approved by the Department, north oriented to the top of sheet and show the following existing and proposed features on the subject property.
A. The location, distance and bearings for boundary lines and location, width and purpose of all easement lines.
B. The street name (which shall not be the same nor closely approximate, phonetically or in spelling, the name of any other street in Hardin County), right-of-way width, location, angles of intersection, street grade, and typical cross section.
C. The location and distance for lot lines, lot numbers, and the building setback lines with dimensions showing the distance setback from the street right-of-way.
3-2
D. The location, size and invert elevation of sanitary and storm sewers, location of water mains, location of gas lines, fire hydrants, electric and telephone poles or underground wires and street lights (show those existing within and adjacent to the proposed subdivision only).
E. Contours with two (2) foot vertical intervals, reference to USGS datum or to a permanent benchmark approved by the Engineering Department. Source of contours shall be noted.
F. When required, location and results of tests made to ascertain subsurface soil, rock and ground water conditions, especially for septic tanks, street construction or flood hazards.
G. The name, acreage and use of any parcels to be conveyed or held for public use or for joint use of property owners, and an explanation of the provisions of reservation and arrangement for maintenance; and name, acreage and use of any non-public uses.
H. Areas of substantial existing trees shall be shown including those located along fence rows and drainage areas.
I. The location of watercourses shall be shown, as well as the location of any floodplain areas and the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) identification number. The elevation of the regulatory flood shall be labeled where such information is available. The general location of any proposed stormwater retention basin and/or stream relocation shall also be shown.
J. Any areas of geological hazard or environmental sensitivity as defined in these standards shall be shown on the lotting scheme and labeled as to their nature. Additional information as required by these standards shall also be filed.
K. Other conditions such as ponds, marshes, sinkholes, or other significant natural or manmade features and other information related to the adjoining land as necessary to ensure proper continuity of storm drainage, sanitary sewers, street grades and other facilities.
L. The names of adjacent subdivisions and/or the names of recorded owners of adjacent unsubdivided land and deed book or plat cabinet and sheet number.
3-3
Subdivision Regulations
Design and Improvement Standards
M. The location of the buffer zone area when the subdivision is adjacent to an incompatible land use.
N. The location of existing political boundaries, school district boundaries, and utility company boundaries if within more than one service area.
3.3.6 Site Statistics
Site statistics shall include the total acreage; in street right-of-way and single-family lots, acreage of other land uses, average lot sizes, lineal feet of streets, zoning, and density of development.
3.3.7 Certification Block for Preliminary Plats
The certification block shall contain the following certifications along with required signatures as follows:
Owners Certification
The owner(s) shall certify as follows:
“(I, We) certify that (I am, we are) the owner(s) of the property platted herein and accept this as (my, our) preliminary plat for development of this property.”
Owner(s) Title Date
Commission Certification
Upon acceptance of the preliminary plat, the Commission shall certify as follows:
“I certify that this preliminary plat has been approved in accordance with the regulations administered by the Elizabethtown Planning Commission.”
Chairman or Authorized Agent Date
3.4 Improvement Plan Requirements
This plan shall be sufficient to show the proposed locations, sizes, types, grades and general design features of each facility as required by the Engineering Department; be based upon reliable field data; and meet the following requirements at a minimum.
The plan shall be to a horizontal scale of one inch (1”) is equal to fifty (50) feet and a vertical scale of one-inch (1”) is equal to ten (10) or five (5) feet, on a 24” x 36” sheet size unless otherwise approved by the Engineering Department.
3-4
3.4.1 Title Block
The plan shall contain title block information as for the preliminary plat and sheet title. Each sheet shall be numbered sequentially with each sheet showing the total number in the set. A north arrow and graphic scale shall be on all sheets of the plan.
3.4.2 Authorization to Prepare Plans
All improvement plan materials shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer. Each page of the improvement plan materials shall be certified with the seal of the engineer and his signature.
3.4.3 Street Plans
The plans shall show the plan and profile of each proposed street both within the subdivision and a minimum of 300 feet beyond the tract. The street plans shall show all curve data, edges of pavement, sidewalks, right-of-ways, property lines, ditch lines, top of banks, and toe of slope. The street profile shall show all elevations and distances for the existing ground and the proposed grade surface, special ditches, storm sewers, and utility crossings.
3.4.4 Typical Street Cross Section
A typical cross section of each proposed street or other construction item shall show the width and depth of pavement, the location and width and depth of sidewalks and right-of-way, cross slopes of ditch lines if not curb and gutter.
3.4.5 Sanitary Sewers
The plans and profiles of proposed sanitary sewers shall show grades and sizes. The plans of the sanitary sewers shall also show the elevations of the sewer lines where the sewer line crosses a storm sewer, drainage channel, other public or private utility lines, or roadway.
3.4.6 Stormwater Drainage
Stormwater drainage plans shall show the location and profiles of proposed stormwater drainage sewers, channels or other drainage ways along proposed streets and easements. All drainage plans should indicate the following information as applicable:
• Drainage appurtenances, such as drop boxes, curb and gutter inlets, flumes, headwalls, and street culverts,
• Pipes and ditch details,
• Entrance tile sizes for each lot,
• Direction of flow,
• Channel slope protection,
• Retention and/or detention areas, and
• Easements.
3-5
Subdivision Regulations
Design and Improvement Standards
3.4.7 Drainage Calculations
Design calculations for all drainage facilities including detention/retention basins, stormwater pipelines and drainage channels. Drainage calculations may be submitted in a binder folder, with the cover sheet signed and stamped by the engineer.
3.4.8 Erosion Control Plan
The location of all erosion and sediment control facilities shall be shown on the plan, with detail drawing of each type of facility being used. Scheduling and specifications of sodding, seeding and other vegetative BMP’s shall be indicated.
An inspection and maintenance plan for both structural and vegetative BMP’s to insure functioning of practices and to protect downstream areas from excessive sedimentation may be required by the Engineering Department.
3.4.9 Water Distribution
The plans for the water distribution system shall show the location of water mains, valves and fire hydrants and other information as may be required by the State of Kentucky, Division of Water and the Engineering Department (including, but not limited to, construction and material specifications).
The plans of the water distribution system shall also show the elevations of the water lines where the waterline crosses a storm sewer, other public or private utilities, drainage channel, sanitary sewer, or roadway.
3.4.10 Other Public Utilities
The plans shall indicate the existing and/or proposed location of electric, natural gas, telephone, street lights, cable television and other public utilities. The plans shall show lines, poles, transformers and any other necessary facilities.
3.5 Record Plat Requirements
The following information and requirements shall be applicable to any submission for Commission consideration of a record subdivision plat.
3.5.1 Drawing Size
The plats shall be 24” x 36”.
3.5.2 Authorization for Plat Preparation
Record subdivision plats must be prepared by a registered land surveyor.
3-6
3.5.3 Title Block and Vicinity Sketch
The title block shall be placed on the bottom of the sheet and shall contain the following:
• the subdivision name, which shall not duplicate nor closely approximate the name of any other subdivision in Hardin County, preceded by the words “Record Plat of (subdivision name)”,
• the record name and mailing address of the property being subdivided,
• the name and mailing address of the property owner(s),
• the name and mailing address of the developer(s),
• the name and mailing address of the registered professional engineer preparing the plans as and any other persons directly involved in the transaction,
• graphic and written scale,
• north arrow,
• date of preparation,
• Property Valuation Administration (PVA) number of property being subdivided, and
• Other pertinent legend data 12
3.5.4 Lotting Scheme
The lotting scheme shall be drawn at a scale of one hundred (100) feet or less to the inch, north oriented to top of the sheet and shall show the following:
A. For adjacent land, show the exact location of adjoining streets with dashed lines; show the bearings and distances to nearest established street bounds, established survey lines or other official monuments; and for adjacent property, show the boundaries with dashed lines and the record name of the subdivision or owner’s name.
B. Show the subdivision tract boundary lines with lengths of course to hundredths of a foot and bearings to nearest five (5) seconds of an arc, determined by an accurate survey in the field.
C. For street right-of-way, show the names, bearings, angles of intersections and widths. For all arcs, show the length of the radii, points of curvance and tangent bearings. For all lot lines, show dimensions in feet and hundredths and bearings and angles to minutes if other than right angles to the street of lines.
D. All easements shall be shown and clearly labeled as to their width and purpose.
E. All floodplain areas shall be shown and clearly labeled and where available, the actual computed elevation of the regulatory flood shall be noted, as well as the FIRM identification number.
3-7
Subdivision Regulations
Design and Improvement Standards
F. Show lots numbered in numerical order, and street address numbers for each lot.
G. Show the accurate location, description, and material of all monuments.
H. Show all property intended for public use or dedication and for common use of property owners.
I. Show building setback lines.
3.5.5 Proposed Private Utilities
A listing of the private utilities (those improvements generally not later dedicated to and maintained by local government such as electricity, telephone, and at times, water, gas, and sewage disposal), whether or not the developer intends to have them provided, agency or means by which they are to be provided and agency which will supervise or approve any installation.
3.5.6 Notes
Any informational or restrictive notes to be included on the plat shall be numbered in sequential order and grouped together as one list whenever possible.
3.5.6.1 Maintenance Note
A note shall be included on the plat, which notifies potential lot purchasers of their responsibilities for maintaining drainage and other easement areas.13
3.5.6.2 Monumentation
All monumentation shall be indicated as required in Article 4, Section 6 of these subdivision regulations.
3-8
3.5.7 Certification Block for Record Plats
Certification blocks shall contain the following certifications along with required signatures. 37
Surveyors Certification
The land surveyor who prepared the plat shall certify as follows:
I certify that this plat was prepared by me or under my direction; that all monuments indicated here do actually exist and that their locations, size and material are correctly indicated; and that the information shown herein is correct to the best of my knowledge and belief.
Signature Date
Registration Number
The land surveyor shall also stamp the plat.
Utility/Easement Certification
Utility companies shall certify as follows:
I, being a duly authorized agent of the cited utility company, accept the easements shown on this record plat on behalf of my company.
If previous easements are to be released, the following phrase shall be inserted at the end of the certification shown above:
I also release any easements that have been approved previously.
Representative Date
Company
Owners Certification
The owner(s) shall certify as follows:
(I, We) certify that (I am, we are) the owner(s) of this property, as recorded in in the Hardin County Clerk’s Office (See Deed Source Below), and that we adopt this plan of development with our free consent, establish the minimum building lines, and dedicate all streets,
3-9
Subdivision Regulations
Design and Improvement Standards
drainage ways, walks, public utility lines, parks and other open spaces to public use as noted and illustrated. Further, (I, we) we grant unto the applicable utility companies, their successors and assigns, an easement over the spaces indicated by dashed lines marked as either exclusive or multipurpose easement. Utility companies that may utilize a multipurpose easement established by this plat include, but are not limited to: Kentucky Utilities (KU) and Nolin RECC, for electric power distribution; Windstream Communications, Brandenburg Telecom and Comcast for telecommunications services; Hardin County Water District No. 2 for potable water distribution; and, the City of Elizabethtown for sanitary sewer collection, drainage and natural gas distribution.60 Said easements include:
1. the right to construct, maintain, operate, replace, upgrade, or rebuild pole lines and/or pipes, and/or underground cable systems and all appurtenances thereto;
2. the right of ingress and egress over all lots to and from said easements indicated;
3. the right to trim or remove any tree necessary to maintain proper service;
4. the right to keep said easements free of any structures or obstacles the company deems a hazard to the said pole lines, pipes or cable; and
5. the right to prohibit any excavation within five (5) feet of any buried pipe and/or cable herein mentioned, or change of grade that interferes with overhead pole lines.
The undersigned hereby grants the further right, to the applicable61 electric utility company, to install, either overhead or underground, necessary wiring for street lighting, that is requested and/or required, but in no case shall wiring be installed more than five (5) feet from any lot line.
Lot owners are to use and enjoy said lands included in easement shown herein, but such use shall not interfere with the right herein granted.
Owner(s) Title Date
3-10
Notary Certification
Each owner’s signature shall be notarized as follows:
I certify that I am a notary for the State-At-Large. I further certify that the above signature(s) (is, are) legal and (has, have) been executed voluntarily, to the best of my knowledge and belief.
Notary Public Date
Date Commission Expires
Improvement, Sanitary Sewer and Fire Protection Certification
An official of the appropriate department shall certify as follows:
I certify that the street improvement plans for this subdivision have been reviewed and are in conformance with all appropriate regulations. I further certify the water supply system for fire protection and sewage disposal system installed or proposed for installation in this subdivision have been reviewed and fully meet the requirements of this jurisdiction and are approved.
Jurisdiction Official Date 37
Improvement, Water Certification
An official of the appropriate water agency shall certify as follows:
I certify that the water supply system installed or proposed for installation in this subdivision fully meets the requirements of this jurisdiction and are approved.
Jurisdiction Official Date 37
Improvement, Stormwater and Drainage Certification
An official of the appropriate department (typically Stormwater Department) shall certify as follows:
I certify that the stormwater improvement plans for this subdivision have been reviewed and are in conformance with all appropriate regulations. I also certify the grading and drainage systems installed or proposed for installation in this subdivision fully meet the requirements of this jurisdiction and are approved.
Jurisdiction Official Date 14
3-11
Subdivision Regulations
Design and Improvement Standards
Commission Certification
Upon acceptance of the record plat, the Commission shall certify the following:
I certify that this record plat has been approved in accordance with the regulations administered by the Elizabethtown Planning Commission, and that this plat is now eligible for recording. I further certify that a financial surety in the amount of $ has been posted to assure completion of all required improvements in case of default.
Chairman or Authorized Agent Date
3.5.8 Amendments
The required content and format of any amendment to a subdivision plat shall be the same as for the original submission. In addition, the plat title shall be labeled to indicate the plat as an “Amended” (type of plat) of (subdivision name)”; and a note shall be included on the plat setting forth the specific purpose of the requested amendment. No plat changes shall be considered in effect unless it is referenced in this note.
3.6 As-Built Improvement Plans
This plan shall generally include the same information as required for improvement plans, except that the “as-built” plan shall accurately reflect the actual installation of the improvements and shall be labeled “As-Built Improvement Plan” in the title box. Specifically, As-Built plans shall include the following:
Streets -The profile of each street with elevation of ground and street
Grade, and
-A typical cross-section of each street showing pavement width,
right-of-ways, and sidewalks.
Sewer Lines -Size and locations of all lines,
-Manholes and service connections, and
-A “Tap Plan” showing exact detailed locations of all service
line connections, specifically showing distance right or left of main line station and elevation. Service lines not intersecting main line at right angles shall show internal angle of intersection.
Water Lines -Size and locations of lines, fitting, valves, and hydrants, and
-A “Tap Plan” showing exact detailed locations of all service
line valves.
3-12
Natural Gas Lines -Size and location of lines, and
-A “Tap Plan” showing exact detailed locations of all
service line valves.
3-13
Article IV
Design and Improvement Standards
4.0 Purpose
The purpose of this article is to establish the basic and minimum design and improvement standards, which will be required for lots, streets, utilities, and other physical elements in the subdivision. The City may require standards above the minimum contained herein and additional measures whenever it finds that the public health, safety, and welfare justify such increases.
4.1 General Requirements
Certified engineering plans and specifications for subdivision improvements shall be provided as required by Article 3, Section 4 of this document. All improvements shall be designed and constructed according to standard engineering practice. It is the responsibility of the developer and his/her engineer to obtain the best available design and construction.
Existing features which are assets to the community and subdivision area shall be preserved as much as possible through harmonious design of the subdivision. Examples of such features are groups of existing trees, watercourses, historic buildings, and similar irreplaceable physical assets.
All construction shall be protected from flooding and erosion damage. Open pipes shall be protected from filling with mud or debris. Erosion and flooding control shall be exercised during construction to prevent damage to property adjacent to the development. Silt dams, retention basins, or other protections are required as needed.
4.2 Block and Lot Standards
The following shall be the minimum standards for lots and blocks:
4.2.1 Block Standards
In general, intersecting streets which determine block lengths shall be provided at such intervals as necessary to meet existing street patterns, topography and requirements for safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian circulation. Residential blocks shall not exceed one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet in length, with a block width generally sufficient to allow two tiers of lots of appropriate depths. Non-residential blocks shall be of such length, width and other design as the Commission finds necessary for the prospective use including appropriate provision for off-street parking, truck loading and unloading, buffer areas, pedestrian movement and proper vehicular access to adjacent streets.
4-1
Subdivision Regulations
Design and Improvement Standards
4.2.2 Lot Shapes
Excessive depth in relation to width should be avoided, with a proportion of two and one-half (2 ½) to one (1) normally being considered as a desirable maximum for lot widths of seventy-five (75) feet or greater. Pointed or very irregularly shaped lots shall be avoided where possible. Additional depth of at least twenty (20) feet over the typical lot depth shall be required on lots which back up to railroads, major streets, commercial or industrial areas or other conflicting land uses.
4.2.3 Lot Frontage and Access
All lots shall abut an approved right-of-way for at least the minimum frontage required by the zoning category in which the lot is located. Frontage shall be measured at the street right-of-way line, except that in cases where curved streets or cul-de-sac radii are involved, measurement shall be taken at the building setback line as set forth in the zoning category in which the lot is located, or if more restrictive, as set forth on the subdivision plat. All lots shall be designed so as to provide safe, convenient vehicular traffic and pedestrian access to the street.
Land reserved for public use, as stated in 4.5.1, may have this frontage requirement waived by the Commission to no less than twenty (20) feet.
4.2.4 Lot Lines
Side lot lines should be at right angles to the straight street centerline and radial to curved street centerline. Rear lot lines should consist of straight line with a minimum number of deflections.
4.2.5 Lot Area and Minimum Setback Lines
Lots shall meet the minimum standards required by the Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance. The Commission may require increased setbacks along collector arterial streets, floodways, or environmentally sensitive areas.
4.2.6 Corner Lots
Corner lots should be of sufficient width and depth to equal non-corner lots in subdivisions plus sufficient area to comply with the required minimum building setback lines on each street frontage.
4.2.7 Double Frontage Lots
Double frontage lots shall be prohibited except where employed to prevent excessive vehicular driveway access to street or to separate residential areas from other areas of conflicting land or traffic use.
4-2
4.2.8 Land Remnants
If remnants of land exist after subdividing and have no apparent future use, which can be properly controlled, they shall be incorporated into lots of the proposed lotting scheme.
4.2.9 Street Addresses
Street address numbers shall be assigned to each lot by the Department in order to provide a separate and distinct address for each lot.
4.3 Streets and Sidewalk Standards
The following guidelines shall be considered when laying out proposed transportation system:
• Adequate vehicular and pedestrian access should be provided to all lots,
• Local street systems shall be designed to minimize through traffic movements,
• The layout of a local street system should not create excessive travel lengths,
• Local circulation systems and land development patterns should not detract from the efficiency of adjacent major streets,
• Residential streets shall clearly convey their local function and place in the street hierarchy,
• Streets shall be designed to accommodate local emergency services,
• The street layout shall be designed to limit the extent of grading, cutting, and filling necessary for street construction, allowing the topographic characteristics of a site to the greatest extent possible, and
• The proposed street layout shall provide for the continuation of existing streets to adjoining tracts, unless the Commission deems such extension undesirable for specific reasons of topography or design. Where it is desirable in the opinion of the Commission to provide street access to adjoining property, proposed streets shall be extended by dedication to the boundary of such property.
4.3.1 Street Design Standards and Geometrics
The following shall be the minimum standards for streets:
4.3.1.1 Street Hierarchy
The street hierarchy should minimize through traffic movements in subdivisions, promote safety of vehicular traffic and neighborhood residents, and promote a stronger sense of neighborhood by limiting traffic volume.
4-3
Subdivision Regulations
Design and Improvement Standards
4.3.1.2 Utilization
Street hierarchy shall be utilized in the layout and design of subdivisions. This hierarchy shall conform to the following specifications:
1. All proposed streets shall be classified under the street
hierarchy.
2. The street hierarchy shall be determined by road function and the Average Daily Traffic (ADT) in residential subdivisions. The anticipated ADT is determined by utilizing the trip generation tables in Appendix A. In commercial or industrial subdivision, the road function should be built to collector street standards.
3. Existing streets shall be classified under the street hierarchy by the Commission when required or when necessary for the review of proposed developments.
4. The developer shall demonstrate to the Commission that the distribution of traffic to the proposed street system will not exceed the ADT thresholds indicated herein for any proposed or existing street type.
4.3.1.3 Classification
The following street classifications shall be used in the street hierarchy:
A. Arterial Streets - Arterial streets shall have the highest traffic volumes, speed limit, and right-of-way width.
1. Principal Arterials - The Kentucky Department of Transportation will be consulted when state maintained roads are involved. No new residential driveway access shall be encouraged.
2. Minor Arterials - The Kentucky Department of Transportation will be consulted when state maintained roads are involved. New residential driveway access shall be limited by the Commission. On-street parking shall be prohibited.
4-4
B. Collector Streets - Collector streets shall be designed to discourage through vehicular traffic generated outside of the subdivision it serves unless a linkage between higher order streets outside of the subdivision is identified in the Comprehensive Plan or as determined by the Commission to be desirable.
1. Commercial Collector – The highest order of commercial streets. Provides limited access to abutting lots and conveys traffic from intersecting local access and sub-collector streets to higher order arterials. Designed to convey the highest volume of vehicular traffic at the highest speed. Due to commercial collector street’s functions as a through street, the following service restrictions shall apply:
• Driveway spacing should be at a minimum of 300 feet, and
• On street parking shall be prohibited.15
2. Residential Collector - The highest order of residential streets. Provides limited access to abutting lots and conveys traffic from intersecting local access and subcollector streets to higher order arteries. Designed to convey the highest volume of vehicular traffic at the highest speed. Due to residential collector street’s functions as a through street, the following service restrictions shall apply:
• No more than 25 percent of the total number of lots may take direct access on the collector street.
• On street parking shall be prohibited.
C. Local Access - The lowest order of streets. They provide access to abutting lots and convey vehicular traffic from the intersecting cul-de-sac streets. They are designed to convey traffic with motorists having origins or destinations within the immediate neighborhood. Due to the local access streets function, the following standards shall apply:
• The maximum number of lots should front on local access streets.
• On-street parking shall be allowed on one side of the street.
• No section of street should convey an ADT of more than 750 vehicles.
4-5
Subdivision Regulations
Design and Improvement Standards
D. Cul-de-Sac Street - Provides access to abutting lots and does not convey vehicular traffic from any higher order street that intersects it. Should be designed to conduct the least amount of vehicular traffic at the lowest speed. Due to the functions of a cul-de-sac, the following standards shall apply:
• On-street parking shall be provided on one side of the street if the ADT is greater than 200.
• No on-street parking shall be allowed in the turnaround area.
• Minimum pavement turnaround radius shall be no less than 35 feet.
If any public/institutional or nonresidential land uses are proposed on a street, the additional ADT shall be determined through use of the Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation Tables.
4.3.1.4 Right of Way Width
Sufficient right-of-way is required to contain the elements of:
• Sufficient street pavement and curbing;
• Sidewalks where required;
• Public utilities such as water, sewer, and natural gas; and
• Turn lanes where required.
The following table gives the minimum right-of-way width:
Commercial Collector Streets 60 feet39
Residential Collector Streets 60 feet
Local Streets 50 feet
Cul-de-Sac Streets 50 feet16
The Commission may require additional right-of-way width when the stated minimum is not adequate due to a dividing median, turning lanes, ditch-line streets, potential for future development, or similar circumstances.
4-6
4.3.1.5 Existing Deficient Street Right-of-Ways
Developments platted along existing streets shall dedicate additional right-of-ways necessary to meet the minimum width requirements specified in these regulations. Should the possibility of obtaining additional right-of-way on the other remaining side of the right-of-way exist, the Commission may reduce the increased dedication up to one-half (1/2) the total necessary to meet the minimum width requirements specified.
4.3.1.6 Pavement Width
The minimum pavement width (does not include curb and gutter) for all streets shall be as follows:
Collector Streets (Commercial) 24’ 40
Collector Streets (Residential) 28’ 41
Local Streets 28’ 42
Cul-de-Sac Streets with parking 28’
Cul-de-Sac Streets w/o parking 24’ 17
4.3.1.7 Pavement Specifications
The subdivision shall provide pavement on a sub-grade, which has been properly shaped, rolled, and uniformly completed to conform to specified cross-sections and grades. Streets shall be constructed of Portland Cement Concrete (PCC) or Bituminous Concrete (asphalt) which conforms to all industry standards and to the current addition of “Kentucky Department of Highways Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.”
All sub-grades shall conform to 95% compaction as defined by the Standard Proctor compaction test and/or shall meet the approval of the Engineering Department. All rock sub-bases shall extend at least six (6) inches beyond the edge of the pavement.
Streets shall be constructed in conformance with the following pavement specifications:
A. Commercial Collector Streets
Asphalt 8 inches DGA
4 inches Base Asphalt
1 inch Surface Asphalt
Concrete 7 inches 18
4-7
Subdivision Regulations
Design and Improvement Standards
B. Residential Collector Streets
Asphalt 8 inches DGA
3 inches Base Asphalt
1 inch Surface Asphalt
Concrete 7 inches 19
C. Local Streets
Asphalt 6 inches DGA
3 inches Base Asphalt
1 inch Surface Asphalt
Concrete 7 inches
D. Cul-de-Sac Streets
Asphalt 6 inches DGA
2 inches Base Asphalt
1 inch Surface Asphalt
Concrete 7 inches
4.3.1.8 Street Grades
The maximum and minimum street grades for all streets shall be as follows:
Maximum Grade Minimum Grade
Collector Streets 8% .5%
Local Streets 10% .5%
Cul-de-Sac Streets 10% .5%
4.3.1.9 Street Intersections
Minimum standards for intersection design are as follows:
A. Number of Approaches
Intersections involving more than four (4) basic street approaches shall be prohibited. Merging lanes, deceleration lanes, “Y” intersections, etc., are not in this prohibition and are considered as parts of one street approach.
B. Angle of Intersection
For a tangent distance of at least one hundred (100) feet, measures from the intersection of right-of-way lines, all streets shall intersect at an angle of ninety (90) degrees.
4-8
C. Street Jogs
Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred (100) feet for local and two hundred (200) feet for collector streets shall not be made.
D. Excessive Grades at Intersections
When a street grade at the approach of an intersection exceeds three (3) percent, a leveling area shall be provided with grades of not greater than three (3) percent for a distance of fifty (50) feet from the intersection of street centerline. Vertical curves shall then be used to connect the intersecting grades.
E. Spacing
The minimum standards for intersection spacing measured from centerlines shall be as follows:
Minimum Preferred
Major Street Type Intersected Spacing Spacing
Arterial Streets 500* feet 1,000 feet*
Collector Streets 300 feet 500 feet
Local Streets 150 feet 200 feet
* May vary based upon the recommendation of the Kentucky Department of Transportation. 20
F. Sight Distance at Intersections
The sight distance at intersections is the distance from the stopped vehicles to as far left or right, the driver can see. The minimum stopping sight distance shall be as follows:
If intersecting with a:
Arterial Street *KDOT
Collector Street 250 feet
Local Street 200 feet
Cul-de-Sac Street 175 feet
* State Department of Highways to determine.
Situations involving skewed intersections, curvilinear streets, or other factors shall have sight distances determined by the Commission. No plant material or man made objects may be constructed which obstruct visibility from 30 inches high upwards.
4-9
Subdivision Regulations
Design and Improvement Standards
4.3.1.10 Horizontal Curve/Centerline Radius
The minimum horizontal curve radius shall be as follows:
Collector Streets 400 feet
Local Streets 200 feet
Cul-de-Sac Streets 175 feet
4.3.1.11 Minimum Property Line Radii
At street intersections, the minimum radius at property lines shall be twenty (20) feet for all streets.
4.3.1.12 Clear Sight Distance
In an area formed by joining with a straight line, points along intersecting street right-of-ways, twenty-five (25) feet from their intersection a clear area, is hereby created and no plant materials or manmade objects may be constructed which obstruct visibility from thirty (30) inches high upwards to the sky.
4.3.1.13 Maximum Cul-de-Sac Length
The maximum length for all cul-de-sac streets shall be as follows:
On streets with an ADT of 200 or greater, the maximum cul-de-sac length shall be 700 feet.
On streets with an ADT of less than 200, the maximum cul-de-sac length shall be 1000 feet.
In commercial and industrial areas, cul-de-sac streets should not exceed 1000 feet in length.
Cul-de-sac length shall be measured from the pavement centerline of the intersection to the center of the cul-de-sac.
4.3.1.14 Conflicting Traffic or Land Use
When a proposed development contains or is adjacent to an existing or proposed railroad right-of-way, arterial street right-of-way or conflicting and detrimental land use, the Commission may require marginal access street, reverse frontage lots, lots with rear service alleys, lots with additional depth or other measures which may be necessary for the protection of abutting properties and the maintenance or function of major traffic arteries.
4-10
4.3.1.15 Street Continuity
The proposed street layout shall provide for the continuation of existing streets to adjoining tracts, unless the Commission deems such extension undesirable for specific reasons to topography or design. Where it is desirable in the opinion of the Commission to provide street access to an adjoining property, the proposed street shall be extended by dedication to the boundary of such property. This proposed street shall be temporarily known as a stub street until it becomes a through street by the adjoining property owner.
4.3.1.16 Stub Street
Temporary turnarounds shall be required at the end of stub streets as long as it is retained within the street right-of-way.
4.3.1.17 Turning Lanes
When the Commission determines that vehicles turning into a proposed subdivision will adversely affect the capacity of the existing streets, the developer shall dedicate sufficient right-of-way and construct the turning lane as necessary to maintain the capacity of the existing streets. The Commission may require turning lanes whenever a proposed subdivision or additional section of an existing subdivision generates an ADT of 1000 vehicles or greater at the street intersection.
When the Commission determines that a turning lane is desirable, the Kentucky Department of Transportation’s design and construction standards for turning lanes shall be utilized.
4.3.1.18 Street Names
Streets that are in alignment with existing streets shall bear the name of the existing street. When streets are not in alignment, no name shall be used which would duplicate or be confusing with names of the existing street. Street names should not duplicate or closely approximate in spelling or phonetics of the names of other streets in Hardin County. Street names may not contain more than fourteen (14) characters, not including directional (such as North, South, East, West) or suffix (such as Street, Way, Drive) nomenclature. Names determined to be obscene or improper may not be used.65
4.3.1.19 Subdivision Entrances
The number of entrances required in a subdivision shall depend on the type of subdivision, the density of the development, and in residential subdivisions, the ADT. An additional entrance/exit to a higher order street is required whenever a subdivision entrance street conveys an ADT greater than 2000.
4-11
Subdivision Regulations
Design and Improvement Standards
4.3.1.20 Medians
Medians may be permitted in street cross sections when approved by the Commission. Medians shall only be allowed when it is designed to provide for all the necessary traffic movements, including driveway access. Provisions for the maintenance of any median areas and associated plantings shall be noted on the final plat of the property. Plantings shall be of a nature that will not conflict with sight distance or other traffic related requirements.
4.3.1.21 Lot Access in Residential Subdivisions
Driveways on corner lots in residential subdivisions shall be limited to access from the street of lower classification. If the streets are of the same class, access shall be limited to the street of the lower ADT.
4.3.1.22 Curb and Gutter
Curbing shall be required for the purposes of drainage, safety, and delineation and protection of pavement edge. This requirement may be waived by the Commission after a recommendation by the Engineering Department and drainage swales used when it can be shown that soil or topography makes the use of drainage swales preferable. Drainage swales and their construction must be approved by the Engineering Department. Driveway headwalls must be provided and constructed based on standards set by the Engineering Department.
A. Curb and Gutter Construction
On arterial and collector, vertical face (box) curb shall be constructed. Driveway cuts shall be constructed according to Figure A-5 in Appendix C.
The transition between vertical and existing rolled curbs shall happen at sidewalk intersections where handicap accessibility is provided.
4-12
B. Specifications
PCC Standard Vertical Face 6 inches high and 6
Curb inches wide curb
18 inches wide and 7 inches thick gutter
PCC Standard Rolled Curb 24 inches total width
Local and Cul-de-sacs Curb height varies from 2 to 5 inches subject to Engineering Department approval and 7 inches thick gutter64
C. Accessibility
Curbing and sidewalks shall be designed to provide a ramp for handicap accessibility and bicycles at street intersections.
4.3.1.23 Entrance Standards21
All lots in subdivisions shall be configured with the following design criteria for access.
A. Entrance Distance From Street Intersections
The minimum distance from the intersection of two or more streets to a commercial entrance shall be one-hundred fifty (150’) feet, measured from the nearest curb lines. Entrances with spacing less than 150’ shall be submitted to the Engineering Department for review and may be approved when extenuating circumstances exist.43
B. Entrance Location
Entrances shall be designed and located to provide an exiting vehicle with an unobstructed view. Entrances along acceleration or deceleration lanes and tapers are discouraged and may only be approved by the Commission when extenuating circumstances exist.
C. Entrance Visibility Time
Entrances for all lots shall be located to provide for the minimum visibility time sight distance of six seconds. The six second rule is to be calculated based on standards established by AASHTO.
4.3.2 Sidewalk Design Standards
Where required, sidewalks shall be constructed along both sides of the street in all zoning districts except Industrial. The Commission may waive these requirements for sidewalks if an acceptable alternative pedestrian walkway system is proposed that will provide better access to parks, schools, or other land uses.
4-13
Subdivision Regulations
Design and Improvement Standards
4.3.2.1 Sidewalk Construction
Concrete sidewalks and walkways shall be constructed on thoroughly compacted sub-grade. Sidewalks shall be four (4) inches in thickness and have a minimum width of five (5) feet.44
When an alternative pedestrian walkway is provided, walkway construction shall be approved by the Engineering Department.
4.3.2.2 Sidewalk Placement
On curb and gutter streets, sidewalks shall be placed in the right-of-way and parallel to the street, three (3) feet from the back of the curb, unless an exception has been permitted by the Engineering Department.
On ditch-line streets, the sidewalk shall be placed parallel to the street, outside of the right-of-way within a pedestrian easement. No utilities may be placed within this pedestrian easement. 45
If an existing sidewalk network is in place on adjacent properties, the developer shall design and construct his/her sidewalks to connect with the existing system.
4.3.2.3 Accessibility
Curbing and sidewalks shall be designed to provide a ramp for handicap accessibility and bicycles at street intersections.
4.3.2.4 Detectable Warning for Sidewalk Ramps
Detectable warnings shall be placed on all sidewalk ramps. Detectable warning plates shall be provided with truncated domes at the nominal dimensions as shown in Appendix C, individual pavers shall not be used as a material to meet this requirement. The color shall be homogeneous throughout a development and contrast visually with adjoining surfaces. The City will allow either red or yellow as colors.22 46
4.3.2.5 Construction of Detectable Warnings on Sidewalk Ramps
Detectable warnings shall extend the full surface width and a minimum length of two (2) feet up the ramp. If a walkway crosses or adjoins a vehicular way, and the pedestrian walking surface is not separated by curbs, railings, or other elements, define the boundary between the areas with a continuous two (2) foot minimum width detectable warning. The detectable warning pavers shall be installed as shown in Appendix C.23
4-14
4.3.3 Street Lights
Streetlights shall be placed at strategic locations to insure safe vehicular and pedestrian traffic. At a minimum, the required streetlights shall be located at every street intersection and at 200 to 300 feet intervals. Electric service to streetlights shall be provided underground.
When decorative lights are proposed, the subdivider shall provide the street lighting poles, accessories, and necessary easements in accordance with the appropriate utility company. The ownership and maintenance of streetlights may be transferred to the City after inspection.
4.4 Utility Standards
The following shall be the minimum standards for utilities necessary for subdivision construction, such as telephone supply, electric supply, cable television service lines, natural gas supply, water supply, stormwater disposal, sewage disposal, or other utilities:
4.4.1 General Requirements
The location of all utilities must be considered together to avoid crossing conflicts, minimize trenching, and maintain the required separations between incompatible systems.
It is desirable to keep utilities in a uniform location relative to the street.
4.4.2 Telephone, Electric, and Cable Systems
Every subdivision shall be provided with proper telephone, electric and cable services system. In residential subdivisions that require improvement plans, telephone, electric, and cable television service lines shall be placed underground except in cases where the Commission determines underground lines are infeasible.
4.4.2.1 Location
All telephone, electric, and cable television system lines shall be placed within the drainage and utility easement and restricted from the public right-of-way.
4.4.3 Sanitary Sewer Collection System
Every subdivision shall be provided with a sanitary sewer system designed and constructed according to the specification of the City, unless it is determined by the Engineering Department that public sanitary sewer is not readily available. If public sanitary sewer is not readily available, then a private sanitary sewer (septic system) shall be provided in conformance with the requirements of the Hardin County Health Department and the requirements listed in this section.
The Engineering Department shall determine public sanitary sewer to not be readily available if all the following conditions exist:
1. Public sanitary sewer is a distance greater than 2000 feet from the site,
2. The development involves fewer than six (6) building lots,
4-15
Subdivision Regulations
Design and Improvement Standards
3. The development involves lots with a minimum frontage of 150 feet for each lot,
4. Unusual topography exists between the site and the existing sanitary sewer or extraordinary measures are required to construct a system acceptable to the City,
5. Public water and electric utility service are provided to the development in conformance with City standards as required by this Ordinance,
6. The soils and lot design are acceptable for the proper absorption of the discharge from the private system,
7. The development involves lots with a minimum acreage size as indicated below:
Number of Lots Minimum Lot Size
1 – 2 1 acre
3 – 4 2 acres
8. When public sanitary sewer becomes available to the subdivision all lot owners are required to connect to the system.
4.4.3.1 Sanitary Sewer Line Locations
Lines and manholes shall be located within the right-of-ways or recorded easements, but not under pavement, except when approved by the Engineering Department.
Service lines shall be installed to serve all lots in the subdivision. Service line connections shall be installed to the property line for each lot.
4.4.3.2 Sanitary Sewer Line Sizes
Main lines shall be at least eight (8) inches in diameter, unless otherwise approved by the Engineering Department. Tap lines shall be at least six (6) inches in diameter where serving more than one lot and/or residence or commercially zoned lots. Four (4) inch diameter tap lines shall be allowed for single residential services. Over sizing of sewer lines may be required by the City. In such instances, the developer will be reimbursed for any additional cost incurred as a result of this requirement.
4.4.3.3 Lift Stations and Force Mains
Design criteria for lift stations and force mains shall be approved by the Engineering Department on an individual basis.
4.4.3.4 Construction and Materials
All construction practices and construction materials shall conform to the City of Public Improvement Specifications.
4-16
4.4.4 Water Supply
Every subdivision shall be provided with a complete water distribution system to serve the area being developed, including adequate fire protection facilities, as required by the City of Elizabethtown Fire Protection and Prevention Ordinance. The entire water system shall be provided by the developer and shall be designed and constructed to meet the approval of the City of Elizabethtown, the Kentucky Division of Water and/or the appropriate water utility.
4.4.4.1 Water Line Locations
Lines and valves shall be located within street right-of-ways or recorded easements, but not under pavements, except when approved by the Engineering Department.
Water lines shall be extended to the development boundary along all street right-of-ways.
Service lines shall be installed to serve all lots in the subdivision. Service line connections shall be installed to the property line for each lot.
4.4.4.2 Water Line Sizes
Waterlines shall be at least six (6) inches in diameter. Eight (8) inch in diameter lines shall be installed when the line dead ends. Dead end lines shall not exceed 600 feet in length and shall be avoided whenever possible. Over sizing of water lines may be required by the City, but in all cases must be sized to provide the required fire flows as stated in the Fire Protection and Prevention Ordinance. In such instances, the developer will be reimbursed for any additional cost incurred as a result of this requirement.
4.4.4.3 Construction and Materials
All construction practices and construction materials shall conform to the City of Elizabethtown Public Improvement Specifications.
4.4.5 Stormwater Drainage Systems
Every subdivision shall provide satisfactory drainage of the surface water of the subdivision and the drainage area of which it is a part. The stormwater drainage system shall meet the approval of the Engineering Department.
The developer shall be required to provide storm drainage improvements that will prevent aggravation of any existing downstream problem considering both the instantaneous flow rate and flood elevations caused by the increased run off from the development.
4-17
Subdivision Regulations
Design and Improvement Standards
4.4.5.1 Road Drainage System
The road drainage system shall serve as the primary drainage collection system and shall be designed to carry roadway, adjacent land and building stormwater drainage. No stormwater shall be permitted to enter into the sanitary sewer system.
Road cross drains shall be constructed for the twenty-five (25) year storm rate. Gutters shall be constructed for the ten (10) year storm rate and checked against a twenty-five (25) year storm.
Where curb and gutter is not required by the Commission, headwalls on culvert pipes are required and acceptable provisions must be made to prevent erosion around the pipe entrance. Entrance pipes for each lot shall be sized and indicated on the drainage plan.
4.4.5.2 Off-road Drainage Systems
When the drainage system is outside of the road right-of-way, the developer shall make provisions for dedicating of an easement to the City. The landowner shall properly maintain all on-site drainage areas.
A. Detention Areas
For detention areas, stormwater discharge points shall have multiple discharges. The detention area shall store run off generated from a post-developed 2-year storm with a maximum discharge rate of a pre-developed 2-year storm and store runoff from a post developed 10-year storm with a maximum discharge rate of a pre-developed 10-year storm and store the runoff generated from a post developed 25-year storm with a maximum discharge of the pre-developed 25-year storm. All storage shall be contained within the drainage easement.
Side slopes shall be constructed so as to be maintainable by the proposed owner of the facility, as approved by the Engineering Department.
The sub-divider shall adequately protect all detention areas from erosion.
4-18
B. Drainage Ditches
The side slopes of the ditch shall not be greater than 4:1.
The sub-divider shall adequately protect all ditches. Ditches and open channels shall be seeded, sodded or paved depending on grades and types of soils to stabilize the ditch and prevent erosion, as determined by the Engineering Department.
4.4.6 Natural Gas
Natural gas shall be provided at the option of the developer. Where natural gas service is desired in a development, a natural gas main extension contract must be complete with the City of Elizabethtown. The gas line extension shall conform to the policies of the Gas Department and shall be designed and constructed according to the specification of the City.
4.4.7 Utility and Access, Drainage, Floodway Protection and Riparian Buffer Easements
Easements for new, or the continuation of existing, utilities shall be provided for all subdivisions with the widths or other characteristics as required by the Commission or the Department based upon recommendations from the various utility companies. Drainage and utility easements shall be shown on the final plat. Release or modification of utility and drainage easements shall require the expressed approval of all such parties holding the right to use the easement.
The Planning Commission or Department may require either exclusive and/or multipurpose easements associated with access to lots and parcels, drainage, provision of utilities and protection of streams and floodways. Except as noted below for riparian buffers, easements are to be established, modified and/or released through the recordation of a plat or amendment of an existing plat.
The determination as to whether an easement is exclusive or multipurpose will be made by the Department based on requirements contained within these regulations and/or recommendations from the various utility companies and, in some cases, affected property owner(s). Specific types of easements, and associated requirements, are described below.
Access easements – This type of easement is for a specific public purpose associated with providing shared vehicular or pedestrian access to land uses. Where vehicular or pedestrian access to property is to be shared through a common and privately owned access facility, an access easement shall be provided for the benefit of all affected property owners. The easement shall be of sufficient width/area and constructed to provide the required level and type of access (one or more travel lanes, pedestrian or multiuse walks and paths, etc.). A note shall be included on the record or amended record plat that
4-19
Subdivision Regulations
Design and Improvement Standards
describes the responsibilities, method and timing of maintenance for the lands and facilities included within the easement area (or references a separate agreement between the property owners for maintenance of the easement). An access easement may be specific to a geographically defined portion of one or more lots or parcels, or general to the entirety of one or more lots that benefit from the easement.
Utility/Drainage easements – A utility easement may be for a specific provider (i.e., exclusive to an electric service provider) or several providers (i.e., electric, natural gas, water, sanitary sewer, etc.). A utility easement shall be of sufficient width/area, as determined by the City, to accommodate the intended use(s). New subdivisions shall, at a minimum, incorporate multipurpose utility easements along all boundaries of lots and public streets. Street side multipurpose utility easements should be wider than side or rear yard easements in order to accommodate the placement of several types of utilities. The guideline for the width of streetside easements should be in a range of 15 - 20 feet. Side and rear yard easement widths may be less than for streetside easements and should generally be consistent with the width of required building setbacks. The area within utility easements may not be utilized for permanent pavement or structures without the express written consent of the affected utilities. Easements may be planted by the property owner with shrubs, perennials, annuals and groundcovers. However, understory or canopy trees shall not be planted within, or adjacent to, a utility easement such that the canopy of a mature tree would extend into an easement that contains above ground electric power facilities. Any landscape material planted within a utility easement may be removed by a utility provider without compensation to the property owner when necessary for maintenance of an existing facility.
Floodway/drainage and riparian buffer easements – These types of easements are required to be provided for any regulatory stream that flows through or adjacent to property subject to plat or development plan approval. Establishment of a riparian buffer/building setback (a riparian buffer is also known as a Vegetative Buffer Strip) may be accomplished through subdivision or development plan approval. Regulatory streams (also defined as perennial blue line streams) are characterized by a defined or undefined floodway and an associated riparian zone. (See Ordinance No. 27-2007 of the City of Elizabethtown for definitions of “floodway” or “regulatory floodway” and a description of riparian buffers.) Property owners submitting subdivision plats or development plans for approval shall delineate the extent of the floodway associated with a regulatory stream (based on FEMA data or twenty-five feet from the top of bank of each side of the stream where there is no defining FEMA data) and provide a required riparian buffer and building setback. The extent of the riparian buffer shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet,
4-20
except that within the designated urban core area, which shall be those areas located inside KY 3005 (Ring Road) and south of US 62, the minimum standard may be reduced or enlarged as a condition of approval of the associated subdivision plat or development plan.
Where any element of a regulatory stream corridor (stream, floodway or associated riparian buffer) is partially located on an adjoining property then the balance of a required easement or buffer shall be provided by the owner of the adjoining property. For example, if a five (5) foot wide (of a total floodway width of twenty (20) feet) portion of a floodway is located on an adjoining property the property owner shall provide a five foot easement and the required Floodway/Drainage Easement note. Where more than one property owner has maintenance responsibilities for a floodway/drainage easement and/or associated riparian zone, a shared maintenance responsibility note shall also be placed on the plat and/or development plan. The requirement for an adjoining property owner to grant an easement or provide a buffer shall be accomplished when that owner voluntarily submits a subdivision plat or development plan for approval by the City.
A permanent floodway drainage easement shall be provided for each regulatory stream. A Floodway/Drainage Easement note shall provide notice to future property owners of the requirements for: maintenance of the easement; limitations on use and construction within the easement; and authorities/permitting requirements for activities proposed within the easement. This easement and note shall also be shown on all subsequent development plans or amended subdivision plats. Each floodway drainage easement shall be supported by a riparian buffer/building setback along each side. The riparian buffer is separate from the floodway/drainage easement but also performs a drainage function associated with the quality of stormwater entering a stream/floodway. The timing for the establishment of the buffer/building setback and the condition, width and improvement of the buffer/setback area shall be permitted to vary as determined below.
1. Timing of establishment of the buffer/building setback
a. The buffer may be established as an element of a subdivision plat; or
b. The creation of the buffer may be deferred to approval of a development plan for sites containing a regulatory stream and included in the designated urban core area of the City. Where deferral is selected, a note shall be placed on the plat indicating that the establishment of the buffer/building setback shall be accomplished through development plan review. A development plan shall not be approved without establishment of the required buffer and/or approval of a development permit required by the provisions of Ordinance No. 27-2007.
4-21
Subdivision Regulations
Design and Improvement Standards
2. Condition, Width, Improvements and Restrictions
a. The physical condition of the floodway and area proposed for a riparian buffer/building setback shall be inventoried, noting any vegetative, structural or other impairment to storm water flow. City staff will review the information provided and determine if any maintenance or improvements will be required to be included with general subdivision or development improvements for which a surety is provided.
b. For all “greenfield” settings, the minimum width of a riparian buffer shall be twenty-five (25) feet as measured from the edge of the floodway easement.
c. For all “urban core” settings, the minimum average width shall be either: twenty-five (25) feet measured and calculated as defined in (b) above; or, a width and physical area determined through a regulatory stream buffer plan prepared by the property owner and submitted to and approved by the Planning Commission as an element of development plan approval after deferral during the approval of a subdivision plat. See below for a description of the submittal and approval requirements of a regulatory stream buffer plan.
d. Riparian buffers shall be retained or modified in conformance with the requirements of the City of Elizabethtown Ordinance No. 27-2007. Vegetative planting and buffer area grading requirements shall be included in the Landscape Plan submittal with either the Construction Plans for a Subdivision Plat or a Development Plan.
e. Land use and development restrictions for riparian buffers include: ongoing maintenance in the condition required by City regulations and/or required by an approved regulatory stream buffer plan; no building or structure with a permanent foundation other than sign poles and posts shall be permitted; storm water discharge structures associated with parking lots and building areas shall employ spreader and or flow dissipation techniques to minimize soil erosion from storm water flowing through the riparian buffer; off-street parking and driveways shall not be permitted unless constructed by an approved method; underground placement of utilities is prohibited but above ground placement may be approved on a case by case basis; and crossing of a regulatory stream corridor by classified streets and public utilities may be permitted in conformance with the City of Elizabethtown Ordinance No. 27-2007 and requirements of other state or federal environmental permitting agencies.
4-22
3. Regulatory Stream Buffer Plan (RSBP) Requirements
a. An RSBP provides an opportunity to propose alternative buffer standards and/or storm water best management practices for site development in urban core areas of the City of Elizabethtown. The RSBP will be evaluated by staff to determine if proposed buffers and storm water practices will accomplish the goal of improved quality of storm water discharge to regulatory streams. The RSBP shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission prior to staff approval of a Development Plan. Amendments to a floodway/drainage easement shall not be considered as part of a RSBP associated with a Development Plan. Such amendments shall only be considered as a revision to the subdivision plat containing the original easement dedication.
b. A RSBP plan submittal shall consist of: a site development plan consistent with the City’s submittal requirements; a text and graphic description of the proposed riparian buffers, building setbacks and storm water management practices to be implemented. The plan must demonstrate: no direct discharge of the water quality portion of storm water to the regulatory stream; an equivalent level of treatment of the first inch of storm water runoff to that provided by a 25 foot wide riparian buffer with associated treatment practices; and building setbacks/development restrictions that ensure that future site development will not adversely impact the regulatory stream and floodway.
c. The purpose of the RSBP process is to recognize that urban core area development parcels and lots may not be sized or configured to permit full development of the site and accomplish the preservation/provision of minimum riparian buffers that provide water quality treatment of storm water runoff. In such cases, the RSBP provides a process to develop and implement an equivalent water quality treatment plan based on the alternative riparian buffers and water quality best management practices such as the use of pervious pavement in parking areas and driveways, underground storm water retention facilities, rain gardens and tree wells, and other similar low impact development practices.
4. Maintenance Options for Floodway Easements with Riparian Buffers
The property owner is responsible for the ongoing maintenance of lands and storm water improvements within a floodway easement and streamside riparian buffers unless an alternate maintenance and land purchase agreement is approved by the Elizabethtown City Council.
4-23
Subdivision Regulations
Design and Improvement Standards
5. Conformance with the requirements and standards described above does not relieve the property owner/development from seeking floodway permit approvals as required by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and/or Kentucky Division of Water. Permit requirements and conditions imposed by any State or Federal agency with jurisdiction shall take precedence over any requirement or regulation contained herein.49 62
4.4.7.1 Location
Utilities should be located in the center of the easements unless the appropriate utility company agrees to a different location. In these circumstances, the utility company may request a larger easement width to accommodate the proper provision of services and required maintenance and repair of any lines or facilities. 38
4.5 Community Facilities Design Standards
In reviewing preliminary plats, the Commission shall consider the adequacy of existing or proposed community facilities which must serve the additional population to be housed in the proposed subdivision.
Areas reserved for community facilities should be adequate for building sites, landscaping, and off street parking as appropriate to the proposed use.
4-24
Subdivision Regulations
Design and Improvement Standards
4.5.1 Reservation of Land for Public Use
The developer, in the design of the subdivision plan, and the Department, in its review of the plan, shall consider the reservation of land for parks, open space, and other public uses as indicated in the Comprehensive Plan and/or as determined by the Commission consistent with the principle that the burden for such public uses must bear a reasonable relationship to the benefits conferred on the development, to the overall benefit to the surrounding development, and to the need for public use improvements necessitated by the development. The
developer may be required to reserve such sites for a period of two (2) years after preliminary subdivision plan approval. After the two (2) year period has elapsed and the City has not acquired or made other arrangements for the acquisition of the area, the full rights shall revert back to the developer.
The area of each parcel of recreation space shall be of such minimum dimensions as to be functionally usable. The required lot frontage may be waived by the Commission to no less than twenty (20) feet.
4.5.2 Location of Open Space Parcels
Open space parcels shall be convenient to the dwelling units they are intended to serve. They shall be sited with sensitivity to surrounding development and traffic condition.
4.6 Surveying and Monumentation Standards
The following monumentation standards shall be applicable to all subdivision plats:
A. Every boundary corner location which is determined by a land survey on the subdivision property will be monumented or witness monumented as described and required of every registered land surveyor in Kentucky as specified in Minimum Standards of Practice for Land Surveying in Kentucky, effective October 1, 1980 (or a more current version) and available from the Kentucky State Board of Registration.
B. There shall be a minimum of four (4) Control Monuments placed on the subdivision boundary when the plat is associated with a major subdivision approved after July 1, 2001. A minimum of two (2) permanent Control Monuments are required for minor subdivision plats if the lots are greater than 1000 feet from an existing Control Monument.24
C. Where corners are found to coincide with the previously set permanent Control Monument, the number on the previously set monument shall be shown on the plat.
D. A permanent Control Monument with both horizontal and vertical control shall be required to be set at every intersection of a collector street with an arterial street.25
4-25
E. The location, reference numbers, State plane coordinates, and elevation of all permanent Control Monuments shall be shown on the final plat.
F. All survey boundary location monuments shall be rebars, steel pins, stone markers, etc., as described in the Minimum Standards of Practice for Land Surveying in Kentucky.
G. The permanent Control Monuments, herein described, shall always consist of a pre-printed survey disk (brass, bronze, or aluminum set in solid rock, cemented into masonry or placed on top of a pre-cast concrete monument. If a pre-cast monument is to be used, it shall have a minimum seven (7) inch square top, and eleven (11) inch square bottom extended below the frost line). Survey disks, as provided by the City, shall be placed in the new concrete before it sets. The concrete monument must be set deep enough to be undisturbed by frost and should extend a few inches above the ground. See Appendix C for typical detail.26
H. The corner location chosen should be one that will not be likely to be disturbed. Original ground or excavated ground should be used for locating the permanent Control Monument. A monument should never be placed in a new fill area; however, if this is necessary, precautions must be taken to make the monument permanent, as approved by the Engineering Department.
I. If the subdivision is less than one (1) mile from an existing Control Monument, as measured in a straight line distance, the plat and any new permanent monuments set shall be referenced to that existing monument.27
4.7 Miscellaneous Standards
4.7.1 Environmentally Sensitive Areas
All such area shall be protected by special design measures taken by the developer to attempt to minimize the development’s impact. Acceptable design measures are:
• Non-disturbance of the area;
• Provision of additional building setbacks (at minimum of 50 foot setback);
• Provision of easements in such area as may be appropriate, so that an open space is provided;
• Provision of stormwater retention areas;
• Recontouring and excavation of the area, only when an erosion control plan is approved by the Engineering Department and when appropriate performance surety has been posted with the City.
• Any geologic hazard area shall be left in its natural state as a permanent open space for a distance of 100 feet from such areas. 63
4-26
Subdivision Regulations
Design and Improvement Standards
4.7.2 Buffer Zones
Buffer zones of screen plantings will be required when the subdivision is adjacent to an incompatible land use, as required in Article IX, Section 4 of the Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance.
4.7.3 Subdivision Identification Signs
Each entrance to the subdivision may have no more than two signs per entrance and shall only contain the name of the establishment and date for the subdivision.
4.7.4 Neighborhood Associations
Developers may choose to form neighborhood associations or other organizations that would be responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of common areas, decorative entrances, special median plantings, drainage features or other special amenities. If any such association or organization is formed, the private covenant or agreement establishing the association or organization must be reviewed and approved by the Department and City Attorney as to the content relating to the continual and permanent maintenance of special features and the disposition of such features if organization or association ceases.
4.7.5 City Erosion Control
During grading, improvement installation, and building construction erosion control shall be implemented. The project engineer shall use the Best Management Practices for Construction Activities prepared by the Kentucky Division of Conservation and Division of Water. The developer and project engineer shall use vegetative, structural, and associated best management practices, as approved by the Engineering Department.
4-27
Appendix A
Trip Generation Table
Street Geometric Table
A-1
Subdivision Regulations
Design and Improvement Standards
Table 1
Average Daily Traffic (ADT)*
Trip Generation Table
The ADT anticipated on a residential street shall be determined by the number of vehicular trips generated by dwelling unit type:
Dwelling Unit Type Average Trips Per Unit
Single Family, Detached 9.57
Duplex/Townhouse 5.86
Apartments 6.63
Trip Generation, Sixth Edition. Institute of Transportation Engineers 28
Table 2
Street Geometrics
Commercial Residential Cul-de-Sac Cul-de-Sac
Collector Collector Local w/Parking w/o Parking
Street Dimensions
Right-of-Way Width 80 feet 60 feet 50 feet 50 feet 50 feet
Pavement Widths 30 feet 30 feet 30 feet 28 feet 24 feet
Design Speed 40 MPH 40 MPH 30 MPH 30 MPH 30 MPH
Street Grade, Minimum 0.5% 0.5% 0.5% 0.5% 0.5%
Street Grade, Maximum 8% 8% 10% 10% 10%
Minimum turnaround radius -- -- -- 35 feet 35 feet
Street Intersections
Maximum Number of Approaches 4 4 4 4 4
Intersection Angle 90° 90° 90° 90° 90°
Maximum Grade within 50 feet of 3%± 3%± 3%± 3%± 3%±
intersection of street centerlines
Stopping Sight Distance 250 feet 250 feet 200 feet 175 feet 175 feet
Street Alignment
Horizontal Curve Radius 400 feet 400 feet 200 feet 175 feet 175 feet 29
A-2
Appendix B
Subdivision Application
Construction Cost Estimates Form
Subdivision Design Standards Waiver Form
Environmentally Sensitive Area Or
Geological Hazard Areas Application
A-3
Subdivision Regulations
Design and Improvement Standards
SUBDIVISION APPLICATION
City of Elizabethtown, Department of Planning and Development
200 West Dixie Avenue P.O. Box 550
Elizabethtown, Kentucky 42702
(270) 765-6121
The following are to be submitted with this application: Two (2) copies of the proposed plat
Review Fee
One (1) copy of the current deed to the property
DATE
APPLICANT INFORMATION
APPLICANT
ADDRESS
CITY
STATE
ZIP CODE
PHONE
FAX
EMAIL
OWNER INFORMATION (IF DIFFERENT FROM APPLICANT)
OWNER
ADDRESS
CITY
STATE
ZIP CODE
PHONE
FAX
EMAIL
SUBDIVISION INFORMATION
SUBDIVISION NAME
SECTION
LOT(S) (If amending plat)
ZONING CLASSIFICATION
LOCATION OF SUBDIVISION
PROPOSED USE
PLAT TYPE
Preliminary Plat - $500.00Amended Preliminary Plat - $250.00
Future Development Plat - $250.00
Record Plat - $250.00Amended Record Plat - $250.00
I do hereby certify that the information provided herein is both complete and accurate to the best of my knowledge, and I understand that any inaccuracies may be considered just cause for invalidation of this application and any action taken on this application.
_______________________________________________________
Owner Signature (Title if corporate agent)
OFFICIAL USE ONLY
RECEIVED BY
FILING DATE
RECIEPT #
NUMBER OF LOTS PROPOSED
NUMBER OF LOTS CREATED
RECORDING INFORMATION
DATE RECORDED
PLAT CABINET
SHEET NUMBER 30
Construction Cost Estimate Form
Use additional sheets if necessary
Page _______
Street Improvements
Quantity
Units
Price per Unit
Improvement
Cost
Roadway DGA
TON
Base Asphalt
TON
Final Asphalt
TON
Concrete Roadway
YDS
Curb and Gutter
LF
Clear and Grub
ACRE
Mass Earth Excavation
CU. YDS
ADA Sidewalk Connection*
EACH
4’ Sidewalk
LF
5’ Sidewalk
LF
10’ Multi-Use Path
LF
12’ Multi-use Path
LF
5’ Walking Trail
LF
Entrance Turning Lane
EACH
Temp. Traffic Control
Lump Sum
Final Grading
ACRE
Seeding/Straw
ACRE
Proof Roll
Lump Sum
Other (List by Type)
As-Built Plans
Lump Sum
05/2010
Street Subtotals
*ADA Sidewalk Connections shall include the concrete ramps and the truncated-dome plate
Construction Cost Estimate Form
Use additional sheets if necessary
Page _______
Water Improvements
Quantity
Units
Price per Unit
Improvement
Cost
12” Pipe and Fittings
LF
10” Pipe and Fittings
LF
8” Pipe and Fittings
LF
6” Pipe and Fittings
LF
10” Valve with Box
EACH
8” Valve with Box
EACH
6” Valve with Box
EACH
12” Tapping Sleeve & Valve
EACH
10” Tapping Sleeve & Valve
EACH
8” Tapping Sleeve & Valve
EACH
6” Tapping Sleeve & Valve
EACH
3/4“ Service Tap
EACH
1” Service Tap
EACH
3/4“ Service Pipe
LF
1” Service Pipe
LF
Fire Hydrant per Specs
EACH
Fire Hydrant Valve w/Box
EACH
Pipe DGA
TON
Service Tap Markers
EACH
Testing per Specs
Lump Sum
Other (List by Type)
As-Built Plans
Lump Sum
Water Subtotals
*All Fittings, Valves and Fire Hydrants shall include pricing for thrust blocks
Construction Cost Estimate Form
Use additional sheets if necessary
Page _______
Sewer Improvements
Quantity
Units
Price per Unit
Improvement
Cost
Manholes (0’- 6’ Depth)
EACH
Manhole Extension
EACH
8” Pipe (0’- 6’ Depth)
LF
8” Pipe (6’ - 12’ Depth)
LF
8” Pipe (12’ + Depth)
LF
10” Pipe (0’ - 6’ Depth)
LF
10” Pipe (6’ - 12’ Depth)
LF
10” Pipe (12’ + Depth)
LF
4” Service Pipe
LF
Property Service Connection
LF
Sanitary Sewer DGA
TON
Pump Station per Specs*
EACH
3” Force Main
LF
4” Force Main
LF
6” Force Main
LF
Service Tap Markers
EACH
Testing per Specs
Lump Sum
Other (List by Type)
As-Built Plans
Lump Sum
Sanitary Sewer Subtotals
*Pump Stations shall include electrical requirements, access roads and screening
Construction Cost Estimate Form
Use additional sheets if necessary
Page _______
Stormwater Improvements
Quantity
Units
Price per Unit
Improvement
Cost
Curb Inlet Boxes
EACH
Drop boxes
EACH
12” Concrete Pipe
LF
15” Concrete Pipe
LF
18” Concrete Pipe
LF
24” Concrete Pipe
LF
30” Concrete Pipe
LF
36” Concrete Pipe
LF
42” Concrete Pipe
LF
48” Concrete Pipe
LF
12’ CPP, N12, Watertight
LF
15’ CPP, N12, Watertight
LF
18’ CPP, N12, Watertight
LF
24’ CPP, N12, Watertight
LF
Culverts (List by Size)
EACH
Stormwater Detention
Ac-Ft
Basin Grading
ACRE
Basin Seeding
ACRE
Basin Outlet Structure
EACH
Other Structures (List)
EACH
Standard Headwalls
EACH
Headwalls - Others
EACH
Ditches, Grass
“V” Shaped
LF
1’ Bottom
LF
2’ Bottom
LF
4’ Bottom
LF
Ditches, Channel Lining
“V” Shaped
LF
1’ Bottom
LF
2’ Bottom
LF
4’ Bottom
LF
As-Built Plans
Lump Sum
Stormwater Subtotals
Construction Cost Estimate Form
Use additional sheets if necessary
Page _______
EPSC & WQM Improvements
Quantity
Units
Price per Unit
Improvement
Cost
Erosion Control
Silt Fencing
LF
Rock Check
EACH
Inlet Protection
EACH
Tire Wash
EACH
Temporary Seeding/Straw
ACRE
Construction Entrance
EACH
Other (List by Type)
Erosion Control
Pervious Pavement
TON
Rain Garden
Square Ft.
Bio-swale
Lump Sum
Infiltration Ditch
Lump Sum
Vegetation Buffer
Lump Sum
Other (List by Type)
EPSC & WQM Subtotals
Construction Cost Estimate Form
Use additional sheets if necessary
Page _______
Miscellaneous Improvements
Quantity
Units
Price per Unit
Improvement
Cost
Landscape
Trees
EACH
Shrubbery
EACH
Ground Cover
Square Ft.
Irrigation
Lump Sum
Other (List by Type)
Subtotal
City Monument
Monument
EACH
Subtotal
Total of all Sheets
Project Engineer’s Certificate
Engineer’s Stamp
Project Engineer’s Signature Date
For Office Use Only
Approved Amount:
City Engineer Date
31
SUBDIVISION DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS WAIVER APPLICATION
City of Elizabethtown, Department of Planning and Development
200 West Dixie Avenue P. O. Box 550
Elizabethtown, KY 42702
(270) 765-6121
A waiver of any requirements does not exempt the development from any other requirements of the Elizabethtown Zoning Ordinance or the Elizabethtown Subdivision Design and Improvement Standards.
DATE
APPLICANT INFORMATION
APPLICANT
ADDRESS
CITY
STATE
ZIP CODE
PHONE
FAX
EMAIL
OWNER INFORMATION (IF DIFFERENT FROM APPLICANT
OWNER
ADDRESS
CITY
STATE
ZIP CODE
PHONE
FAX
EMAIL
SUBDIVISION INFORMATION
SUBDIVISION NAME
LOCATION
FINDINGS NECESSARY FOR GRANTING OF WAIVER REQUEST: Before granting any waiver, the Commission must determine that there will be no adverse impact on the neighborhood or general area. Information should address:
1. The special circumstances of the proposed use.
2. Site constraints that would make installation of improvement(s) economically unfeasible.
3. Whether installation of improvement(s) would serve the purpose of enhancing the public welfare.
The commission may also consider other factors it deems relevant in rendering it’s decision.
Describe the impact the waiver(s) will have on the area (use supplemental page if needed) ____________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
State reasons in support of granting waiver(s)(use supplemental pages if needed _______________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
I do hereby certify that the information provided herein is both complete and accurate to the best of my knowledge and I understand any inaccuracies may be considered just cause for invalidation of the application and any action taken on this application.
__________________________________________________
Owner’s Signature, Title if Corporate Agent
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________________
OFFICIAL USE ONLY
RECEIVED BY
FILING DATE
ACTION DATE
ACTION TAKEN
Granted WaiverDenied Waiver
NOTES _______________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________
07/2008 Chairperson, Planning Commission
DEVELOPMENT IN ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE OR GEOLOGIC HAZARD AREAS
City of Elizabethtown, Department of Planning & Development
200 West Dixie Avenue P. O. Box 550
Elizabethtown, KY 42702
(270) 765-6121
DATE
APPLICANT INFORMATION
APPLICANT
ADDRESS
CITY
STATE
ZIP CODE
PHONE
FAX
EMAIL
OWNER INFORMATION (IF DIFFERENT FROM APPLICANT
OWNER
ADDRESS
CITY
STATE
ZIP CODE
PHONE
FAX
EMAIL
SUBDIVISION/DEVELOPMENT INFORMATION
PROPERTY ADDRESS
ZONING CLASSIFICATION
TYPE OF REQUEST (Check all that apply)
Environmentally Sensitive AreaGeologic Hazard Area
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREA
For Environmentally Sensitive Areas, submit the following along with application:
1. A statement describing the nature of the environmentally sensitive area.
2. A statement describing the manner in which the area is to be addressed during development.
3. A statement describing any special design measures to minimize impact on the environmentally sensitive area.
4. Any plans or drawings indicating measures to be implemented during construction.
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________________
“I do hereby certify that the information provided herein is both complete and accurate to the best of my knowledge, and I understand that any inaccuracies may be considered just cause for invalidation of this application and any action taken on this application.”
______________________________________________________
Applicant/Owner Signature, Title if Corporate Agent
OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ACTION
ApprovedDenied
DATE
NOTES ___________________________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________
Planning Department
07/2008
Appendix C
Typical Street Cross-Sections
Typical Street/Sidewalk Transition
Typical Residential Driveway Plan
Typical Residential Driveway Profile
Typical Curb Details
Typical Survey Control Monument
A-11
Subdivision Regulations
Design and Improvement Standards
47
47
A-12
47
47
A-13
Subdivision Regulations
Design and Improvement Standards
47
32
A-14
A-15
Subdivision Regulations
Design and Improvement Standards
64
A-16
33
A-17
Subdivision Regulations
Design and Improvement Standards
34
A-18
35
A-19
1 Amended December 11, 2001: A definition added to coincide with additional amendments in
4.6 B, D, G, I and Appendix C
2 Amended March 14, 2000: Additional details added to the definition
3 Amended March 14, 2000: Additional details added to the definition
4 Amended October 22, 1996: Changed definition
5 Amended March 14,2000: Deletion of the words ‘or suitable’
6 Amended March 14, 2000: Deletion of the word ‘option’; required a digital copy to be submitted
7 Amended March 14, 2000: Added time constraints for submission of digital copy allowing any improvement plans or record plats to be held if the digital copy has not been received within 30 days of approval
8 Amended January 13, 2004: Added provision for approval of record plats with minor differences from the preliminary plat without amending the preliminary plat
9 Amended September 13, 2011: Added Stormwater Department and prescribed form; removed contract provision
10 Amended October 22, 1996 and March 14, 2000: Change of title from Non Building Plats to Future Development Plats; Addition of the word ‘tracts’ and the phrase ‘no further subdividing of these tracts is permitted’
11 Amended October 22, 1996: Changed wording of Subdivision naming
12 Amended October 22, 1996: A correction in the numbering sequence and changed numbering of subdivision naming
13 Amended January 10, 2006 and October 24, 2006: Maintenance note changed from a general note concerning inclusion to the exact wording required on the Record Plat; Maintenance note was changed from the detailed maintenance note back to the general note concerning the inclusion of a maintenance note
14 Amended June 10, 2008: Added Improvement, Stormwater and Drainage Certification
15 Amended March 14, 2000: Added Commercial collector as a type of collector street, included its definition and restrictions
16 Amended March 14, 2000: Deletion of Collector Streets, Cul-de-Sac Streets with parking and Cul-de-Sac Streets w/o parking they were replaced with Commercial Collector, Residential Collector and Cul-de-Sac Streets
17 Amended March 14, 2000: Changed the pavement width of Cul-de-Sac Streets w/o parking from 22’ to 24’
18 Amended March 14, 2000: Added Commercial Collector Streets and the pavement specifications
19 Amended March 14, 2000: Replacement of Collector Streets with Residential Collector Streets
20 Amended march 14, 2000: Added the Preferred Spacing column
21 Amended June 10, 2008: Section 4.3.1.23 regarding Entrance Standards was added
22 Amended August 24, 2004: Added text to require detectable warnings on sidewalk ramps
23 Amended August 24, 2004: Added text concerning placement of detectable warnings on sidewalks
24 Amended December 11, 2001: Added text to require a minimum of four control monuments in major subdivisions and a minimum of two control monuments in minor subdivisions
25 Amended December 11, 2001: Added text to require permanent monumentation at collector and arterial street intersections
26 Amended December 11, 2001: Added a reference to the typical survey control monument in Appendix C
27 Amended December 11, 2001: Added the requirement of referencing to an existing permanent control monument if within one mile
28 Amended March 14, 2000: Changed all Average Trips Per Unit values due to the 6th edition of Trip Generation
29 Amended March 14, 2000: Changed Collector to Residential Collector and added Commercial Collector and its values
30 Application Updated May 2010: Requires Owner Signature
31 Approved September 13, 2011: Amended Cost Estimate Form
32 Amended June 8, 2004: Drawing of a typical cross-section for industrial streets
33 Amended December 11, 2001: Drawing of typical survey control monument
34 Amended August 24, 2004: Drawings of detectable warning pattern dimensions, alignments, and the truncated dome profile
35 Amended August 24, 2004: Drawings of typical placement of detectable warnings on different types of sidewalk transitions
37 Amended September 23, 2014: Changes to Improvement certifications
38 Amended December 9, 2014: Changes the requirements for number/type of copies for record plat submission
39 Amended April 14, 2015: Changed Commercial Collector R-O-W width.
40 Amended April 14, 2015: Changed Commercial Collector paving width.
41 Amended April 14, 2015: Added Residential Collector paving width.
42 Amended April 14, 2015: Changed Local Street paving width.
43 Amended April 14, 2015: Changed responsible department to review entrance distances from the Commission to Engineering Department.
44 Amended April 14, 2015: Changed minimum sidewalk width from four (4) feet to five (5) feet.
45 Amended April 14, 2015: Removed five (5) foot sidewalk easement to allow for variable easement as needed.
46 Amended April 14, 2015: Removed ability to use pavers for detectable warnings and required use of detectable warning plates.
47 Amended April 14, 2015: Changed R-O-W Cross Section drawings.
48 Amended Jan. 12, 2016: Added definitions for Exclusive and Multipurpose Easements.
49 Amended Jan. 12, 2016: Expanded types of easements and added standards for floodways & riparian buffer.
50 Amended Jan. 12, 2016: Deleted as addressed in Section 4.4.7.
51 Amended Jan. 12, 2016: Definition of Easements modified to include Exclusive and Multipurpose easements.
52 Amended Jan. 12, 2016: Updated definition of Environmentally Sensitive Areas to also include Geologic features.
53 Amended Jan. 12, 2016: Deleted definition of Geological Hazard Area.
54 Amended Jan. 12, 2016: Updated definition of Cul-de-sac to define where this type of street begins.
55 Amended Jan. 12, 2016: Updates submittal requirements for a minor record plat.
56 Amended Jan. 12, 2016: Updates submittal requirements to record a minor record plat.
57 Amended Jan. 12, 2016: Updates preliminary plat submittal requirement prior to Planning Commission meeting.
58 Amended Jan. 12, 2016: Updates Owner’s Certification to be consistent with changes to the definition of easement (multipurpose and exclusive).
59 Amended Jan. 12, 2016: Updates procedures for Environmentally Sensitive Areas per Section 2.8 (consistent with incorporation of Geological Hazard areas).
60 Amended Jan. 12, 2016: Revisions to the standard Owner’s Certification to include language for exclusive and multipurpose easements, and defining utility companies that may utilize easements obtained through the plat process.
61 Amended Jan. 12, 2016: Added language for clarification of electric utility responsibilities.
62Amended Jan. 12, 2016: Expanded Section 4.4.7 by adding text addressing access easements, floodway and riparian buffer easements and provides procedures for determining the width and required elements of such easements both outside and within the urban core area of the City of Elizabethtown.
63Amended Jan. 12, 2016: Modified language of Section 4.7.1 to include a standard for the preservation of Geological Hazard areas.
64Amended June 12, 2018: Modified Section 4.3.1.22.A to change the specification for PCC Standard Rolled Curb.
65Amended January 22, 2019: Modified Section 4.3.1.18 to limit number of characters in a street name and prohibit obscene or improper names.