
Highland Heights, KY Code of Ordinances


CITY OF HIGHLAND HEIGHTS, KENTUCKY
CODE OF ORDINANCES



2019 S-24 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 03-2019, passed 3-5-19
State legislation current through KRS 2018



 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



CITY OFFICIALS



 




MAYOR




GREGORY V. MEYERS




COUNCILMEMBERS




DEBORAH BALL

 

JOHN HOFFERT




GARY CHINN

 

MICHAEL KESSLING




RENE HEINRICH

 

VIRGIL MILLER





 





CITY OFFICIALS




CITY CLERK/TREASURER

 

JEANNE PETTIT




FINANCE DIRECTOR

 

HARRY BARLAGE




CITY ATTORNEY

 

STEVEN J. FRANZEN




CITY ENGINEER/ZONING ADMINISTRATOR   

 

DAVID WHITACRE




POLICE CHIEF

 

WILLIAM BIRKENHAUER




PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR

 

STEVE LEHMAN





 



ADOPTING ORDINANCES



ORDINANCE NO. 29-92



AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF
HIGHLAND HEIGHTS, KENTUCKY, REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING, AND
COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY REGARDING THE
SUBJECTS STATED IN SAID CODE.



   WHEREAS, the present general ordinances of the city of Highland
Heights, Kentucky are incomplete and inadequate in the manner of arrangement,
classification and indexing thereof and insufficient to meet the immediate
needs of the City, and;



   WHEREAS, the acts of the Kentucky State Legislature empower and
authorize the City of Highland Heights, Kentucky to revise, amend, restate,
codify and to compile any existing ordinance or ordinances and all new
ordinances not herebefore adopted or published and to incorporate said
ordinances into one ordinance in book form, and;



   WHEREAS, The City of Highland Heights, Kentucky has authorized a
general compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the City
of a general and permanent nature and publication of such ordinances in book
form.



   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City of Highland Heights,
Kentucky:



SECTION I



   The general ordinances of the City of Highland Heights, Kentucky are
herein revised, amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are
adopted and shall constitute the code of ordinances of the City of Highland
Heights, Kentucky.



SECTION II



   Said code as adopted in Section I shall consist of the following
titles, to wit:



   Title I      General Provisions



   Title III   Administration



   Title V      Public Works



   Title VII   Traffic Code



   Title IX   General Regulations



   Title XI   Business Regulations



   Title XIII   General Offenses



   Title XV   Land Usage



   Table of Special Ordinances



   Parallel References



   Index



SECTION III



   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in said code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of said code
except as they are included and reordained in whole or part in said code;
provided such repeal shall not effect any offense committed or penalty
incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of said code,
nor shall such repeal effect the provisions of ordinances levying taxes,
appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory establishing franchises
or granting special rights to certain persons, authorizing public
improvements, authorizing issuances of bonds or borrowing of money,
authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property, granting or
accepting easements, plats or dedication of land to public use, naming or
vacating or setting the boundaries of streets, alleys or other public places,
nor to any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or pertaining to
subjects not contained therein.



SECTION IV



   Said code shall be deemed published as of the date of its adoption and
approval by the City Legislative body and the Clerk of the City of Highland
Heights, Kentucky is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of said
code in the office of the City Clerk.



SECTION V



   This ordinance shall be signed by the Mayor, attested by the City
Clerk/Treasurer, recorded and published.  Same shall be in effect at the
earliest time provided by law.



   First reading this 13th day of August, 1992.



   Second reading this 27th day of August, 1992.



                  Signed:  /s/   Herbert Kenter, III



                        Mayor



Attest:       /s/  Jean Rauf                 



      City Clerk/Treasurer



ORDINANCE NO. 10-98



   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF HIGHLAND HEIGHTS, KENTUCKY.



   WHEREAS, Burlington Publishing Systems, Florence, Kentucky, has
completed the 1997 S-6 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Highland Heights, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general
nature enacted since the adoption of the 1996 S-5 Supplement of this
municipality; and



   WHEREAS, said Burlington Publishing Systems has recommended the
revision or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are
based on or make reference to sections of the Kentucky code; and



   WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Council to accept these updated
sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the Commonwealth of
Kentucky;



   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of
Highland Heights, Commonwealth of Kentucky:



   SECTION I



   That the 1997 S-6 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Highland Heights, as submitted by Burlington Publishing Systems, and as
attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by reference as if set out
in its entirety.



   SECTION II



   That this ordinance shall be signed by the Mayor, attested by the City
Clerk/Treasurer, recorded and published. Same shall be in effect at the
earliest time provided by law.



Date of First Reading:          7/7/98   



Date of Second Reading:          8 /4/98   



Publication Date:                         



                  Signed:  /s/   Charles Roettger, III 



                        Mayor



Attest:    /s/  Jean Rauf    



         City Clerk



ORDINANCE NO. 10-2005



   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF HIGHLAND HEIGHTS, KENTUCKY.



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio has
completed the 2005 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Highland Heights, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general
nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this
municipality; and



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the
revision or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are
based on or make references to sections of the Kentucky Revised Statues;



   NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY OF HIGHLAND HEIGHTS, KENTUCKY
AS FOLLOWS:



   Section I



   That the 2005 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Highland Heights, Kentucky, as submitted by American Legal Publishing
Corporation of Cincinnati, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby
adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety.



   Section II



   That this ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after
its date of passage, approval and publication as required by law.



   Section III



   That this ordinance shall be signed by the Mayor, attested by the City
Clerk/Treasurer, recorded and published according to law.  Same shall be in
effect at the earliest time provided by law.



      First reading on this 21 day of June, 2005.



      Second reading on this 19 day of July, 2005.



               /s/    Charles Roettger  III       



      Mayor



ATTEST:



    /s/ Jean A. Rauf 



City Clerk/Treasurer



ORDINANCE NO. 02-2006



   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF HIGHLAND HEIGHTS, KENTUCKY.



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2006 S-14 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Highland Heights, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general
nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this
municipality; and



   WHEREAS, Said American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio
has recommended the revision or addition of certain sections of the Code of
Ordinances which are based on or make references to sections of the Kentucky
Code;



   WHEREAS, it is the intent of Council to accept these updated sections
in accordance with the changes of the law of the Commonwealth of Kentucky;



   NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY OF HIGHLAND HEIGHTS, KENTUCKY
AS FOLLOWS:



   Section I



   That the 2006 S-14 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Highland Heights, Kentucky, as submitted by American Legal Publishing
Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is
hereby adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety.



   Section II



   That this ordinance shall be signed by the Mayor, attested by the City
Clerk/Treasurer and recorded.  Same shall be in effect at the earliest time
provided by law.



      First reading this 16th day of May, 2006.



      Second reading this 6th day of June, 2006.



                                    /s/   
Charles Roettger  III       



                        Mayor Charles Roettger, III



ATTEST:



    /s/ Jean A. Rauf 



Jean a. Rauf



City Clerk/Treasurer



ORDINANCE NO. 08-2007



   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF HIGHLAND HEIGHTS, KENTUCKY.



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2007 S-15 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Highland Heights, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general
nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this
municipality; and



   WHEREAS, Said American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio
has recommended the revision or addition of certain sections of the Code of
Ordinances which are based on or make references to sections of the Kentucky
Code;



   WHEREAS, it is the intent of Council to accept these updated sections
in accordance with the changes of the law of the Commonwealth of Kentucky;



   NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY OF HIGHLAND HEIGHTS, KENTUCKY
AS FOLLOWS:



   Section I



   That the 2007 S-15 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Highland Heights, Kentucky, as submitted by American Legal Publishing
Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is
hereby adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety.



   Section II



   That this ordinance shall be signed by the Mayor, attested by the City
Clerk/Treasurer and recorded.  Same shall be in effect at the earliest time
provided by law.



      First reading this 18th day of September, 2007.



      Second reading this 2nd day of October, 2007.



                                    /s/   
Gregory V. Meyers     



                        Mayor Gregory V. Meyers



ATTEST:



    /s/ Jean A. Rauf 



Jean A. Rauf



City Clerk/Treasurer



ORDINANCE NO. 16-2008



   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF HIGHLAND HEIGHTS, KENTUCKY.



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2008 S-16 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Highland Heights, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general
nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this
municipality; and



   WHEREAS, Said American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio
has recommended the revision or addition of certain sections of the Code of
Ordinances which are based on or make references to sections of the Kentucky
Code;



   WHEREAS, it is the intent of Council to accept these updated sections
in accordance with the changes of the law of the Commonwealth of Kentucky;



   NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY OF HIGHLAND HEIGHTS, KENTUCKY
AS FOLLOWS:



   Section I



   That the 2008 S-16 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Highland Heights, Kentucky, as submitted by American Legal Publishing
Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is
hereby adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety.



   Section II



   That this ordinance shall be signed by the Mayor, attested by the City
Clerk/Treasurer and recorded.  Same shall be in effect at the earliest time
provided by law.



      First reading this 18th day of November, 2008.



      Second reading this 2nd day of December, 2008.



                  /s/    Gregory V. Meyers     



      Mayor Gregory V. Meyers



ATTEST:



    /s/ Jean A. Rauf 



Jean A. Rauf



City Clerk/Treasurer



ORDINANCE NO. 11-2009



   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF HIGHLAND HEIGHTS, KENTUCKY.



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2009 S-17 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Highland Heights, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general
nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this
municipality; and



   WHEREAS, Said American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio
has recommended the revision or addition of certain sections of the Code of
Ordinances which are based on or make references to sections of the Kentucky
Code;



   WHEREAS, it is the intent of Council to accept these updated sections
in accordance with the changes of the law of the Commonwealth of Kentucky;



   NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY OF HIGHLAND HEIGHTS, KENTUCKY
AS FOLLOWS:



   Section I



   That the 2009 S-17 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Highland Heights, Kentucky, as submitted by American Legal Publishing
Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is
hereby adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety.



   Section II



   That this ordinance shall be signed by the Mayor, attested by the City
Clerk/Treasurer and recorded.  Same shall be in effect at the earliest time
provided by law.



      First reading this 5th day of May, 2009.



      Second reading this 19th day of May, 2009.



      Gregory V. Meyers  /s/     



      Mayor Gregory V. Meyers



ATTEST:



Jean A. Rauf  /s/     



Jean A. Rauf



City Clerk/Treasurer



ORDINANCE NO. 09-2011



   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE Of
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF HIGHLAND HEIGHTS, KENTUCKY.



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2011 S-19 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Highland Heights, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general
nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this
municipality; and



   WHEREAS, Said American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio
has recommended the revision or addition of certain sections of the Code of
Ordinances which are based on or make references to sections of the Kentucky
Code;



   WHEREAS, it is the intent of Council to accept these updated sections
in accordance with the changes of the law of the Commonwealth of Kentucky;



   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF HIGHLAND
HEIGHTS, KENTUCKY AS FOLLOWS:



   Section I



   That the 2011 S-19 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Highland Heights, Kentucky, as submitted by American Legal Publishing
Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is
hereby adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety.



   Section II



   That this Ordinance shall be signed by the Mayor, attested by the City
Clerk/Treasurer and recorded. Same shall be in effect at the earliest time
provided by law.



   First reading this 19th day of July, 2011.



   Second reading this 16th day of August, 2011.



                        Gregory V. Meyers  /s/   
 



                        Mayor Gregory V. Meyers



ATTEST:



Jean A. Rauf  /s/     



Jean A. Rauf



City Clerk/Treasurer



ORDINANCE NO. 15-2012



AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE Of ORDINANCES OF
THE CITY OF HIGHLAND HEIGHTS, KENTUCKY.



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2012 S-20 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Highland Heights, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general
nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this
municipality; and



   WHEREAS, Said American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio
has recommended the revision or addition of certain sections of the Code of
Ordinances which are based on or make references to sections of the Kentucky
Code;



   WHEREAS, it is the intent of Council to accept these updated sections
in accordance with the changes of the law of the Commonwealth of Kentucky;



   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF HIGHLAND
HEIGHTS, KENTUCKY AS FOLLOWS:




Section I




   That the 2012 S-20 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Highland Heights, Kentucky, as submitted by American Legal Publishing
Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is
hereby adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety.




Section II




   That this Ordinance shall be signed by the Mayor, attested by the City
Clerk/Treasurer and recorded. Same shall be in effect at the earliest time
provided by law.



   First reading this 4th day of September, 2012.



   Second reading this 18th day of September, 2012.



                        Gregory V. Meyers  /s/   
 



                        Mayor Gregory V. Meyers



ATTEST:



Jean A. Rauf  /s/     



Jean A. Rauf



City Clerk/Treasurer



ORDINANCE NO. 05-2014



AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE Of ORDINANCES OF
THE CITY OF HIGHLAND HEIGHTS, KENTUCKY.



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2014 S-21 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Highland Heights, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general
nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this
municipality; and



   WHEREAS, Said American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio
has recommended the revision or addition of certain sections of the Code of
Ordinances which are based on or make references to sections of the Kentucky
Code;



   WHEREAS, it is the intent of Council to accept these updated sections
in accordance with the changes of the law of the Commonwealth of Kentucky;



   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF HIGHLAND
HEIGHTS, KENTUCKY AS FOLLOWS:



   Section I



   That the 2014 S-21 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Highland Heights, Kentucky, as submitted by American Legal Publishing
Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is
hereby adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety.



   Section II



   That this Ordinance shall be signed by the Mayor, attested by the City
Clerk/Treasurer and recorded. Same shall be in effect at the earliest time
provided by law.



   First reading this 3rd day of June, 2014.



   Second reading this 17th day of June, 2014.



                        Gregory V. Meyers  /s/   
 



                        Mayor Gregory V. Meyers



ATTEST:



Jean A. Rauf  /s/     



Jean A. Rauf



City Clerk/Treasurer



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Chapter



      10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY



CHAPTER 10:  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY



Section



   10.01   Short titles



   10.02   Definitions



   10.03   Rules of construction



   10.04   Computation of time



   10.05   Majority may act for all; authorized agent



   10.06   Writings and signatures



   10.07   Severability



   10.08   Revivor



   10.09   Rights and liabilities accruing before repeal of ordinance



   10.10   Construction of section references



   10.11   Ordinances repealed



   10.12   Ordinances unaffected



   10.13   Ordinances saved



   10.14   Amendments to code; amendatory language



   10.15   Conflicting provisions



   10.16   Reference to offices



   10.17   Errors and omissions



   10.18   Section histories; statutory references



 



   10.99   Penalty



§ 10.01  SHORT TITLES.



   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city
as revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters, and sections shall be known and designated as the
Highland Heights Code, for which designation "codified ordinances" or "code"
may be substituted.  Code, title, chapter, and section headings do not
constitute any part of the law as contained in the code. 



(KRS 446.140)



   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters, and sections are to
such components of the code unless otherwise specified.  Any component code
may be referred to and cited by its name, such as the "traffic code". 
Sections may be referred to and cited by the designation "§" followed by the
number, such as "§ 10.01".  Headings and captions used in this code other
than the title, chapter, and section numbers, are employed for reference
purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this code the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACTION.  Includes all proceedings in any court of this state.



(KRS 446.010 (1))



   AND.   May be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the sense requires
it.



   ANIMAL.  Includes every warm-blooded living creature except a human
being. 



(KRS 446.010(2))



   AVIS. The automated vehicle information system established and
maintained by the Transportation Cabinet to collect titling and registration
information on vehicles and boat and information on holders of motor vehicle
operator’s licenses and personal identification cards.



(KRS 446.010(55))



   CITY,  MUNICIPAL  CORPORATION,  or MUNICIPALITY.  When used in this
code shall denote the City of Highland Heights irrespective of its population
or legal classification.



   COMPANY.  May extend and be applied to any corporation, company,
person, partnership, joint stock company, or association. 



(KRS 446.010(9))



   CORPORATION.  May extend and be applied to any corporation, company,
partnership, joint stock company, or association. 



(KRS 446.010(10))



   COUNCIL.  The city legislative body. 



(KRS 83A.010(5))



   COUNTY.  Campbell County, Kentucky.



   CRUELTY.  As applied to animals, includes every act or omission
whereby  unjustifiable  physical  pain, suffering, or death is caused or
permitted. 



(KRS 446.010(12))



   DIRECTORS.  When applied to corporations, includes managers or
trustees. 



(KRS 446.010(13))



   DOMESTIC.  When applied to a corporation, partnership, business trust,
or limited liability company, means all those incorporated or formed by
authority of this state. 



(KRS 446.010(14))



   DOMESTIC ANIMAL.  Any animal converted to domestic habitat. 



(KRS 446.010(15))



   EXECUTIVE AUTHORITY.  The Mayor. 



(KRS 83A.010(6))



   EXECUTIVE ORDER.  An order issued by the mayor which is binding upon
the officers and employees of the city and any governmental agency over which
the city has jurisdiction.



(KRS 83A.010(7))



   FEDERAL.  Refers to the United States. 



(KRS 446.010(17))



   FOREIGN.  When applied to a corporation, partnership, limited
partnership, business trust, statutory trust, or limited liability company, 
includes all those incorporated or formed by authority of any other state. 



(KRS 446.010(18))



   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes all persons, whether acting by
themselves or as a servant, agent, or employee.



   KRS.  Kentucky Revised Statutes.



   LAND or REAL ESTATE.  Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments and
all rights thereto and interest therein, other than a chattel interest. 



(KRS 446.010(23))



   LEGISLATIVE BODY.  The City Council. 



(KRS 91A.010(8))



   LEGISLATIVE BODY MEMBER.  A City Councilman. 



(KRS 83A.010(8))



   LIVESTOCK.  Cattle, sheep, swine, goats, horses, alpacas, llamas,
buffaloes or any other animals of the bovine, ovine, procine, caprine, equine
or camelid species. 



(KRS 446.010(25)



   MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.



(KRS 446.010(26))



   MISDEMEANOR.  An offense for which the criminal fine cannot exceed the
amount set forth in KRS 534.040(2)(a), or a term of imprisonment not to
exceed the periods set forth in KRS 532.090(1) or both.



(KRS 83A.065)



   MONTH.  Calendar month.



(KRS 446.010(27))



   MUNICIPAL ORDER.  An official act of the city council which is binding
upon the officers and employees of the city and any governmental agency over
which the municipality has jurisdiction.



(KRS 83A.010(9))



   MUNICIPALITY.  The City of Highland Heights, Kentucky.



   OATH.  Includes AFFIRMATION in all cases in which an affirmation may
be substituted for an oath.



(KRS 446.010(28))



   OFFICER.  Any person elected to a position by the voters or any person
appointed to a position which:



      (1)   Is created by the Constitution, the General Assembly, or
a city;



      (2)   Possesses a  delegation  of a portion of the sovereign
power of Government;



      (3)   Has powers and duties to be discharged which are
conferred directly or by implication by the city;



      (4)   Has duties performed independently and without control
of a superior power other than the law;



      (5)   Has some permanency;



      (6)   Requires an official oath;



      (7)   Is assigned by a commission or other written authority;
and



      (8)   Provides for an official bond if required by proper
authority. 



(KRS 83A.010(10))



   ORDINANCE.  An official act of a city legislative body, which is a
regulation of a general and permanent nature and enforceable as a local law
or is an appropriation of money. 



(KRS 83A.010(11))



   PARTNERSHIP.  Includes both general and limited partnerships.



(KRS 446.010(30))



   PEACE OFFICER.  Includes sheriffs, constables, coroners, jailers,
metropolitan or urban-county government correctional officers, marshals,
policemen, and other persons with similar authority to make arrests.



(KRS 446.010(31))



   PERSON.  May extend and be applied to bodies-politic and corporate,
societies, communities, the public generally, individuals, partnerships,
joint stock companies, and limited liability companies.



(KRS 446.010(33))



   PERSONAL PROPERTY.  Includes all property except real.



   PREMISES.  As applied to property, includes land and buildings.



   PROPERTY.  Includes real, personal, mixed estates and interests.



   PUBLIC AUTHORITY.  Includes boards of education; the municipal,
county, state, or federal government, its officers or an agency thereof; or
any duly authorized public official.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school
yard, body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any other place for
the sale of merchandise, public accommodation, or amusement.



   REAL PROPERTY.  Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.



   REGULAR ELECTION.  The election in even numbered years at which
members of Congress are elected and the election in odd numbered years at
which state officers are elected.



(KRS 446.010(37))



   RESOLUTION.  A resolution is a less formal mechanism for dealing with
matters of a special or temporary character.  While an ordinance, and to a
large extent a municipal order, involves a distinctly legislative act, a
resolution is simply an expression of the opinion, will or policy of the
legislative body on some matter of ministerial business which has come before
the body.



   SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



(KRS 446.010(39))



   SIDEWALK.  That portion of the street between the curb line and the
adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.



   STATE.  The Commonwealth of Kentucky.



   STREET.  Includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes,  roads,
highways, viaducts, and all other public thoroughfares within the city.



   SUBCHAPTER.  A division of a chapter, designated in this code by an
underlined heading  in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in
the  body of the chapter setting apart a group of sections related by the
subject matter of the heading.  Not all chapters have subchapters.



   SWORN.   Includes AFFIRMED in all cases in which an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath.



(KRS 446.010(43))



   TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person holding
a written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of
such premises, alone or with others.



   VACANCY IN OFFICE.  Such as exists when there is an unexpired part of
a term of office without a lawful incumbent therein, or when the person
elected or appointed to an office fails to qualify according to law, or when
there has been no election to fill the office at the time appointed by law;
it applies whether the vacancy is occasioned by death, resignation, removal
from the state, county, or district, or otherwise.



(KRS 446.010(46))



   VIOLATE.  Includes failure to comply with.



(KRS 446.010(47))



   VIOLATION.  An offense for which the criminal fine cannot exceed the
amount set forth in KRS 534.040(2)(c).



(KRS 83A.065)



   YEAR.  Calendar year.



(KRS 446.010(49))



§ 10.03  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Singular includes plural.  A word importing the singular
number only may extend and be applied to several persons or things, as well
as to one person or thing, and a word importing the plural number only may
extend  and be applied to one person or thing as well as to several persons
or things.



(KRS 446.020(1))



   (B)   Masculine includes feminine.  A word importing the masculine
gender only may extend and be applied to females as well as males.



(KRS 446.020(2))



   (C)   Liberal construction.  All sections of this code shall be
liberally construed with a view to promote their objects and carry out the
intent of Council.



(KRS 446.080(1))



   (D)   Retroactivity.  No ordinance shall be construed to be
retroactive, unless expressly so declared.



(KRS 446.080(3))



   (E)   Technical terms.  All words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of language, but technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in the law, shall be construed according to such meaning.



(KRS 446.080(4))



§ 10.04  COMPUTATION OF TIME.



   (A)   In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by order
of court, or by any applicable ordinance or regulation, the day of the act,
event, or default after which the designated period of time begins to run is
not to be included.  The last day of the period so computed is to be
included, unless it is a Saturday, a Sunday, a legal holiday, or a day on
which the public office in which a document is required to be filed is
actually and legally closed, in which event the period runs until the end of
the next day which is not one of the days just mentioned.  When the period
of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven days, intermediate
Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation.



   (B)   When an ordinance, regulation, or order of court requires an
act to be done either a certain time before an event or a certain time before
the day on which an event occurs, the day of the event shall be excluded in
computing the time.  If the day thereby computed on which or by which the
act is required to be done falls on a Saturday, Sunday, legal holiday, or a
day on which the public office in which the act is required to be completed
is actually and legally closed, the act may be done on the next day which is
none of the days just mentioned.



   (C)   If any proceeding is directed by law to take place, or any act
is directed to be done, on a particular day of a month and that day is
Sunday, the proceeding shall take place, or the act shall be done, on the
next day that is not a legal holiday.



(KRS 446.030)



   (D)   In all cases where the law requires any act to be done in a
reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given, such reasonable time or
notice shall mean the time only as may be necessary for the prompt
performance of such duty or compliance with such notice.



§ 10.05  MAJORITY MAY ACT FOR ALL; AUTHORIZED AGENT.



   (A)   Words giving authority to three or more public officers or
other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of
such officers or other persons.



(KRS 446.050)



   (B)   When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as
well be done by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be
construed to include such acts when done by an authorized agent.



§ 10.06  WRITINGS AND SIGNATURES.



   (A)   When this code requires any writing to be signed by a party
thereto, it shall not be deemed to be signed unless the signature is
subscribed at the end or close of the writing.



   (B)   Every writing contemplated by this code shall be in the
English language. 



(KRS 446.060)



§ 10.07  SEVERABILITY.



   It shall be considered that it is the intent of Council in enacting any
ordinance, that if any part of the ordinance be held unconstitutional the
remaining parts shall remain in force, unless the ordinance provides
otherwise, or unless the remaining parts are so essentially and inseparably
connected with and dependent upon the constitutional part that it is apparent
that Council would not have enacted the remaining parts without the
unconstitutional part, or unless the remaining parts, standing alone, are
incomplete and incapable of being executed in accordance with the intent of
Council. 



(KRS 446.090)



§ 10.08  REVIVOR.



   (A)   A repealed ordinance without a delayed effective date is
revived when the ordinance that repealed it is repealed by another ordinance
enacted at the same meeting of Council.



   (B)   A repealed ordinance with a delayed effective date is revived
by the enactment of a repealer of the ordinance that repealed it at the same
or any subsequent meeting of Council as long as it takes effect prior to the
effective date of the original repealer.



   (C)   An amended ordinance without a delayed effective date remains
unchanged with respect to an amendment which is repealed at the same meeting
of Council which enacted the amendment.



   (D)   An amended ordinance with a delayed effective date remains
unchanged with respect to that amendment if the ordinance making the
amendment is repealed at the same or at a subsequent meeting of Council as
long as the repealing ordinance takes effect prior to the effective date of
the original amendment.



   (E)   No other action of Council repealing a repealer or an
amendment shall have the effect of reviving the original language of the
repealer or amendment as the case may be. 



(KRS 446.100)



§ 10.09  RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES ACCRUING BEFORE REPEAL OF ORDINANCE.



   No new ordinance shall be construed to repeal a former ordinance as to
any offense committed against a former ordinance, nor as to any act done, or
penalty, forfeiture, or punishment incurred, or any right accrued or claim
arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such
offense or act so committed or done, or any penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, except that the proceedings thereafter had shall
conform, so far as practicable, to the laws in force at the time of such
proceedings.  If any penalty, forfeiture, or punishment is mitigated by any
provision of the new ordinance, such provision may, by the consent of the
party affected, be applied to any judgment pronounced after the new ordinance
takes effect.



(KRS 446.110)



§ 10.10  CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION REFERENCES.



   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation
of a section or an inclusive group of sections, such reference shall be
construed to mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections
included in the reference.



   (B)   References in the code to action taken or authorized under
designated sections of the code include, in every case, action taken or
authorized under the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by
this code.



   (C)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section
hereof, the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered, unless the subject
matter be changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.11  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced.  All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by
this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
code of ordinances.



§ 10.12  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this code of
ordinances, shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed
expressly or by necessary implication.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES SAVED.



   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the
Council, or a certain city officer or employee, to make additional ordinances
or regulations for the purpose of carrying out the intent of the ordinance,
all ordinances and regulations of a similar nature serving such purpose
effected prior to the codification and not inconsistent thereto, shall remain
in effect and are saved.



§ 10.14  AMENDMENTS TO CODE; AMENDATORY LANGUAGE.



   (A)   Any chapter, section, or division amended or added to this
code by ordinances passed subsequent to this code may be numbered in
accordance with the numbering system of this code and printed for inclusion
herein.  Any chapter, section, or division repealed by subsequent ordinances
may be excluded from this code by omission from reprinted pages.  Subsequent
ordinances as printed or omitted shall be prima facie evidence of such
subsequent ordinances until Council shall adopt a new code of ordinances.



   (B)   The method of amendment set forth in § 32.37 should be used
by the city to amend, add, or repeal a chapter, section, or division of this
code of ordinances.



§ 10.15  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.



   If the provisions of different codes, chapters, or sections of the
codified ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions
bearing the latest passage date shall prevail.  If the conflicting
provisions bear the same passage date, the conflict shall be so construed as
to be consistent with the meaning or legal effect of the questions of the
subject matter taken as a whole.



§ 10.16  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or changes in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.17  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error be discovered consisting of the misspelling of any
word or words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the
intention of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no
meaning can be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or
words was clearly intended to express the intention, the spelling shall be
corrected, and the word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will
conform with the manifest intention, and the provision shall have the same
effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as originally
published.  No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of such error.



§ 10.18  HISTORICAL AND STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending
ordinances, if any, are listed following the text of the code section. 
Example:  (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-60;  Am. Ord. 15, passed  1-1-70;  Am.
Ord. 20, passed  1-1-80;  Am. Ord. 25, passed 1-1-85)



   (B)   If a KRS cite is included in the history, this indicates that
the text of the section reads word-for-word the same as the statute. 
Example:  (KRS 83A.090)  (Ord. 10, passed  1-17-80; Am.  Ord.  20,
passed 1-1-85).  If a KRS cite is set forth as a "statutory reference"
following the text of this section, this indicates that the reader should
refer to that statute for further information.



Example:



   § 31.10  MAYOR.



      The executive authority of the city shall be vested in and
exercised by the Mayor.



   (Ord. 10, passed 1-1-80)



   Statutory reference:



      For powers and duties of the Mayor, see KRS 83A.130



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   Where an act or omission is prohibited or declared unlawful in this
code of ordinances, and no penalty is otherwise provided, the offense shall
be deemed a violation and the offender shall be fined not more than two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each offense.



Statutory reference:



   Fine amount for ordinance violations authorized by state law, see KRS
83A.065 and 534.040



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



Chapter



      30.   ORGANIZATIONAL AND SALARY REGULATIONS



      31.   DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



      32.   EMPLOYEE REGULATIONS



      33.   FINANCE AND REVENUE



      34.   PUBLIC RECORDS



      34A.   PUBLIC MEETINGS



      35.   TAXATION



      36.   CITY POLICIES



      37.   CODE OF ETHICS



CHAPTER 30:  ORGANIZATIONAL AND SALARY REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   30.001   Title



   30.002   Election procedure



   30.003   Bonds



   30.004   Additional benefit



   30.005   Wage differential for employees called into active military
service



City Council



   30.015   Organizational; authority



   30.016   Executive authority; powers and duties



   30.017   Presiding officer



   30.018   Legislative authority; meetings; powers and duties



   30.019   Compensation



Departmental Organization



   30.030   Establishment of certain departments



   30.031   Control and supervision of departments



Department of Public Safety (Police Department)



   30.055   Establishment; organization



Department of Law



   30.065   City Attorney



   30.066   Attorney's fees reimbursable to city; lien on real estate



Department of Administration



   30.075   City Clerk-Treasurer



   30.076   Deputy City Clerk



   30.077   Clerk-Typist



   30.078   City Planning Director/Zoning



   30.079   City Engineer



Department of Recreation



   30.090   Establishment; organization



Department of Public Works (Maintenance)



   30.100   Maintenance foreman



   30.101   Outside maintenance employees



   30.102   Part-time maintenance custodian



   30.103   Public works director



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 30.001  TITLE.



   This chapter may be known and referred to as the Organizational and
Salary Chapter for employees of the city.



('81 Code, § 230.2, § I) (Ord. 17-84, passed 6-28-84)



§ 30.002  ELECTION PROCEDURE.



   (A)   The nomination and election of candidates for city office in a
nonpartisan election within the city shall be conducted pursuant to the
following provisions.



      (1)   There shall be no nonpartisan primary election for the
nomination of candidates to city office regardless of the number of
candidates running for each office.



      (2)   All candidates must file their nomination papers with
the County Clerk of the County of Campbell not later than the second Tuesday
in August before the day fixed by KRS Chapter 118 for holding a regular
election in order to be entitled to appear on the ballot.



      (3)   All nomination papers shall be filed no later than 4:00
p.m. local time when filed on the last day on which such papers are permitted
to be filed.



      (4)   The election of candidates to city office shall be
governed by the provisions of this section, KRS 83A.175(2) through (7) and
KRS Chapters 116 to 121.



      (5)   Candidates for city office shall not be required to make
pre-election reports to the Registry of Election Finance pursuant to KRS
Chapter 121.180 but shall be required to make post-election reports within 30
days after the regular election in November.



      (6)   The number of candidates equal to the number of city
offices to be filled who receive the highest number of votes cast in the
regular election for each city office shall be elected.



      (7)   All candidates shall be subject to all other applicable
election laws pursuant to KRS Chapters 83A and 116 to 121.



   (B)   This section shall be further governed by and constructed in
light of KRS Chapter 83A.040.



(Ord. 24-88, passed 1-12-89; Am. Ord. 7-93, passed 3-11-93)



   (C)   After the election of the legislative body members of the City
Council at the general election on November 5, 1991, but prior to their
taking of office, lots shall be drawn by all members elected, and one-half
shall serve a term of one year, and one-half shall serve a term of two years,
all beginning the first Monday of January, 1992.  At each subsequent general
election in November of each year, the seats of one-half of the members of
the City Council shall stand for election for a two-year term beginning the
first Monday in January next following. 



(Ord. 18-90, passed 8-9-90; Am. Ord. 19-91, passed 9-12-91)



§ 30.003  BONDS.



   Before entering upon their respective duties each of the officers or
employees hereinafter named shall execute bond to the city in the sum
indicated, conditioned upon the faithful performance of their duties:



 

Personnel
 
Amount of Bond


 


City Clerk-Treasurer
 
$ 20,000


Deputy City Clerk
 
    5,000


Clerk-Typist, Receptionist
 
    5,000


Police Chief
 
    2,000


All other police personnel
 
    1,000



 



('81 Code, §  230.2, '§  XII) (Ord. 17-84, passed 6-28-84)



§ 30.004  ADDITIONAL BENEFIT.



   In addition to the minimum salaries and longevity paid, the city shall
pay medical insurance premiums for permanent full-time employees.



('81 Code, §  230.2, '§ XI) (Ord. 17-84, passed 6-28-84)



§ 30.005  WAGE DIFFERENTIAL FOR EMPLOYEES CALLED INTO ACTIVE MILITARY
SERVICE



   (A)   Any employee that is called into active military service shall
be paid the difference between his active military pay and his wage while
employed with the city in the event his active military pay is lower than his
city wage.



   (B)   This payment shall continue for a period of twenty-four (24)
months while the employee is serving in an active military service.



(Ord. 10-2001, passed 11-6-01)



CITY COUNCIL



§ 30.015  ORGANIZATION; AUTHORITY.



   (A)   The city shall be governed by an elected executive who shall
be called Mayor and by an elected legislative body which shall be called the
City Council, and by such other officers and employees as are provided for by
statute or city ordinance.



(KRS 83A.130(2))



   (B)   As set forth in KRS 83A.010(8), a legislative body member
means a City Councilmember.



   (C)   The City Council shall be composed of not less than six (6)
members nor more than twelve (12) members as prescribed by ordinance.



(KRS 83A.030(1))



   (D)   The executive authority of the city is vested in and shall be
exercised by the Mayor, as set forth in § 30.016



   (E)   The legislative authority of the city is hereby vested in and
shall be exercised by the elected Council of the city.  The Council may not
perform any executive functions except those functions assigned to it by
statute.



(KRS 83A.130(11))



§ 30.016  EXECUTIVE AUTHORITY; POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The executive authority of the city shall be vested in and
exercised by the Mayor. The Mayor shall enforce the Mayor-Council plan, city
ordinances and orders and all applicable statutes.  The Mayor shall
supervise all departments of the city government and the conduct of all city
officers and employees under his jurisdiction and shall require each
department to make reports to him required by ordinance as he and the City
Council deems desirable.  The Mayor shall maintain liaison with related
units of local government respecting interlocal contracting and joint
activities.  The Mayor shall report to the Council and to the public on the
condition and needs of city government as the Mayor finds appropriate or as
required by ordinance, but not less than annually.  The Mayor shall make any
recommendations for actions by the Council the Mayor finds in the public
interest.  Subject to disapproval of the Council, the Mayor shall promulgate
procedures to insure orderly administration of the functions of the city
government and compliance with statute or ordinance.  Upon promulgation or
upon revision or rescission of the procedures, copies shall be filed with the
person responsible for maintaining city records as provided under KRS
83A.060.  The Council may set by ordinance the manner in which one of its
number may be selected to preside at meetings of the Council in place of the
Mayor.  The Mayor may participate in Council proceedings, but shall not have
a vote, except that Mayor may cast the deciding vote in case of a tie.



   (B)   The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Council.  The
Mayor shall be recognized as the official head of the city for ceremonial and
military purposes and as the agent upon whom civil process may be served for
the municipal corporation.  In time of public danger or emergency, the Mayor
may, with the consent of the Council, take command of the Police Department,
maintain order in the community and enforce all the laws of the Commonwealth
and this municipality.



   (C)   Any delegation of the Mayor's power, duties or
responsibilities to subordinate officers and employees and any expression of
his official authority to fulfill executive functions shall be made by
executive order.  Executive orders shall be sequentially numbered by years
and shall be kept in a permanent file.



   (D)   The Mayor shall be the appointing authority with power to
appoint and remove all city employees, except as tenure and terms of
employment are protected by statute, ordinance or contract and except for
employees of the Council.



   (E)   The Mayor shall provide for the orderly continuation of the
functions of city government.



('81 Code, § 230.2, § 'II)  (Ord. 17-84, passed 6-28-84)



   (F)   No vacancy by reason of a voluntary resignation in the office
of Mayor shall occur unless a written resignation which specifies the
resignation date is tendered to the City Council.  The resignation shall be
effective at the next regular meeting of the city legislative body.



§ 30.017  PRESIDING OFFICER.



   (A)   The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Council.  The
Council has the authority to establish, by ordinance, the manner in which one
of its number may be selected to preside at meetings of the Council in the
absence of the Mayor.



   (B)   The Mayor may participate in Council proceedings, but shall
not have a vote, except that he may cast the deciding vote in case of a tie.



(KRS 83A.130(5))



§ 30.018  LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY; MEETINGS; POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The legislative authority of the city shall be vested in and
exercised by the elected Council of the city.  The City Council shall not
perform any executive functions except those functions assigned to it by
statute.



   (B)   Regular meetings of the City Council shall be held at the City
Building, 176 Johns Hill Road, at 7:00 p.m. on the first and third Tuesdays
of each month.  Special meetings of the Council may be called by the Mayor
or upon written request of a majority of the Council.  In the call, the
Mayor or Council shall designate the purpose, time and place of the special
meeting with sufficient notice for the attendance of Councilmembers and for
compliance with KRS Chapter 61. At a special meeting no business may be
considered other than that set forth in the designation of purpose.



(Am. Ord. 5-96, passed 7-2-96; Am. Ord. 01-2019, passed 2-5-19)



   (C)   The Council shall by ordinance establish all appointive
offices and the duties and responsibilities of those offices and codes, rules
and regulations for the public health, safety and welfare.  The Council
shall by ordinance provide for sufficient revenue to operate city government
and shall appropriate the funds of the city in a budget which shall provide
for the orderly management of city resources.



   (D)   The Council shall have the right to investigate all activities
of city government.  The Council may require any city officer or employee to
prepare and submit to it sworn statements regarding his performance of his
official duties.



('81 Code, § 230.2, '§ II)  (Ord. 17-84, passed 6-28-84)



   (E)   No vacancy by reason of a voluntary resignation of a member of
the City Council shall occur unless a written resignation which specifies the
resignation date is tendered to the City Council.  The resignation shall be
effective at the next regular meeting of the city legislative body.



§ 30.019  COMPENSATION.



   As compensation for their services hereinabove, the Mayor and each
Councilmember shall receive compensation at rates as set by ordinance and
incorporated herein by reference.



('81 Code, § 230.2, § II)



DEPARTMENTAL ORGANIZATION



§ 30.030  ESTABLISHMENT OF CERTAIN DEPARTMENTS.



   For the efficient, orderly and economical administration of municipal
affairs, and for the assignment  and  decentralization of duties, and the
proper control, management and supervision of the several officers, agents
and employees of the city, the following departments are now established:



   (A)   Department of Administration.



   (B)   Department of Law.



   (C)   Department of Engineering.



   (D)   Department of Public Works (Maintenance).



   (E)   Department  of  Public  Safety  (Police Department).



   (F)   Department of Recreation.



('81 Code, '§ 230.2, § III) (Ord. 17-84, passed 6-28-84)



§ 30.031  CONTROL AND SUPERVISION OF DEPARTMENTS.



   The various departments provided for as aforesaid or hereafter
established shall operate under the direct control and supervision of the
Mayor and each department shall be organized and headed by a chief of section
or director who shall be in immediate control of and responsible for the
efficient and proper operation of his/her respective department; provided,
however, that the Police Department or the Department of Public Safety is
under control and supervision in accordance with the provisions of the
Kentucky Revised Statutes and as otherwise specifically provided for in this
chapter.  All officers, agents and employees of the city shall perform their
respective duties in accordance with and pursuant to the laws of this
Commonwealth as provided for cities of the fourth class, and the ordinances
of this city.



('81 Code, '§ 230.2, § IV) (Ord. 17-84, passed 6-28-84)



DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY (POLICE DEPARTMENT)



§ 30.055  ESTABLISHMENT; ORGANIZATION.



   (A)   There is hereby established the Department of Public Safety,
also known as the Police Department, which shall consist of the following job
titles:



      (1)   Chief of Police.



      (2)   Police Captain.



      (3)   Police Lieutenant.



      (4)   Police Sergeant.



      (5)   Police officer (full-time).



      (6)   Detective.



   (B)   Chief of Police.



      (1)   For provisions concerning the job description of the
Chief of Police, refer to the city's executive order.



      (2)   In the absence of the Chief of Police due to vacation,
sick leave or leave of absence, command of the Department devolves to the
next highest ranking officer.



      (3)   As compensation for his services hereunder, the Chief of
Police shall receive compensation at a rate of pay provided by ordinance.



   (C)   Police Captain.



      (1)   For provisions concerning the job description of the
Police Captain, refer to the city's executive order.



      (2)   As compensation for his services hereunder, the Captain
of the Police Department shall receive compensation at a rate of pay provided
by ordinance.



   (D)   Police Lieutenant.



      (1)   For provisions concerning the job description of the
Police Lieutenant, refer to the city's executive order.



      (2)   As compensation for his services hereunder, the
Lieutenant of the Police Department shall receive compensation at a rate of
pay provided by ordinance.



   (E)   Police Sergeant.



      (1)   For provisions concerning the job description of the
Police Sergeant, refer to the city's executive order.



      (2)   As compensation for his services hereunder, the Sergeant
of the Police Department shall receive compensation at a rate of pay provided
by ordinance.



   (F)   Police officers.



      (1)   For the provisions concerning the job description of the
police officer, refer to the city's executive order.



      (2)   As compensation for his services hereunder, the
full-time police officer of the Police Department shall receive compensation
at a rate of pay provided by ordinance.



   (G)   Detective.  The position of detective is established with the
Police Department.



      (1)   For the provisions concerning the job description of the
police officer, refer to the city's executive order.



      (2)   As compensation for his services hereunder, the
full-time police officer of the Police Department shall receive compensation
at a rate of pay provided by ordinance.



   (H)   Additional personnel.



      (1)   In addition to the full-time police personnel, the
Police Department shall be comprised of part-time police personnel.  The
following job titles are set out below:



         (a)   Police matron (part-time).



         (b)   Police officer (part-time).



      (2)   For provisions concerning the job descriptions of the
above, refer to the city's executive order.



      (3)   As compensation for services hereunder, the police
matron (part-time) and police officer (part-time) employees shall receive
compensation at a rate of pay provided by ordinance.



   (I)   Pay classification.



      (1)   The pay classification for the Department of Public
Safety (Police Department) shall be dependent upon the following:



         (a)   Job performance.



         (b)   Length of service.



         (c)   Training.



         (d)   Education.



         (e)   Responsibilities other than assigned duties.



         (f)   Approval of Chief of Police and any
recommendations made by him.



      (2)   The pay classification within the Department of Public
Safety (Police Department) shall be divided into twelve (12) separate pay
ranges for each individual classification, with a minimum wage as set out by
ordinance and maximum wage set out by ordinance and the twelve (12)
increments between top and bottom salary shall reflect an equal amount of
each.



('81 Code, '§ 230.2, § VI) (Ord. 17-84, passed 6-28-84; Am. Ord. 08-95,
passed 4-20-95; Am. Ord. 10-97, passed 6-3-97; Am. Ord. 06-2001, passed
7-17-01; Am. Ord. 04-2002, passed 8-6-02; Am. Ord. 05-2003, passed 1-21-03;
Am. Ord. 15-2003, passed 6-17-03; Am. Ord. 06-2006, passed 8-15-06)



DEPARTMENT OF LAW



§ 30.065  CITY ATTORNEY.



   (A)   The City Attorney is the chief legal officer for the city. 
The office of City Attorney is to be filled by a licensed attorney who is a
member of the Kentucky Bar Association selected by the Mayor subject to the
approval of City Council to serve under contract with the city for a term of
two years, subject to removal at the pleasure of the Mayor and majority vote
of Council, conditioned upon his contract or other orders.



   (B)   The City Attorney shall receive for his services an annual
retainer of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) payable on a monthly basis in
equal amounts which shall be full compensation for all ordinary advisory
services including attending all regular scheduled City Council meetings, the
drafting of ordinary ordinances, resolutions and orders; and all services
other than those rendered in connection with bond issues or assessed
improvements of streets, water lines and all other public works, or with
litigation or adversary hearings to which the city or its officers or
employees in their official capacity may be parties.  For any services not
covered by the retainer the City Attorney shall receive compensation of
thirty-five dollars ($35.00) per hour or as authorized by the City Council.



   (C)   For provisions concerning the job description of the City
Attorney, refer to the city's executive order.



('81 Code,'§ 230.2, § VII) (Ord. 17-84, passed 6-28-84; Am. Ord. 10-97,
passed 6-3-97)



§ 30.066  ATTORNEY'S FEE REIMBURSABLE TO CITY; LIEN ON REAL ESTATE.



   (A)   The fees of the City Attorney as are incurred incident to the
enforcement of any city ordinance affecting or controlling real property
within the city and as are so approved by Council as extraordinary services
shall be reimbursed to the city by the owner of such real property as so
involved or affected.



   (B)   The fees of the City Attorney as are so incurred and approved
by City Council incident to the enforcement of any city ordinance affecting
or controlling any real property within the city shall be included in any
lien upon the real property upon which cost be incurred incident to such
enforcement of the city's ordinance.



('81 Code, § 1020.7)



DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATION



§ 30.075  CITY CLERK-TREASURER.



   (A)   The city hereby establishes the office of the City
Clerk-Treasurer.  The City Clerk-Treasurer shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the approval of City Council.  The City Clerk-Treasurer shall attend
all meetings of the City Council and record the minutes thereof; shall
preserve and maintain the records and files of the City Council; shall keep a
true and complete record of all proceedings of the City Council, and such
other records as he may be directed by the City Council to keep; and shall
perform such duties as may be required pursuant to the personnel rules of the
city.



   (B)   For provisions concerning the job description of the City
Clerk-Treasurer, refer to the city's executive order.



   (C)   The current rate of compensation to be paid to the City
Clerk-Treasurer shall be at a rate of pay provided by ordinance.



('81 Code, § 230.2, § 'VIII) (Ord. 17-84, passed 6-28-84; Am. Ord. 10-97,
passed 6-3-97; Am. Ord. 06-2001, passed 7-17-01; Am. Ord. 04-2002, passed
8-6-02; Am. Ord. 05-2003, passed 1-21-03; Am. Ord. 15-2003, passed 6-17-03)



   (D)   No person shall be appointed or act as the City
Clerk-Treasurer unless such person has taken the oath required by section 228
of the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Kentucky.



§ 30.076  DEPUTY CITY CLERK.



   (A)   There shall be a Deputy City Clerk who shall assist the City
Clerk-Treasurer with the duties of that office and in the performance of
other general administrative duties of the city, including assisting the City
Administrative Officer upon request.  The Deputy City Clerk shall report
directly to the City Clerk-Treasurer and be under his supervision.



   (B)   For provisions concerning the job description of the Deputy
City Clerk, refer to the city's executive order.



   (C)   The current rate of compensation for the Deputy City Clerk
shall be at a rate provided by ordinance.



('81 Code, '§ 230.2, § VIII)  (Ord. 17-84, passed 6-28-84; Am. Ord. 10-97,
passed 6-3-97)



§ 30.077  CLERK-TYPIST.



   (A)   There shall be a clerk-typist who shall also serve as the
official receptionist of the city.  The clerk-typist shall report directly
to the City Clerk-Treasurer with regard to the duties and responsibilities of
the positions of both clerk-typist and receptionist.



   (B)   For provisions concerning the job description of the
clerk-typist, refer to the city's executive order.



   (C)   This position shall be either part-time or full-time,
dependent upon the determination of City Council.



   (D)   The rate of compensation to be paid to the
clerk-typist/receptionist shall be at a rate of pay provided by ordinance.



('81 Code, § 230.2, § VIII)  (Ord. 17-84, passed 6-28-84; Am. Ord. 10-97,
passed 6-3-97)



§ 30.078  CITY PLANNING DIRECTOR/ZONING.



   (A)   There shall be the position of City Planning
Director/Zoning.  The City Planning Director/Zoning shall enforce the
subdivision regulations; act as liaison between developers and City Council
and Planning Commission; analyze development plans and issue a written report
of recommendations to the Planning Commission and Council; attend Council and
Planning Commission meetings as a consultant; prepare, or aid in the
preparation of, federal or state grant applications; enforce the zoning
ordinances and approve or disapprove zoning permits; and record real estate
transfers in ledgers and cross-reference files and maintain tax cards.



   (B)   For provisions concerning the job description of the City
Planning Director/Zoning, refer to the city's executive order.



   (C)   The current rate of compensation for the City Planning
Director/Zoning shall be on a contractual basis.



('81 Code, '§ 230.2, § VIII) (Ord. 17-84, passed 6-28-84; Am. Ord. 10-97,
passed 6-3-97)



§ 30.079  CITY ENGINEER.



   There shall be a City Engineer to perform all duties necessary and
relevant in reference to City Engineer.  He shall be hired on a contractual
basis.



('81 Code, '§ 230.2, § VIII) (Ord. 17-84, passed 6-28-84)



DEPARTMENT OF RECREATION



§ 30.090  ESTABLISHMENT; ORGANIZATION.



   (A)   The Department of Recreation shall employ five seasonal
employees or as many as City Council so desires.  There shall be two
full-time seasonal employees and three part-time seasonal employees.  There
shall be a Director of Recreation who shall be in charge of the Department of
Recreation.  The duties of the Director shall be for the efficient
management and control of all parks within the city or its control.  The
Director shall maintain control over the following parks:



      (1)   Carmack Park, Knollwood Subdivision, city owned.



      (2)   University Park, Marshall Lane, behind Thriftway, leased
from Northern Kentucky University.



      (3)   Veterans Memorial Park, U.S. 27 and Veterans Avenue,
leased from the Kentucky Highway Department.



      (4)   Nature Trail, Pooles Creek Road #1, leased from Campbell
County Fiscal Court.



      (5)   Highland Heights Elementary Ballfield,  owned by
Campbell County Board of Education.



      (6)   Lakeside Ballfields, owned by Campbell County Fiscal
Court.



      (7)   Lot Number 45 of Block "A" of the Hay Subdivision as
recorded in Plat Book #10, page 32A of the Campbell County Clerk's records,
Newport, Kentucky, city owned.



   (B)   The Director of Recreation shall establish procedures and
policies in recreational programs for the above parks.  The Director shall
perform any and all duties related to the effective running of a Department
of Recreation.



   (C)   The Assistant Director of Recreation shall perform the same
duties as the Director of Recreation and shall be under the direct
supervision of the Director of Recreation.



   (D)   The three (3) part-time seasonal employees shall perform such
duties as cutting grass and/or weeds at the parks or within the city,
cleaning up the parks or any designated area within the city, marking the
ballfields and any and all other duties assigned by the Director of
Recreation.



   (E)   The employees of the Department of Recreation shall be
employed for the months of June, July and August only.  Their hourly rate of
compensation shall be at a rate of pay provided by ordinance.



('81 Code, § 230.2, § IX) (Ord. 17-84, passed 6-28-84)



Cross-reference:



   Recreation Board, see §§ 31.25-31.30



DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS (MAINTENANCE)



§ 30.100  MAINTENANCE FOREMAN.



   (A)   For provisions concerning the job description of the
Maintenance Foreman, refer to the city's executive order.



   (B)   The current rate of compensation for the maintenance foreman
shall be at a rate of pay provided by ordinance.



('81 Code, § 230.2, § X) (Ord. 17-84, passed 6-28-84; Am. Ord. 10-97,
passed 6-3-97; Am. Ord. 06-2001, passed 7-17-01; Am. Ord. 04-2002, passed
8-6-02; Am. Ord. 05-2003, passed 1-21-03; Am. Ord. 15-2003, passed 6-17-03)



§ 30.101  OUTSIDE MAINTENANCE EMPLOYEES.



   (A)   There shall be two outside maintenance persons who shall be
employed for the purpose of assisting, as subordinates, the maintenance
foreman.  The outside maintenance persons shall report directly to the
maintenance foreman and shall, daily, complete a work report relating the
status of his various day's work assignments and informing the maintenance
foreman of any necessary repair or maintenance tasks which are brought to his
attention.



   (B)   For provisions concerning the job description of the outside
maintenance persons, refer to the city's executive order.



   (C)   The current rate of compensation for each of the outside
maintenance personnel shall be at a rate of pay provided by ordinance.



('81 Code, § 230.2, § X) (Ord. 17-84, passed 6-28-84; Am. Ord. 10-97,
passed 6-3-97; Am. Ord. 04-2002, passed 8-6-02; Am. Ord. 05-2003, passed
1-21-03; Am. Ord. 15-2003, passed 6-17-03)



§ 30.102  PART-TIME MAINTENANCE CUSTODIAN.



   (A)   There shall be a part-time maintenance custodian.



   (B)   For provisions concerning the job description of the part-time
maintenance custodian, refer to the city's executive order.



   (C)   The current rate of compensation for the part-time maintenance
custodian shall be at a rate of pay provided by ordinance.



('81 Code, § 230.2, § X) (Ord. 17-84, passed 6-28-84; Am. Ord. 10-97,
passed 6-3-97; Am. Ord. 04-2002, passed 8-6-02; Am. Ord. 05-2003, passed
1-21-03; Am. Ord. 15-2003, passed 6-17-03)



§ 30.103  PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR.



   (A)   The position of Pubic Works Director is hereby established.



   (B)   This is a full-time position reporting directly to the Mayor.



   (C)   The duties of the Public Works Director shall be determined by
the Mayor.



   (D)   The Public Works Director shall be hired and/or fired by the
executive authority of the city.



   (E)   This position is an at will employee.



(Ord. 12-97, passed 7-15-97)



CHAPTER 31:  DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



Section



Volunteer Fire Department



   31.01   Definitions



   31.02   Determination of services



   31.03   Written contract for services



   31.04   Provision of services



   31.05   Maintenance and use of Department facilities, equipment and
vehicles



   31.06   Insurance premiums



   31.07   Purchase of fuel; receipt of fire protection service fees



   31.08   Annual financial statement



   31.09   Inspection of departmental buildings; equipment facilities
and records



   31.10   Fire Chief designated as Director of Civil Defense



   31.11   Fire inspector



Recreation Board



   31.25   Establishment



   31.26   Authority



   31.27   Acceptance of grants, gifts or other donations



   31.28   Membership



   31.29   Rules and regulations of Board



   31.30   Reporting



Cross-Reference:



   Parks and Recreation, see Ch. 97



Planning and Zoning Commission



   31.40   Establishment



Ethics Commission



   31.50   Establishment



Code Enforcement Board



   31.60   Definitions



   31.61   Creation and membership



   31.62   Jurisdiction



   31.63   Appointment of members; terms of office; removal from
office; oath and compensation



   31.64   Organization of Board; meetings; quorum and alternate Board
members



   31.65   Conflicts of interest



   31.66   Powers of the Board



   31.67   Enforcement proceedings



   31.68   Hearing, notice and final order



   31.69   Legal counsel



   31.70   Appeals; final judgement



   31.71   Civil fine schedule



   31.72   Liens; fines; charges and fees



   31.73   State statutes adopted by reference



Tree Commission



   31.80      Establishment



   31.81      Terms of office



   31.82      Vacancies



   31.83      Organization



   31.84      Powers and duties of Commission



   31.85      Penalty



VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT



§ 31.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AMBULANCE SERVICE.  The rendering of first aid to anyone injured
within the territorial limits of the city, and the transportation where
necessary, to a hospital or other place of medical treatment of anyone
injured within the territorial limits of the city.



   FIRE PROTECTION SERVICE.   The extinguishing of fires everywhere
within the territorial limits of the city, and such protection shall be
extended both to realty and personality.



   RESCUE SERVICE.   The rendering of aid and the use of all available
means to extricate from danger persons in danger of injury to life or limb
and property in danger of damage within the territorial limits of the city.



('81 Code, § 310.1, § 4)



§ 31.02  DETERMINATION OF SERVICES.



   The city has determined that the Highland Heights Volunteer Fire
Department, Incorporated (hereinafter to be referred to as the Fire
Department) is best able to provide the necessary fire protection service,
ambulance service and rescue service necessary to protect the public health,
safety and welfare of all persons and property located within the territorial
limits of the city.



('81 Code, § 310.1, § 1)



§ 31.03  WRITTEN CONTRACT FOR SERVICES.



   The services of the Fire Department shall be engaged by written
contract for a term of two years with such terms commencing consistent with
each two-year term of City Council and, accordingly, requiring renewal upon
the installation of each newly elected Council.



('81 Code, § 310.1, § 2)



§ 31.04  PROVISION OF SERVICES.



   The Fire Department shall provide fire protection service, ambulance
service and rescue service, as hereinafter more specifically described,
within the territorial limits of the city.  All of such services shall be so
provided by the Fire Department, at all times, both day and night, and on all
days of the year, including Sundays and all holidays.



('81 Code, § 310.1, § 3)



§ 31.05  MAINTENANCE AND USE OF DEPARTMENT FACILITIES, EQUIPMENT AND
VEHICLES.



   (A)   The Fire Department shall maintain within the city limits a
firehouse wherein it shall garage the vehicles necessary to provide such
services and may, by separate lease agreement, rent garage space from the
city in the Civic Center located at 175 Johns Hill Road, Highland Heights,
Kentucky.



('81 Code, § 310.1, § 5)



   (B)   The Fire Department shall maintain and have available for use
at all times all necessary and proper equipment required for the suppression
of fires and other related emergency service.



('81 Code, § 310.1, § 6)



   (C)   The Fire Department shall maintain and have available for use
at all times an ambulance equipped for the transportation of a least two
persons in a prone position and all other such equipment as is necessary.



('81 Code, § 310.1, § 7)



   (D)   The Fire Department shall maintain and have available for use
at all times a rescue truck equipped with all such other equipment as is
necessary.



('81 Code, § 310.1, § 8)



§ 31.06  INSURANCE PREMIUMS.



   The Fire Department shall pay all insurance premiums on its facilities,
equipment and personnel.  The Fire Department shall maintain collision and
liability insurance substantially equivalent in amount and terms to the
insurance reasonably necessary and proper.  This section shall not be
construed by anyone as a recognition of liability or responsibility by the
city for the acts or contracts of the Fire Department or its personnel nor as
a waiver of any defenses which the city may by law assert in any action
brought against it of whatever nature, by whomever brought.



('81 Code, § 310.1, § 9)



§ 31.07  PURCHASE OF FUEL; RECEIPT OF FIRE PROTECTION SERVICE FEES.



   In consideration of the services to be rendered by the Fire Department,
as described in this subchapter, the city shall permit the Fire Department to
purchase all necessary gasoline fuel for the Fire Department operations from
the city and at the same cost as the city shall pay from time to time, and
shall pay to the Fire Department all receipts which the city collects in the
form of fire protection service fees with such receipts being required to be
paid over to the Fire Department accordingly:



   (A)   Five thousand dollars on July 1 of that year, so long as the
city has received such amount in fire protection service fees by that time
from the period January 1 to June 15 of the same year;



   (B)   The balance of all fire protection service fees collected
during the period from January 1, each year through June 30, shall be
remitted to the Fire Department by not later than July 31 of that year;



   (C)   All fire protection service fees collected in July and in
August shall be remitted to the Fire Department by not later than the last
day of each such subsequent month (for example, July receipts shall be
remitted to the Fire Department by August 31, and August receipts by
September 30); and



   (D)   All fire protection service fees collected during the period
from September 1, each year through December 31, shall be remitted to the
Fire Department by December 31, of that same year.



('81 Code, § 310.1, § 10)



§ 31.08  ANNUAL FINANCIAL STATEMENT.



   Each year the Fire Department shall submit to the Mayor by October 15,
its annual financial statement for the prior calendar year.



('81 Code, § 310.1, § 11)



§ 31.09  INSPECTION OF DEPARTMENTAL BUILDINGS; EQUIPMENT FACILITIES AND
RECORDS.



   The Mayor of the city, or the Budget Committee of the City Council
shall have the right of reasonable inspection of the buildings, equipment
facilities, and records of the Fire Department at all times.



('81 Code, § 310.1, § 12)



§ 31.10  FIRE CHIEF DESIGNATED AS DIRECTOR OF CIVIL DEFENSE.



   The Fire Chief of the Volunteer Fire Department, a nonprofit
corporation incorporated under the laws of the Commonwealth of Kentucky, is
designated Director of Civil Defense for the city pursuant to KRS 39.415,
with all the powers and authorities as therein set forth and with the term of
any specific person's appointment to coincide with that person's term as Fire
Chief for the Fire Department.



('81 Code, § 310, § 3)



Cross-reference:



   Civil emergencies, see §§ 92.01 through 92.05



§ 31.11  FIRE INSPECTOR.



   (A)   Function.  The Fire Inspector is responsible to the Mayor and
City Council for inspecting properties within the community of Highland
Heights, to ensure that they are in compliance with all applicable provisions
of the codes and ordinances which deal with fire prevention and fire
protection.



   (B)   Responsibilities.  For provisions concerning the job
description of the Fire Inspector, refer to the city's executive order.



   (C)   Relationships.



      (1)   Reports to the Fire Chief and the Mayor.



      (2)   Cooperates and works with members of the Fire Department
and Building Department.



(Ord. 10-91, passed 5-23-91; Am. Ord. 10-97, passed 6-3-97)



RECREATION BOARD



§ 31.25  ESTABLISHMENT.



   A Recreation Board is created in the city to foster and encourage the
use of city facilities for recreational use by our citizens.



(Ord. 01-2005, passed 3-15-05)



§ 31.26  AUTHORITY.



   The Board shall have the authority to advise the City Council on proper
maintenance, conduct, and equipment for playground and recreational
facilities in centers and buildings and other appurtenances and equipment to
be used in the city and to advise Council on the employment, training, and
qualifications of playground directors, supervisors, recreation
superintendents or other officers or employees the Board deems appropriate
and perform such other lawful duties and functions as it deems necessary, fit
and proper for the development, expansion, conduct and maintenance of
playground and recreation within the city.



(Ord. 01-2005, passed 3-15-05)



§ 31.27  ACCEPTANCE OF GRANTS, GIFTS OR OTHER DONATIONS.



   The Board may accept any grant, gift, bequest or donation of any
personal property offered or made for recreational purposes and, with the
approval of the Board of Council, may accept any grant, gift or devise of
real estate.  Any gift, bequest of money or other personal property, grant
or devise of real estate, shall be held, used and finally disposed of in
accordance with the terms or conditions under which said grant, gift or
devise is made and accepted.  The Board shall have no authority to enter
into any contract or incur any obligations binding upon the city without
first receiving the approval of the Mayor and City Council.



(Ord. 01-2005, passed 3-15-05)



§ 31.28  MEMBERSHIP.



   The Board shall consist of six (6) persons to be appointed by the
Mayor, each of whom shall serve a term of four (4) years or until his or her
successor is appointed.  Terms shall commence on January 1 of each year in
which the appointment is made.  Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner
as the original appointments and shall be for the unexpired term. Members
appointed to the Board shall be subject to the approval of the Board of
Council. They shall be legal voters of the city and must have resided within
the city for at least two (2) full calendar years prior to the date of the
appointment.



(Ord. 01-2005, passed 3-15-05; Am. Ord. 01-2007, passed 3-20-07)



§ 31.29  RULES AND REGULATIONS OF BOARD.



   The Board may establish rules and regulations for its own organization,
control and administration and for the proper management and control of
playground and recreation centers, subject to the provisions of law and
approval by the Mayor and Council.



(Ord. 01-2005, passed 3-15-05)



§ 31.30  REPORTING.



   The Recreation Board shall report regularly to the Mayor and City
Council any activities it has planned.



(Ord. 01-2005, passed 3-15-05)



PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION



§ 31.40  ESTABLISHMENT.



   There shall be a planning and zoning commission pursuant to the zoning
ordinance [Ord. 16-83] as was adopted June 23, 1977.



('81 Code, § 150.2)



Cross-reference:



   Zoning code adopted by reference, see § 152.01



ETHICS COMMISSION



§ 31.50  ESTABLISHMENT.



   For provisions concerning the Ethics Commission, see § 37.05.



CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD



§ 31.60  DEFINITIONS.



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subchapter,
shall have the meanings described to them in this section, except where the
contract clearly indicates a different meaning:



   CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD.  An administrative body created and acting
under the authority of the Local Government Code Enforcement Board Act.



   CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.  A City Police officer, Public Works
Director, Occupational License Enforcement Officer, City Zoning Administrator
or other public law enforcement officer with the authority to issue a
citation.



   ORDINANCE.  An official action of the City Council of the City of
Highland Heights, Kentucky which is a regulation of a general and permanent
nature and enforceable as a local law and shall include any provision of the
Code of Ordinances adopted by the City Council which embodies all or part of
an ordinance.



(Ord. 02-2010, passed 4-20-10; Am. Ord. 02-2011, passed 4-19-11; Am. Ord.
16-2013, passed 11-19-13)



§ 31.61  CREATION AND MEMBERSHIP.



   There is hereby created pursuant to KRS 65.8801 to 65.8839 within the
city, a Code Enforcement Board (the “Board”) which shall be composed of
five (5) members, all of whom shall be residents of the city for a period of
at least one (1) year prior to the date of the members appointment and shall
reside there throughout the term in office.



(Ord. 02-2010, passed 4-20-10; Am. Ord. 02-2011, passed 4-19-11; Am. Ord.
16-2013, passed 11-19-13)



§ 31.62  JURISDICTION.



   (A)   The Board shall have jurisdiction to enforce and shall enforce
those city ordinances and code provisions which specifically provide for
civil enforcement.



   (B)   The Board shall not have the authority to enforce any
ordinance the violation of which constitutes a criminal offense under the
provisions of the Kentucky Revised Statutes, including specifically, any
provision of the Kentucky Penal Code and any moving motor vehicle offense.



(Ord. 02-2010, passed 4-20-10; Am. Ord. 02-2011, passed 4-19-11; Am. Ord.
16-2013, passed 11-19-13)



§ 31.63  APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS: TERM OF OFFICE: REMOVAL FROM OFFICE: OATH
AND COMPENSATION.



   (A)   Members of the Board shall be appointed by the Mayor of the
city, subject to the approval of City Council.



   (B)   (1)   The initial appointment to the Board shall be as
follows:



         (a)   One (1) member appointed to a term of one (1) year.



         (b)   Two (2) members appointed to a term of two (2)
years each.



         (c)   Two (2) members appointed to a term of three (3)
years each.



      (2)   All subsequent appointments shall be for a term of three
(3) years. A member may be reappointed, subject to the approval of the
legislative body.



   (C)   Any vacancy on the Board shall be filled by the Mayor, subject
to approval of Council within sixty (60) days of the vacancy. If the vacancy
is not filled within that time period, the remaining members shall fill the
vacancy.



   (D)   A Board member may be removed from office by the Mayor for
misconduct, inefficiency or willful neglect of duty. The Mayor shall submit a
written statement to the member and the City Council setting forth the
reasons for removal.



   (E)   All members of the Board must before entering upon the duties
of their office, take the oath of office prescribed by Section 228 of the
Kentucky Constitution.



   (F)   Members of the Board shall be reimbursed for actual expenses
and compensated in the amount of $25 per person per meeting.



   (G)   No member of the Board may hold any elected or non-elected
office, paid or unpaid, or any position of employment with the city.



(Ord. 02-2010, passed 4-20-10; Am. Ord. 02-2011, passed 4-19-11; Am. Ord.
16-2013, passed 11-19-13)



§ 31.64  ORGANIZATION OF BOARD: MEETINGS; QUORUM AND ALTERNATE BOARD
MEMBERS.



   (A)   The Board shall annually elect a Chairman from among its
members. The Chairman shall be the presiding officer and a full voting member
of the Board.



   (B)   Regular meetings of the Board shall be held as directed by the
Chairman and shall be held in accordance with the requirements of KRS
65.8815(5) and the Kentucky Open Meetings Act.



   (C)   Meetings other than those regularly scheduled shall be special
meetings and shall be held in accordance with the requirements of the
Kentucky Open Meetings Act.



   (D)   The affirmative vote of a majority of a quorum of the Board
shall be necessary for any official action to be taken.



   (E)   Minutes shall be kept for all proceedings of the Board and the
vote of each member on any issue decided by the Board shall be recorded in
the minutes.



(Ord. 02-2010, passed 4-20-10; Am. Ord. 02-2011, passed 4-19-11; Am. Ord.
16-2013, passed 11-19-13)



§ 31.65  CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.



   Any member of the Board who has any direct or indirect financial or
personal interest in any matter to be decided shall disclose the nature of
the interest and shall be disqualified from voting on the matter, and shall
not be counted for purposes of establishing a quorum.



(Ord. 02-2010, passed 4-20-10; Am. Ord. 02-2011, passed 4-19-11; Am. Ord.
16-2013, passed 11-19-13)



§ 31.66  POWERS OF THE BOARD.



   The Board shall have the following powers and duties:



   (A)   To adopt rules and regulations to govern its operations and
the conduct of its hearings.



   (B)    To conduct hearings to determine if there has been a
violation of any ordinance over which it has jurisdiction.



   (C)   To subpoena alleged violators, witnesses and evidence to its
hearings subpoenas issued by the Board may be served by any Code Enforcement
Officer.



   (D)   To take testimony under oath. The Chairman shall have the
authority to administer oaths for the purpose of taking testimony.



   (E)   To make findings of fact and issue orders necessary to remedy
any violation of a city or ordinance or code provision which the Board is
authorized to enforce.



   (F)   To issue remedial orders and impose fines, as authorized,
against any person who is found to have violated an ordinance over which the
Board has jurisdiction.



   (G)   To make any recommendations to City Council deemed necessary
by the Board.



(Ord. 02-2010, passed 4-20-10; Am. Ord. 02-2011, passed 4-19-11; Am. Ord.
16-2013, passed 11-19-13)



§ 31.67  ENFORCEMENT PROCEEDINGS.



   The following requirements shall govern all enforcement proceedings
before the Board:



   (A)   Enforcement proceedings before the Board shall only be
initiated by the issuance of a citation by a code enforcement officer.



   (B)   When a code enforcement officer, based upon personal
observation or investigation, has reasonable cause to believe that a person
has committed a violation of any ordinance, the officer is authorized to
issue a citation to the offender. A code enforcement officer may, in lieu of
issuing a citation, give a notice of violation, which shall serve to notify
the violator to remedy the violation within the time specified. If the
offender fails or refuses to remedy the violation within the time specified,
the code enforcement officer is authorized to issue a citation.



   (C)   Nothing in this subchapter shall prevent the Highland Heights
Code Enforcement Officer, as defined in § 31.60 herein, from taking
immediate action to remedy a violation of its ordinances or codes when there
is reason to believe that the violation constitutes a public nuisance or a
threat to the public health, safety, welfare or if in the absence of
immediate action, the effects of the violation will be irreparable or
irreversible. A citation may also be issued for the violation.



   (D)   The citation issued by the code enforcement officer shall
contain the following information:



      (1)   The date and time of the issuance;



      (2)   The name and address of the person to whom the citation
is issued;



      (3)   The date and time the offense was committed or
discovered;



      (4)   Brief facts constituting the offense;



      (5)   The section of the code or the ordinance number violated;



      (6)   The name of the code enforcement officer;



      (7)   The civil fine that may be imposed for the violation if
the person does not contest the citation;



      (8)   The maximum civil fine that may be imposed if the person
elects to contest the citation;



      (9)   The procedure for the person to follow in order to pay
the civil fine or to contest the citation; and



      (10)   A statement that if the person fails to pay the civil
fine set forth in the citation or contest the citation, within the time
allowed , the person shall be deemed to have waived the right to a hearing
before the Board to contest the citation and that the determination that the
violation was committed shall be final.



      (11)   Each day of violation shall constitute a separate
offense.



   (E)   After issuing a citation to an alleged violator, the code
enforcement officer shall notify the Board by delivering a copy of the
citation to the City Clerk.



   (F)   The person to whom the citation is issued shall respond to the
citation within seven days of the date of issuance by either paying the civil
fine and remedying the violation or requesting in writing a hearing before
the Board to contest a citation. The request for a hearing shall be delivered
to the City Clerk. The request shall include the name and address of the
person requesting the hearing. If the person fails to respond to the citation
within seven (7) calendar days by payment and remedial action if necessary,
the person shall be deemed to have waived the right to a hearing and any
determination that a violation was committed shall be considered final. In
the event a violator is issued a citation and neither pays the civil fine or
remedies the violation, the Board may enter a judgment by default. Each day
of violation shall constitute a separate offense. After seven (7) days have
passed without an appeal and the citation has not been paid, a meeting of the
Board shall be scheduled to make a judgment and establish the appropriate
civil fine. A copy of any final order shall be served on the person found in
violation of the city code or ordinance.



   (G)   If the alleged violator pays the fine but does not correct the
violation within the seven (7) days provided, the Code Enforcement Officer
can issue additional citations every 7 days until the violation is corrected.
When the third (3rd) citation is issued for the same violation, there is no
prescribed penalty and the amount of the fine must be established at a
hearing before the Board. The Clerk shall schedule a hearing when any 3rd
citation is issued for the same violation.



(Ord. 02-2010, passed 4-20-10; Am. Ord. 02-2011, passed 4-19-11; Am. Ord.
16-2013, passed 11-19-13)



§ 31.68  HEARING. NOTICE AND FINAL ORDER.



   (A)   When a hearing has been requested, the Board shall schedule a
hearing.



   (B)   Not less than seven (7) calendar days before the date of the
hearing, the Board shall notify the requester of the date, time and place of
the hearing. The notice may be given by certified mail, return receipt
requested; by personal delivery; or by leaving the notice at the persons
usual place of residence with any individual residing therein who is 18 years
of age or older and who is informed of the contents of the notice.



   (C)   Any person requesting a hearing before the Board who fails to
appear at the time and place set for the hearing shall be deemed to have
waived the right to a hearing to contest the citation and the determination
that a violation was committed shall be final. The Board may enter a final
order determining the violation was committed and impose the civil fines
authorized. A copy of the final order shall be served upon the person guilty
of the violation.



   (D)   All testimony shall be taken under oath and recorded.
Testimony shall be taken from the Code Enforcement Officer, the alleged
violator, and any witnesses to the violation offered by the Code Enforcement
Officer or alleged violator. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply but
fundamental due process shall be observed and shall govern the proceedings.



   (E)   The Board shall, based on the evidence, determine whether a
violation was committed. If it determines that no violation was committed, an
order dismissing the citation shall be entered. If it determines that a
violation was committed, an order shall be issued upholding the citation and
either imposing a fine up to the maximum authorized by this or other
ordinance or requiring the offender to remedy a continuing violation, or both.



   (F)   Every final order of the Board shall be reduced to writing
which shall include the date the order was issued. A copy shall be furnished
to the person named in the citation. If the person named in the citations is
not present when the final order is issued, the order shall be delivered in
accordance with the procedures set forth in division (B) of this section.



(Ord. 02-2010, passed 4-20-10; Am. Ord. 02-2011, passed 4-19-11; Am. Ord.
16-2013, passed 11-19-13)



§ 31.69  LEGAL COUNSEL.



   Each case before the Board shall be presented by a City Code
Enforcement Officer or by an attorney selected by the Mayor. The City
Attorney will be counsel to the Board and may not present cases before the
Board.



(Ord. 02-2010, passed 4-20-10; Am. Ord. 02-2011, passed 4-19-11; Am. Ord.
16-2013, passed 11-19-13)



§ 31.70  APPEALS: FINAL JUDGMENT.



   (A)   An appeal from any final order of the Board may be made to the
Campbell County District Court within 30 days of the date the order is
issued. The appeal shall be initiated by the filing of a complaint and a copy
of the Board’s order in the same manner as any civil action under the
Kentucky Rules of Civil Procedure.



   (B)   If no appeal from a final order of the Board is filed within
the time period set forth in division (A) of this section, the Board’s
order shall be final.



(Ord. 02-2010, passed 4-20-10; Am. Ord. 02-2011, passed 4-19-11; Am. Ord.
16-2013, passed 11-19-13)



§ 31.71  CIVIL FINE SCHEDULE.



   Violation of ordinances that are enforced by the City Board shall be
subject to the following schedule of civil fines:



   (A)   If the first and second citation for a violation of an
ordinance is not contested by the person charged with the violation, the
penalties set forth in this division shall apply; however, the Board may
waive all or any portion of a penalty for an uncontested violation, if in its
discretion the Board determines that such waiver will promote compliance with
the ordinance in issue. For any third or subsequent citation issued for the
same violation, the penalty must be established at a hearing of the Board.



 


Violation

 

Penalty



(1st and 2nd citation)






Zoning

 

$25.00




Nuisance

 

$25.00




Property Maintenance Code

 

$25.00




Parking

 

$30.00




Occupational License

 

$50.00




Life Safety Code Violations

 

$50.00




Fire Prevention Code Violations

 

$50.00




Other

 

$25.00





 



   (B)   If a citation is contested or a hearing before the Board is
required, the following penalties may be imposed at the discretion of the
Board; however, the Board may waive all or any portion of a penalty if it
determines such waiver will promote compliance with the ordinance in issue.



 


Violation

 

1st Offense

 

2nd Offense

 

All Others






Zoning

 

$25 - $500

 

$50 - $1,000

 

$75 - $2,000




Nuisance

 

$25 - $500

 

$50 - $1,000

 

$75 - $2,000




Property Maintenance Code Violations

 

$25 - $500

 

$50 - $1,000

 

$75 - $2,000




Parking

 

$30 - $100

 

$50 - $200

 

$75 - $500




Occupational License

 

$50 - $1,000

 

$500 - $1,000

 

$200 - $2,000




Life Safety Code Violations

 

$50 - $1,000

 

$100 - $1,500

 

$200 - $2,000




Fire Prevention Code Violations

 

$50 - $1,000

 

$100 - $1,500

 

$20 - $2,000




Other

 

$25 - $500

 

$50 - $1,000

 

$75 - $2,000





 



(Ord. 02-2010, passed 4-20-10; Am. Ord. 02-2011, passed 4-19-11; Am. Ord.
16-2013, passed 11-19-13)



§ 31.72  LIENS; FINES; CHARGES AND FEES.



   (A)   The City of Highland Heights shall, in accordance with KRS
65.8835 possess a lien on property owned by any person found by a final,
nonappealable order of the Board or by a final judgment of a court of law if
the Board’s decision has been appealed, to have committed a violation, or
all fines assessed for the violation, for all charges and fees incurred by
the City of Highland Heights in connection with the enforcement thereof.



   (B)   The lien may be recorded in the office of the County Clerk.
The lien shall be notice to all persons from the time of its recording and
shall bear interest at the legal rate until paid.



   (C)   The lien shall take precedence over all other subsequent
liens, except state, court, school board and city taxes, and may be enforced
by judicial proceedings.



   (D)   In addition to the remedy prescribed in division (A) of this
section the person found to have committed the violation shall be personally
responsible for the amount of all fines assessed for the violation and for
all charges and fees incurred by the city in connection with the enforcement
of the ordinance. The city may bring a civil action against the person and
shall have the same remedies as provided for the recovery of a debt.



(Ord. 02-2010, passed 4-20-10; Am. Ord. 02-2011, passed 4-19-11; Am. Ord.
16-2013, passed 11-19-13)



§ 31.73  STATE STATUTES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   All of the terms and conditions and procedures of KRS 65.8801 to
65.8839 relating to the organization and powers of the Board, enforcement
procedure, appeals and other matters are hereby adopted by the City of
Highland Heights and incorporated herein by reference as if fully rewritten.



(Ord. 02-2010, passed 4-20-10; Am. Ord. 02-2011, passed 4-19-11; Am. Ord.
16-2013, passed 11-19-13)



TREE COMMISSION



§ 31.80  ESTABLISHMENT.



   A Tree Commission is hereby established, to be known as the City of
Highland Heights Tree Commission. The Tree Commission shall consist of seven
(7) members, who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent
of the City Council. In the event the Mayor fails to fill a vacancy on the
Tree Commission within sixty (60) days of said vacancy, the City Council
shall appoint the new member.



(Ord. 02-2019, passed 3-5-19)



§ 31.81  TERMS OF OFFICE.



   The initial Tree Commission shall contain two (2) members appointed for
a term of one (1) year, two (2) members appointed for a term of two (2) years
and, three (3) members appointed for a term of three (3) years. Thereafter,
all subsequent appointments shall be for a term of two (2) years. Members of
the Commission may be appointed for consecutive terms. All members of the
Tree Commission shall serve without compensation.



(Ord. 02-2019, passed 3-5-19)



§ 31.82  VACANCIES.



   Any vacancy occurring by reason of death, resignation, or removal of
any member shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member. The Mayor
may cause removal of a member of the Commission for inefficiency, neglect of
duty, malfeasance, or conflict of interest. Any member of the Tree Commission
removed from office by the Mayor may appeal the removal to the City Council
within thirty (30) days.



(Ord. 02-2019, passed 3-5-19)



§ 31.83  ORGANIZATION.



   The Tree Commission shall organize within thirty (30) days after the
appointment of its initial total membership to adopt by-laws. The Commission
shall annually elect a Chairman, Vice-Chairman, and Secretary who shall be
eligible for re-election at the Commission’s first meeting annually. The
Commission shall meet at least once quarterly and the exact time and date of
said quarterly meeting may be determined by the Commission.



(Ord. 02-2019, passed 3-5-19)



§ 31.84  POWERS AND DUTIES OF COMMISSION.



   The powers and duties of the Tree Commission shall include the
following.



   (A)   Provide public promotion and leadership in facilitating public
awareness of tree conservation, tree protection, and tree planting issues.



   (B)   Landmark trees.



      (1)   Designate and maintain records of landmark trees on city
property, excluding the Nature Trail. A citizen may apply to have a tree on
their property designated as a landmark tree. A tree may qualify as a
landmark tree if it meets one or more of the following criteria:



         (a)   The tree species is rare;



         (b)   The tree is more than one hundred (100) years of
age;



         (c)   The tree has been connected with a significant
historical event;



         (d)   The tree is of an outstanding trunk diameter or
drip line diameter for a tree of its species;



         (e)   The quality of the tree foliage is outstanding for
a tree of its species; or



         (f)   The location, shade value, fragrance, erosion
control, aesthetic features, or scenic enhancement of such tree is of special
importance to the city.



      (2)   All trees designated as landmark trees by the Commission
shall be shown on an official city map with appropriate code marks signifying
each tree's designation, number, species, age, and periodic monitoring.



      (3)   If the owner or owners of the property on which a
landmark tree is located consent thereto, the Commission may identify such
tree as a landmark tree. The owner or owners may choose to have a suitable
marker placed thereon. The cost of the marker shall be underwritten by the
property owner.



      (4)   Prior to the removal of any designated landmark tree,
the Commission may suggest alternate building areas in an effort to preserve
said landmark tree. If and when any landmark tree is removed, the Commission
shall arrange for the necessary changes to be made to the official landmark
tree inventory records and the city map.



   (C)   The Commission shall prepare and submit a list of trees to the
city staff suitable for planting in public right-of-way areas that are
conducive to growth in the Greater Cincinnati region. All trees located on
property owned by the city or on a public right-of-way shall be maintained by
the city. The Commission may be consulted with regard to the selection,
location, and planting of trees that are to be placed on city property or
right-of-way. When consulted, the Commission shall check to ensure no
underground utilities exist in the area where a tree is to be planted.



   (D)   (1)   The Commission shall bring to the attention of the
city staff any tree on city property that represents a threat to public
safety when such tree is dead or dying and its presence would cause hardship
or endanger the public or an adjoining property owner. The Commission shall
also notify the city when a tree on city property is diseased or infested so
as to be a danger to other trees within the city. Further, the staff shall be
notified by the Commission when a tree is considered a hazard because it
obstructs the view of motor vehicle operations or otherwise interferes with
traffic or pedestrian safety. In the event the complete removal of a tree is
not required, it may be pruned pursuant to the requirements contained herein.



      (2)   Members of the Commission will participate in the review
and development of the city's comprehensive plan. Whenever development is to
occur on city property affecting trees, members of the Commission are
encouraged to attend the Planning and Zoning meetings and make
recommendations to the city that will minimize the impact on said trees. Tree
Commission recommendations should encourage tree conservation whenever
practical, or provide advice as to when tree removal is more feasible. In
determining whether tree removal may be necessary, the Commission should
consider:



         (a)   Whether the presence of such tree would cause
hardship or endanger the public or an adjoining property owner;



         (b)   Whether such tree is located in an area to be
occupied by buildings, driveways, recreation areas, or other construction or
within the drip line of a tree; and



         (c)   Whether such tree is located in an area to have a
cut or fill of land that may be injurious or dangerous to such tree.



   (E)   Any public utility serving the city with overhead services
shall have the right to remove trees on city property, without the prior
approval of the city, only when an emergency exists and when obtaining the
prior approval of the city and/or Tree Commission is not practical. All
public utilities with overhead services shall coordinate all non-emergency
tree trimming activities with the city staff and/or Tree Commission that are
reasonably required for the purpose of providing the appropriate utility
service or to avoid danger to the public, overhead utility personnel, or
equipment pursuant to the requirements contained in the franchise agreements
as authorized by the City Council of the city. Any other person(s) or firm,
except the public utility with overhead lines having line clearing operations
(tree trimming) done by them or, for them by any person(s) or firm shall
first obtain written approval from the city and/or Tree Commission. Any
person may appeal a decision of the Tree Commission regarding a tree removal
request to the City Council. Such appeal shall be made in writing and
received by the City Clerk within the time frame for appeal as stated herein.
The City Council, in the consideration of any appeal, will give much
deference to the decision of the Tree Commission and will render a decision,
to a large extent, based upon an examination of the minutes, records, and
proceedings of the Commission. The City Council shall act upon all appeals
within thirty (30) days from the date of the appeal.



(Ord. 02-2019, passed 3-5-19)



§ 31.85  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, organization, or corporation who violates any of the
provisions of this subchapter shall be guilty, upon conviction, of a Class B
misdemeanor in accordance with the Kentucky Revised Statues. Each day of
continuous violation with any of the provisions contained herein shall be
considered a separate offense and shall be punishable accordingly.



(Ord. 02-2019, passed 3-5-19)



CHAPTER 32:  EMPLOYEE REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   32.01   Holidays



   32.02   [Reserved]



   32.03   Longevity pay



   32.04   [Reserved]



   32.05   Hazardous duty county retirement system



   32.06   Salary pay range scale adopted by reference



Cross-reference:



   Code of Ethics, see Ch. 37



Affirmative Action Program



   32.20   Policy



   32.21   Personnel actions



   32.22   Work force utilization; goals and timetables



   32.23   Responsibility for implementation



   32.24   Evaluation and reports



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 32.01  HOLIDAYS.



   (A)   The city holiday schedule is to be governed by executive order
as issued by the Mayor.



(Ord. 8-88, passed 4-28-88; Am. Ord. 39-89, passed 10-12-89; Am. Ord. 2-94,
passed 1-13-94)



   (B)   When Christmas Eve falls on a Saturday or Sunday, the office
will be closed on the Friday before the holiday.  When New Year's Eve falls
on a Saturday or Sunday, the office will be open on the Friday before the
holiday.



('81 Code, § 230.3, § X)



§ 32.02  [RESERVED].



§ 32.03  LONGEVITY PAY.



   (A)   All full-time employees employed by the city, that remain
employed beyond the period set forth below, are to receive a one-time bonus
payment each time they reach a designated number of years of employment with
the city.  Such one-time payment shall be considered a longevity bonus and
shall be paid according to the following schedule:



      (1)   If the full-time employee remains employed as a
full-time employee with the city for more than three years after the date of
his initial employment, the employee shall receive a three hundred dollars
($300.00) longevity bonus;



      (2)   If the full-time employee remains employed as a
full-time employee with the city for more than five years after the date of
his initial employment, the employee shall receive a five hundred dollars
($500.00) longevity bonus;



      (3)   If the full-time employee remains employed as a
full-time employee with the city for more than seven years after the date of
his initial employment, the employee shall receive a seven hundred dollars
($700.00) longevity bonus;



      (4)   If the full-time employee remains employed as a
full-time employee with the city for more than ten years after the date of
his initial employment, the employee shall receive a one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) longevity bonus;



      (5)   If the full-time employee remains employed as a
full-time employee with the city for more than 15 years after the date of his
initial employment, the employee shall receive a one thousand five hundred
dollars ($1,500.00) longevity bonus;



      (6)   If the full-time employee remains employed as a
full-time employee with the city for more than 20 years after the date of his
initial employment, the employee shall receive a two thousand dollars
($2,000.00) longevity bonus;



      (7)   If the full-time employee remains employed as a
full-time employee with the city for more than 25 years after the date of his
initial employment, the employee shall receive a two thousand five hundred
dollars ($2,500.00) longevity bonus;



      (8)   If the full-time employee remains employed as a
full-time employee with the city for more than 30 years after the date of his
initial employment, the employee shall receive a three thousand dollars
($3,000.00) longevity bonus;



   (B)   Full-time employees currently employed by the city shall be
given credit for the number of years they have been employed as a full-time
employee for the city.



(Ord. 7-90, passed 3-22-90)



§ 32.04  [RESERVED].



§ 32.05  HAZARDOUS DUTY COUNTY RETIREMENT SYSTEM.



   (A)   Effective July 1, 1988, all employees of the Police Department
will transfer from the existing nonhazardous duty county employees retirement
system to the county retirement system for hazardous duty.



   (B)   Contributions to the system will be paid as follows:



      (1)   Fourteen percent of gross wages of employees to be paid
by employer; and



      (2)   Seven percent of gross wages to be paid by employee.



   (C)   The city shall comply with all the statutory requirements to
make the C.E.R.S. Hazardous Duty available for all employees of the Police
Department.



(Ord. 9-88, passed 5-12-88)



§ 32.06  SALARY PAY RANGE SCALE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The most current version of the city's salary pay range scale is hereby
adopted by reference and made a part of this code as if set out at length
herein.



(Am. Ord. 04-2002, passed 8-6-02; Am. Ord. 05-2003, passed 1-21-03; Am. Ord.
15-2003, passed 6-17-03; Am. Ord. 08-2004, passed 7-20-04; Am. Ord. 07-2005,
passed 6-21-05; Am. Ord. 05-2006, passed 8-15-06; Am. Ord. 11-2006, passed
9-19-06; Am. Ord. 02-2007, passed 3-20-07; Am. Ord. 05- 2007, passed 6-19-07;
Am. Ord. 09-2008, passed 6-17-08; Am. Ord. 05-2010, passed 6-15-10; Am. Ord.
10-2014, passed 11-18-14; Am. Ord. 06-2016, passed 6-21-16; Am. Ord. 05-2017,
passed 12-5- 17)



AFFIRMATIVE ACTION PROGRAM



§ 32.20  POLICY.



   (A)   The affirmative action policy of the city is to promote equal
employment opportunity; to prohibit discrimination in employment on account
of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, or handicapped status;
and to bring about a fair representation and utilization of females and
minorities on all levels of the city employment.



('81 Code, § 230.1, § 1)



   (B)   The city will advise all employees and applicants for
employment of this policy and will post it in a conspicuous place.  The city
will make known to the public that employment opportunities are available on
the basis of individual ability and will encourage all persons who are
employed by the city to strive for advancement on that basis.



('81 Code, § 230.1, § 2)



§ 32.21  PERSONNEL ACTIONS.



   The city will actively recruit qualified or qualifiable persons among
females and minorities on a nondiscriminatory basis for all available job
openings at every level; and the city will ensure every employee equal
treatment in respect to terms and conditions of employment, job assignments,
compensation, access to training and promotions.



('81 Code, § 230.1, § 3)



§ 32.22  WORK FORCE UTILIZATION; GOALS AND TIMETABLES.



   The city will analyze the utilization of females and minorities in its
workforce and compare it with the utilization by all employers in the county
according to the latest official census.  The goal of the city is to bring
about comparable utilization in all categories within the next five (5) years.



('81 Code, § 230.1, § 4)



§ 32.23  RESPONSIBILITY FOR IMPLEMENTATION.



   The Mayor shall be responsible for implementation of this Affirmative
Action Plan, including maintenance of the workforce analysis and job roster
and hearing complaints of discrimination by any employees or prospective
employees of the city, with a final appeal to the City Council.



('81 Code, § 230.1, § 5)



§ 32.24  EVALUATION AND REPORTS.



   The person given responsibility for implementation of this Plan shall
examine its operation periodically and shall report the progress being made,
together with recommendations for improvement in the Plan, to the City
Council at least once every year.



('81 Code, § 230.1, § 6)



CHAPTER 33:  FINANCE AND REVENUE



Section



Financial Administration



   33.01   Definitions



   33.02   Accounting records and financial reports



   33.03   Annual budget



   33.04   Annual audit



   33.05   Deposit of receipts; disbursement of funds



   33.06   Municipal aid funds



Improvements



   33.10   Definitions



   33.11   Financing of improvements



   33.12   Apportionment of cost



   33.13   Comprehensive report required



   33.14   Public hearing required



   33.15   Adoption of ordinance; notice to affected owners



   33.16   Affected owner may contest



   33.17   When city may proceed; assessment constitutes lien



   33.18   Effect of additional property or change in financing



Purchasing and Contracts



   33.35   Contracts



   33.36   Procurement procedures



FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION



§ 33.01  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this subchapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the
following definitions shall apply: 



   BUDGET.  A proposed plan for raising and spending money for specified
programs, functions, activities, or objectives during a fiscal year.



   DEBT SERVICE.  The sum of money required to pay installments of
principal and interest on bonds, notes, and other evidences of debt accruing
within a fiscal year and to maintain sinking funds.



   ENCUMBRANCES.     Obligations in the form of purchase orders or
contracts that are chargeable to an appropriation.  An obligation ceases to
be an encumbrance when paid or when the actual liability is recorded.



   FISCAL YEAR.  The accounting period for the administration of fiscal
operations.



   GENERALLY ACCEPTED GOVERNMENTAL AUDITING STANDARDS.     Those
standards for audit of governmental organizations, programs, activities and
functions issued by the Comptroller General of the United States.



(KRS 91A.010(6))



   GENERALLY ACCEPTED PRINCIPLES OF GOVERNMENTAL ACCOUNTING.   Those
standards and procedures promulgated and recognized by the Governmental
Accounting Standards Board.



(KRS 91A.010(7)



§ 33.02  ACCOUNTING RECORDS AND FINANCIAL REPORTS.



   (A)   The city shall keep its accounting records and render
financial reports in such a way as to:



      (1)   Determine compliance with statutory provisions; and



      (2)   Determine fairly and with full disclosure the financial
operations of constituent funds and account groups of the city in conformity
with generally accepted governmental accounting principles



   (B)   The municipal accounting system shall be organized and
operated on a fund basis.



(KRS 91A.020)



§ 33.03  ANNUAL BUDGET.



   (A)   The City Council shall enact an ordinance setting out the
budget guidelines.



   (B)   The preparation of the city budget shall be the responsibility
of the Mayor who shall submit a proposed budget to the City Council not later
than 30 days prior to the beginning of the fiscal year of the city which
shall be accompanied by a budget message containing the following:



      (1)   An explanation of the governmental goals fixed by the
budget for the coming fiscal year;



      (2)   An explanation of the important features of the
activities anticipated in the budget;



      (3)   The reasons for stated changes from the previous year in
program goals, programs and appropriation levels; and



      (4)   An  explanation of any major changes in fiscal policy.



   (C)   The City Council shall adopt the budget as an ordinance in any
form most efficient in enabling it to make necessary fiscal policy decisions
and, generally, consistent with the budget format as shown in Appendix A of
this Code, and the said budget as may be changed from that as submitted by
the Mayor in its proposed form shall be adopted in the same manner as
provided for other ordinances, except that, the ordinance when enacted shall
be published in full and shall be maintained and indexed by fiscal year,
separate from other ordinances.



('81 Code, § 220.1)



§ 33.04  ANNUAL AUDIT.



   (A)   The examination of the city's financial reports and records
shall be performed by an independent public accountant as soon as practicable
after the close of each fiscal year but not later than February 1 immediately
following the fiscal year being audited.



   (B)   The auditor shall be required to:



      (1)   Examine the balance sheets of all governmental,
proprietary and fiduciary funds.



      (2)   Include in the annual audit an examination of local
government economic assistance funds granted to the city under KRS 42.450 to
42.495.  The auditor shall include a certification with the annual audit
report that the funds were expended for the purposes intended.



      (3)   Conduct the audit in accordance with generally accepted
governmental auditing standards and if the audit is to cover the use of state
or federal funds, appropriate state or federal guidelines shall be used.



      (4)   Prepare a typed or printed report with his opinions and
embodying the city's financial statements.



      (5)   Express an opinion over whether the financial statements
present fairly the financial condition of the city or his reason why they do
not.



      (6)   Provide two additional copies of the audit to be sent to
the Department for Local Government for information purposes.



      (7)   The audit shall be published in summary form in the
Campbell County News not later than 30 days after the completion of the audit.



('81 Code, § 250.0)



§ 33.05  DEPOSIT OF RECEIPTS; DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS.



   (A)   All receipts from any source of city money or money for which
the city is responsible which has not been otherwise invested or deposited in
a manner authorized by law, shall be deposited in those banks or federally
insured savings and loan companies which have been designated by the Mayor as
the city's official depositories.



('81 Code, § 240.3)



   (B)   All city funds shall be disbursed by written authorization
approved by the Mayor, or his designate, which shall state the name of the
person to whom funds are payable, the purpose of the payment, and the fund
out of which the funds are payable.  Each authorization shall be numbered
and recorded.



('81 Code, § 240.4)



§ 33.06  MUNICIPAL AID FUNDS.



   (A)   On or before March 31 each year, there shall be a public
hearing to take the sense of the public with regard to road and bridge
matters which may be included in the City's Municipal Road Aid Fund Program
for the remaining portion of the calendar year.



   (B)   At least two weeks before March 31 each year, the Mayor or his
designate shall prepare and submit to each member of City Council a detailed
listing of all proposed projects to be included in the forthcoming year's
Municipal Road Aid Fund Program.



   (C)   Subsequent to the public hearing and before such road aid
funds are spent, Council shall pass a resolution specifically identifying
those projects which shall become a part of the year's Municipal Road Aid
Fund Program.



   (D)   No project which was not specifically identified for
discussion at the public hearing may become a part of the Municipal Road Aid
Fund Program unless a new public hearing is first held with regard to any
such additional project and the resolution of Council is amended to include
such project.



   (E)   Notice of the public hearing shall be given not less than
seven (7) days nor more than twenty-one (21) days before the scheduled date
of the public hearing.  No expenditure of road aid funds for any such
project as then identified may be made sooner than forty-five (45) days after
notice of the public hearing relating to such project.



   (F)   The funds received under this Program may only be spent for
allowable uses consistent with the requirements of this section and all
applicable state statutes and shall be deposited in a separate account not
within the general fund entitled Municipal Road Aid Funds in an official
depository as identified by the Mayor.  And, all records of the expenditure
of such funds as therein deposited shall be retained for a period of five
years and available at all such times for audit by the Kentucky Department of
Finance.



   (G)   The provisions of this section relating to notice and specific
project identification shall not apply to emergency repairs or replacement of
roads or bridges necessitated by natural or man-caused disaster, nor to
street cleaning or snow removal operations.



('81 Code, § 220.2)



IMPROVEMENTS



§ 33.10  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this subchapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the
following definitions shall apply:



   ASSESSED VALUE BASIS.   The apportionment of cost of an improvement
according to the ratio the assessed value of individual parcels of property
bears to the total assessed value of all such properties.



   BENEFITS RECEIVED BASIS.   The apportionment of cost of an improvement
according to equitable determination by Council of the special benefit
received by property from the improvement, including assessed value basis,
front foot basis, and square foot basis, or any combination thereof, and may
include consideration of assessed value of land only, graduation for
different classes of property based on nature and extent of special benefits
received, and other factors affecting benefits received.



   COST.   All costs related to an improvement, including planning,
design, property or easement acquisition and construction costs, fiscal and
legal fees, financing costs, and publication expenses.



   FAIR BASIS.   Assessed value basis, front foot basis, square foot
basis, or benefits received basis.



   FRONT FOOT BASIS.   The apportionment of cost of an improvement
according to the ratio the front footage on the improvement of individual
parcels of property bears to such front footage of all such properties.



   IMPROVEMENT.   Construction of any facility for public use or services
or any addition thereto, which is of special benefit to specific properties
in the area served by such facility.



   PROPERTY.   Any real property benefited by an improvement.



   SPECIAL ASSESSMENT or ASSESSMENT.   A special charge fixed on property
to finance an improvement in whole or in part.



   SQUARE FOOT BASIS.   The apportionment of cost of an improvement
according to the ratio the square footage of individual parcels of property
bears to the square footage of all such property.



(KRS 91A.210)



§ 33.11  FINANCING OF IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   The city may not finance any improvements in whole or in part
through special assessments except as provided in this subchapter and in any
applicable statutes.



(KRS 91A.200)



   (B)   Pursuant to KRS 91A.220(2) the City Council hereby establishes
the procedure for determining the cost of an improvement which shall be
apportioned on a fair basis.  The basis shall be the "Benefits Received
Basis" as defined in KRS 91A.210.



(Ord. 13-83, passed 5-12-83)



   (C)   The city may provide for lump sum or installment payment of
assessments or for bond or other long-term financing, and for any improvement
may afford property owners the option as to method of payment or financing.



(KRS 91A.220)



§ 33.12  APPORTIONMENT OF COST.



   The cost of any improvement shall be apportioned on a benefits received
basis with respect to any property owned by the state, a local unit of
government, or any educational, religious, or charitable organization. 
Council may assess such property in the same manner as for privately owned
property or it may pay the costs so apportioned out of general revenues.



(KRS 91A.230)



§ 33.13  COMPREHENSIVE REPORT REQUIRED.



   Before undertaking any improvements pursuant to this subchapter, the
city shall prepare a comprehensive report setting out:



   (A)   The nature of the improvement;



   (B)   The scope and the extent of the improvement, including the
boundaries or other description of the area to be assessed;



   (C)   The preliminary estimated cost of the improvement;



   (D)   The fair basis of assessment proposed;



   (E)   If financing of assessments if provided, the proposed method,
including the proposed years to maturity of any bonds to be issued in
connection with the improvement; and



   (F)   Such other information as may further explain material aspects
of the improvement, assessments, or financing.



(KRS 91A.240)



§ 33.14  PUBLIC HEARING REQUIRED.



   After preparation of the report required by § 33.13, the city shall
hold at least one public hearing on the proposed improvement at which all
interested persons shall be heard. Notice of the hearing shall be published
pursuant to KRS Chapter 424, and mailed to each affected property owner by
certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall include:



   (A)   The nature of the improvement;



   (B)   Description of area of the improvement;



   (C)   Statement that the city proposes to finance the improvement in
whole or in part by special assessment of property and the method to be used;



   (D)   Time and place the report may be examined; and



   (E)   Time and place of the hearing.



(KRS 91A.250)



§ 33.15  ADOPTION OF ORDINANCE; NOTICE TO AFFECTED OWNERS.



   Within ninety (90) days of conclusion of the hearing, the city shall
determine whether to proceed with the improvement by special assessments, and
if it determines to proceed shall adopt an ordinance so stating and
containing all necessary terms, including the items referred to in § 33.13
and a description of all properties.  Promptly upon passage the city shall
publish such ordinance pursuant to KRS Chapter 424 and shall mail by
certified mail to each affected property owner a notice of determination to
proceed with the project, the fair basis of assessment to be utilized, the
estimated cost to the property owner, and the ratio the cost to each property
owner bears to the total cost of the entire project.



(KRS 91A.260)



§ 33.16  AFFECTED OWNER MAY CONTEST.



   (A)   Within thirty (30) days of the mailing of the notice provided
for in § 33.15, any affected property owner may file an action in the
circuit court of the county, contesting the undertaking of the project by
special assessment, the inclusion of his property in the improvement, or the
amount of his assessment.  If the action contests the undertaking of the
improvement by the special assessment method of the inclusion of the property
of that property owner, no further action on the improvement insofar as it
relates to any property owner who is a plaintiff shall be taken until the
final judgment has been entered.



   (B)   The city may proceed with the improvement with respect to any
properties whose owners have not filed or joined in an action as provided in
this section or who have contested only the amounts of their assessments, and
the provisions of the resolution are final and binding with respect to such
property owners except as to contested amount of assessments.  After the
lapse of time as herein provided, all actions by owners of properties are
forever barred.



(KRS 91A.270)



§ 33.17  WHEN CITY MAY PROCEED; ASSESSMENT CONSTITUTES LIEN.



   (A)   After the passage of time for the action provided for in §
33.16, or after favorable final judgment in any such action, whichever comes
later, the city may proceed with the improvement or part thereof stayed by
the action, including notice requiring payment of special assessment or
installment thereon and bonds or other method proposed to finance the
improvement. The first installment may be apportioned so that other payments
will coincide with payment of ad valorem taxes.



   (B)   The amount of any outstanding assessment or installments
thereof on any property, and accrued interest and other charges, constitutes
a lien on the property to secure payment to the bondholders or any other
source of financing of the improvement.  The lien takes precedence over all
other liens, whether created prior to or subsequent to the publication of the
ordinance, except a lien for state and county taxes, general municipal taxes,
and prior improvement taxes, and is not defeated or postponed by any private
or judicial sale, by any mortgage, or by any error or mistake in the
description of the property or in the names of the owners.  No error in the
proceedings of the Council shall exempt any benefited property from the lien
for the improvement assessment, or from payment thereof, or from the
penalties or interest thereon, as herein provided.



(KRS 91A.280)



§ 33.18  EFFECT OF ADDITIONAL PROPERTY OR CHANGE IN FINANCING.



   The city may undertake any further proceedings to carry out the
improvement or any extension or refinancing thereof, except that §§ 33.13
through 33.17 applies if additional property is included in the improvement
or if change is made in the method or period of financing; but additional
property may be included in the improvement with the consent of the owner
thereof without compliance with other sections if it does not increase the
cost apportioned to any other property, or any other change maybe made
without such compliance if all property owners of the improvement consent.



(KRS 91A.290)



PURCHASING AND CONTRACTS



§ 33.35  CONTRACTS.



   (A)   No contract shall bind or be obligatory upon the city unless
first authorized or approved by the City Council by written ordinance or
resolution duly passed and enacted.



   (B)   Every contract of the city shall be authorized or approved by
the City Council, signed by the chief executive, and witnessed by the City
Clerk-Treasurer.



   (C)   No contract or purchase shall be made which is at variance
with the annual budget as amended.



   (D)   No contract authorized, approved or enacted for a term greater
than the two-year term of City Council or as it remains at the time of
execution of any such contract.



('81 Code, § 240.1)



§ 33.36  PROCUREMENT PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Delegation of responsibility.  The City Administrative
Officer is responsible for performance and administration of the procurement
function of all goods and services for the city.



   (B)   Initiation of purchase.  When any department of the city
recognizes the need for goods or services, an authorized representative from
that department shall sign and submit a purchase requisition to the City
Administrative Officer requesting such goods or services stating in writing
the purpose and intended use of the goods or services requested, its
estimated cost, when the goods or services will be needed, whether any such
goods as requested are presently in inventory, and any other information
which the City Administrative Officer may require.



   (C)   Procurement requirements.  Purchases will be handled in the
following manner:



      (1)   Amounts of one dollar ($1) to five hundred dollars
($500) are purchased by one or more telephone quotations; and noted on a
purchase order.



      (2)   Amounts of five hundred one dollars ($501) to one
thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500) are purchased by telephone after three
inquiries have been made.  Notations of vendor's price, terms and delivery
are made on the purchase order.



      (3)   Amounts of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500) to
ten thousand dollars ($10,000) a price quotation sheet is mailed to a list of
vendors.  The quotation sheet is also posted on the bulletin board located
in the city office.  Vendors are given seven (7) days to return these
sheets.  Vendors may submit written quotations as asked in some cases
eliminating the need to mail quotations.



      (4)   Purchases in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000)
shall be let by competitive bidding.  An advertisement to bid shall be
published in the local newspaper not less than seven (7) days nor more than
twenty-one (21) days prior to bid opening date.  A notice of the invitation
to bid is also posted on the bulletin board located at the city office.  All
bids must be sealed and stamped-in by the City Administrative Officer or City
Clerk-Treasurer by 1:00 p.m. on the date of opening.



   (D)   Sealed bidding procedures.



      (1)   The agency, department, official or person requiring a
contract or purchase from city funds not otherwise covered by small purchase
procedures shall submit to the City Administrative Officer a written request
containing specifications, quantities and delivery desired.



      (2)   The City Administrative Officer shall examine the
request and approve or reject it.  If the request is approved, the City
Administrative Officer shall set a maximum amount to be expended and any
evaluation factors to be considered in bid selection.



      (3)   The City Clerk-Treasurer shall place an appropriate
advertisement in the newspaper and shall open all bids publicly at the time
and place stated in the advertisement.



      (4)   The City Clerk-Treasurer shall submit all responsive
bids to the City Council which shall select the lowest or the lowest
evaluated bid by a qualified bidder.  The City Clerk-Treasurer shall notify
all bidders of the award.



      (5)   The Mayor shall sign a contract or issue a purchase
order with the one receiving the award.



   (E)   Emergency procurement procedures.



      (1)   Negotiated procedures may be used instead of sealed bids
when the amount exceeds ten thousand dollars ($10,000) when the Mayor makes a
written determination that:



         (a)   An emergency exists which will result in danger to
health, safety or property; or



         (b)   The contract is for professional services; or



         (c)   All bids received exceed the amount budgeted.



      (2)   Three copies of the determination shall be submitted to
the City Administrative Officer who shall request such copies to be filed
pursuant to clerical procedures of this section.



      (3)   When the prerequisites have been met for the use of the
negotiated procedures, the Mayor or his designee shall proceed to negotiate
with one or more suppliers in order to obtain the most advantageous terms.



      (4)   The best negotiated proposal shall be submitted to the
City Council for approval, and the City Clerk-Treasurer shall notify the
person awarded the contract.



      (5)   The City Clerk-Treasurer shall prepare a record of all
negotiated contracts, showing the items and quantities acquired, name of
suppliers, cost and date of each contract.



   (F)   Clerical procedures.  The clerical procedures which shall be
followed upon the initiation of any purchase under this section shall include
the following steps:



      (1)   The requesting department will submit a written request
to the City Administrative Officer.  Only authorized personnel may make
written requests.



      (2)   The City Administrative Officer will review the request
and determine the availability of funds.  If funds are available, the City
Administrative Officer will approve the request and assign the correct
account number to the purchase order, which will be obtained from the City
Clerk-Treasurer.  If funds are not available, the request will be returned
to the requesting department along with an explanation as to why the request
was rejected.  Should this result, the request may be submitted to the full
City Council for consideration.



      (3)   (a)   The City Administrative Officer will prepare
three copies of the city's purchase order.



            1.   For the vendor.



            2.   For the City Clerk-Treasurer.



            3.   For the requesting department.



         (b)   The City Administrative Officer will then forward
the purchase order along with the original request and supporting
documentation to the City Clerk-Treasurer for distribution.



      (4)   The City Clerk-Treasurer will enter the anticipated
expenditure for purchases in the appropriate ledger in pencil.



      (5)   The vendor will submit the invoices to the City
Clerk-Treasurer.



      (6)   The City Clerk-Treasurer will match the invoices against
the purchase order and if all match, the invoice and purchase order will be
placed in the proper file along with the supporting documentation, and will
be presented to the City Council for approval.  If there is a discrepancy
the City Administrative Officer will be consulted for clarification and
advisement.



      (7)   The Council must review the invoices and other
documentation and give final approval for payment.  All expenditures must be
approved by the majority vote of Council.



      (8)   After approval of Council is obtained, the City
Clerk-Treasurer will issue a check covering the expenditure and will enter
the actual amount of the expenditure in the appropriate ledge corresponding
to the account number that has been assigned.  The City Clerk-Treasurer will
file the purchase order and related documentation along with a copy of the
check in the appropriate file.  Should an expenditure not be approved, the
Council will instruct the City Clerk-Treasurer of what action should be taken.



('81 Code, § 240.2)



CHAPTER 34:  PUBLIC RECORDS



Section



General



   34.01   Definitions



Procedures for Requesting Public Records



   34.05   Initial request with immediate inspection



   34.06   Referral to proper custodian



   34.07   Public records not immediately available



   34.08   Refusal of unreasonable requests



   34.09   Time limitation; denial of inspection



   34.10   Concealing or destroying records prohibited



   34.11   Access to records relating to particular individual



   34.12   Format of copies



   34.13   Fees for copies



   34.14   Misstatement of purpose prohibited



   34.15   Online access to public records in electronic form



   34.16   Public records protected from disclosure



   34.17   Notification of the Attorney General



GENERAL



§ 34.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.



   CITY.  The city government of this city.



   COMMERCIAL PURPOSE. The direct or indirect use of any part of a public
record or records, in any form, for sale, resale, solicitation, rent, or
lease of a service, or any use by which the user expects a profit either
through commission, salary, or fee.  COMMERCIAL PURPOSE shall not include:



      (1)   Publication or related use of a public record by a
newspaper or periodical;



      (2)   Use of a public record by a radio or television station
in its news or other informational programs; or



      (3)   Use of a public record in the preparation for
prosecution or defense of litigation, or claims settlement by the parties to
such action, or the attorneys representing the parties.



   CUSTODIAN.  The official custodian or any authorized person having
personal custody and control of public records.  The CUSTODIAN having
personal custody of most of the public records of this city is the City
Clerk-Treasurer.



   MECHANICAL PROCESSING.  Any operation or other procedure which is
transacted on a machine, and which may include, but is not limited to a
copier, computer, recorder or tape processor, or other automated device.



   MEDIA.  The physical material in or on which records may be stored or
represented, and which may include, but is not limited to paper, microform,
disks, diskettes, optical disks, magnetic tapes, and cards.



   OFFICIAL CUSTODIAN.  The chief administrative officer or any other
officer or employee of a public agency who is responsible for the
maintenance, care and keeping of public records, regardless of whether such
records are in his actual personal custody and control.  The OFFICIAL
CUSTODIAN of this city shall be the Mayor.



   PERSON.  A human being who makes a request for inspection of public
records.



   PRESCRIBED FEE or FEE.  The fair payment required by the city for
making copies of public records and for mailing public records, which shall
not exceed the actual cost thereof and shall not include the cost of required
staff time.



   PUBLIC AGENCY.   Every city governmental board, commission, and
authority; every city council and council board, commission and committee;
every school district board, special district board, and municipal
corporation; every city governmental agency, including the policy making
board of an institution of education created by or pursuant to state or local
statute, executive order, ordinance, resolution, or other legislative act;
any body created by or pursuant to state or local statute, executive order,
ordinance, resolution, or other legislative act in the legislative or
executive branch of government; any entity when the majority of its governing
body is appointed by a "public agency", as defined by this section; a member
or employee of a "public agency", a state or local officer, or any
combination thereof; any board, commission, committee, subcommittee, ad hoc
committee, advisory committee, council or agency, except for a committee of a
hospital medical staff or a committee formed for the purpose of evaluating
the qualifications of public agency employees, established, created, or
controlled by a "public agency" as defined in this section; an interagency
body of two (2) or more public agencies where each "public agency" is defined
in this section.



(KRS 61.870)



   PUBLIC RECORDS.   All books, papers, maps, photographs, cards, tapes,
discs, diskettes, recordings, software, or other documentation regardless of
physical form or characteristics, which are prepared, owned, used, in the
possession of or retained by public agency.  PUBLIC RECORDS shall not
include any records owned or maintained by or for the public agency that are
not related to functions, activities, programs, or operations funded by the
public agency nor any records that may be excluded by § 34.16.



   REASONABLE FEE OR FEE.   The fair payment required by a public agency
for making copies of non-exempt public records requested for noncommercial
purposes which shall not exceed the actual cost of reproduction, including
the costs of the media and any mechanical processing cost incurred by the
public agency, but not including the cost of staff.  If a public agency is
asked to produce a record in a nonstandardized format, or to tailor the
format to meet the request of an individual or a group, the public agency may
at its discretion provide the requested format and recover staff costs as
well as any actual costs incurred.



   REQUEST.   An oral or written application by any person to inspect
public records of the agency.



   SOFTWARE.   The program code which makes a computer system function,
but does not include that portion of the program code which contains public
records exempted from inspection as provided by KRS 61.878 or specific
addresses of files, passwords, access codes, user identifications, or any
other mechanism for controlling the security or restricting access to public
records in the public agency's computer system.  SOFTWARE consists of the
operating system, application programs, procedures, routines, and subroutines
such as translators and utility programs, but does not include that material
which is prohibited from disclosure or copying by a license agreement between
a public agency and an outside entity which supplied the material to the
agency.



(KRS 61.870)



PROCEDURES FOR REQUESTING PUBLIC RECORDS



§ 34.05  INITIAL REQUEST WITH IMMEDIATE INSPECTION.



   (A)   Any person desiring to inspect or copy the public records of
this city shall make a request for inspection at the office of the City
Clerk-Treasurer during regular office hours, except during legal holidays. 
The official custodian, or the custodian acting under the authority of the
official custodian, may require a request to inspect public records to be in
writing, signed by the applicant and with the applicant's name printed
legibly on the application.  A written request to inspect public records may
be presented by hand delivery, mail or via facsimile, if one is available.



   (B)   If the custodian determines that a person's request is in
compliance with this chapter and the open records law, and the requested
public records are immediately available, the custodian shall deliver the
records for inspection.  A person may inspect public records at the
designated office of the city during the regular office hours, or in
appropriate cases, by receiving copies of the records through the mail.



   (C)   If the public records are to be inspected at the offices of
the city, suitable facilities shall be made available in the office of the
City Clerk-Treasurer or in another office of the city as determined by the
official custodian or custodian for the inspection.  No person shall remove
original copies of public records from the offices of the city without the
written permission of the official custodian of the record.  When public
records are inspected at the city offices, the person inspecting the records
shall have the right to make abstracts and memoranda of the public records
and to obtain copies of all written public records.  When copies are
requested, the custodian may require advance payment of the prescribed fee.



   (D)   Upon proper request, the city shall mail copies of the public
records to a person whose residence or principal place of business is located
outside of the county after the person precisely describes the public records
which are readily available and after the person pays in advance the
prescribed fee.



§ 34.06  REFERRAL TO PROPER CUSTODIAN.



   If the City Clerk-Treasurer  does not have custody or control of the
public record or records requested, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall so notify
the applicant and shall furnish the name and location of the official
custodian of the agency's public records.



(KRS 61.872(4))



§ 34.07  PUBLIC RECORDS NOT IMMEDIATELY AVAILABLE.



   If the public record is in active use, in storage, or not otherwise
available, the official custodian shall immediately so notify the applicant
and shall designate a place, time, and date for inspection or mailing of the
public records, not to exceed three (3) days (excepting Saturdays, Sundays,
and legal holidays) from receipt of the application, unless a detailed
explanation of the cause is given for further delay and the place, time, and
earliest date on which the public record will be available for inspection or
duplication.



(KRS 61.872(5))



§ 34.08  REFUSAL OF UNREASONABLE REQUESTS.



   If the application places an unreasonable burden in producing public
records, or if the custodian has reason to believe that repeated requests are
intended to disrupt other essential functions of the public agency, the
official custodian may refuse to permit inspection of the public records or
mail copies thereof.  However, refusal under this section must be sustained
by clear and convincing evidence.



(KRS 61.872(6))



§ 34.09  TIME LIMITATION; DENIAL OF INSPECTION.



   The official custodian, upon any request for records made under this
chapter, shall determine within three (3) days (excepting Saturdays, Sundays
and legal holidays) after the receipt of any request whether to comply with
the request and shall notify in writing the person making the request within
the three-day period of its decision.  Any agency response denying, in whole
or in part, inspection of any record shall include a statement of the
specific exception authorizing the withholding of the record and a brief
explanation of how the exception applies to the record withheld.  The
response shall be issued by the official custodian or under his authority and
shall constitute final agency action. 



(KRS 61.880)



§ 34.10  CONCEALING OR DESTROYING RECORDS PROHIBITED.



   No official of the city shall willfully conceal or destroy any records
with the intent to violate the provisions of this chapter or these rules and
regulations.



§ 34.11  ACCESS TO RECORDS RELATING TO PARTICULAR INDIVIDUAL.



   Any person shall have access to any public records relating to him or
in which he is mentioned by name, upon presentation of appropriate
identification, subject to the provisions of § 34.12 of these rules and
regulations.



(KRS 61.884)



§ 34.12  FORMAT OF COPIES.



   (A)   Upon inspection, the applicant shall have the right to make
abstracts of the public records and memoranda thereof, and to obtain copies
of all public records not exempted by the terms of § 34.16.  When copies
are requested, the custodian may require a written request and advance
payment of the prescribed fee, including postage where appropriate.  If the
applicant desires copies of public records other than written records, the
custodian of the records shall duplicate the records or permit the applicant
to duplicate the records; however, the custodian shall ensure that such
duplication will not damage or alter the original records.



   (B)   (1)   Nonexempt public records used for noncommercial
purposes shall be available for copying in either standard electronic or
standard hard copy format, as designated by the party requesting the records,
where the agency currently maintains the records in electronic format. 
Nonexempt public records used for noncommercial purposes shall be copied in
standard hard copy format where agencies currently maintain records in hard
copy format.  Agencies are not required to convert hard copy format records
to electronic formats.



      (2)   The minimum standard format in paper form shall be
defined as not less than 8 1/2 inches X 11 inches in at least one color on
white paper, or for electronic format, in a flat file electronic American
Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII) format.  If the public
agency maintains electronic public records in a format other than ASCII, and
this format conforms to the requestor's requirements, the public record may
be provided in this alternate electronic format for standard fees as
specified by the public agency.  Any request for a public record in a form
other than the forms described in this section shall be considered a
nonstandardized request.



(KRS 61.874(1)-(3))



§ 34.13  FEES FOR COPIES.



   (A)   The public agency may prescribe a reasonable fee for making
copies of nonexempt public records requested for use for noncommercial
purposes which shall not exceed the actual cost of reproduction, including
the costs of the media and any mechanical processing cost incurred by the
public agency, but not including the cost of staff required.  If a public
agency is asked to produce a record in a nonstandardized format, or to tailor
the format to meet the request of any individual or a group, the public
agency may at its discretion provide the requested format and recover staff
costs as well as any actual costs incurred.



   (B)   (1)   Unless an enactment of the General Assembly prohibits
the disclosure of public records to persons who intend to use them for
commercial purposes, if copies of nonexempt public records are requested for
commercial purposes, the public agency may establish a reasonable fee.



      (2)   The public agency from which copies of nonexempt public
records are requested for a commercial purpose may require a certified
statement from the requestor stating the commercial purpose for which they
shall be used, and may require the requestor to enter into a contract with
the agency.  The contract shall permit use of the public records for the
stated commercial purpose for a specified fee.



      (3)   The fee provided for in division (B)(1) of this section
may be based on one or both of the following:



         (a)   Cost to the public agency of media, mechanical
processing, and staff required to produce a copy of the public record or
records;



         (b)   Cost to the public agency of the creation,
purchase, or other acquisition of the public records. 



(KRS 61.874(3),(4))



Cross-reference:



   Fees for online access to public records, see § 34.15



§ 34.14  MISSTATEMENT OF PURPOSE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for a person to obtain a copy of any part of a
public record for a:



   (A)   Commercial purpose, without stating the commercial purpose, if
a certified statement from the requestor was required by the public agency
pursuant to § 34.13.



   (B)   Commercial purpose, if the person uses or knowingly allows the
use of the public record for a different commercial purpose; or



   (C)   Noncommercial purpose, if the person uses or knowingly allows
the use of the public record for a commercial purpose.  A newspaper,
periodical, radio or television station shall not be held to have used or
knowingly allowed the use of the public record for a commercial purpose
merely because of its publication or broadcast, unless it has also given its
express permission for that commercial use.



(KRS 61.874(5))  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 34.15  ONLINE ACCESS TO PUBLIC RECORDS IN ELECTRONIC FORM.



   (A)   Online access to public records in electronic form may be
provided and made available at the discretion of the public agency.  If a
party wishes to access public records by electronic means and the public
agency agrees to provide online access, a public agency may require that the
party enter into a contract, license, or other agreement with the agency, and
may charge fees for these agreements.



   (B)   Fees shall not exceed:



      (1)   The cost of physical connection to the system and
reasonable cost of computer time access charges; and



      (2)   If the records are requested for a commercial purpose, a
reasonable fee based on the factors set forth in § 34.13.



(KRS 61.874(6))



§ 34.16  PUBLIC RECORDS PROTECTED FROM DISCLOSURE.



   (A)   The following public records are excluded from the application
of this chapter and these rules and regulations and shall be subject to
inspection only upon order of a court of competent jurisdiction, except as
provided in KRS 61.878(1) that no court shall authorize the inspection by any
party of any materials pertaining to civil litigation beyond that which is
provided by the Rules of Civil Procedure governing pretrial discovery.



      (1)   Public records containing information of a personal
nature where the public disclosure thereof would constitute a clearly
unwarranted invasion of personal privacy.



      (2)   Records confidentially disclosed to an agency and
compiled and maintained for scientific research.  This exemption shall not,
however, apply to records the disclosure or publication of which is directed
by other statute.



      (3)   (a)   Upon and after July 15, 1992, records
confidentially disclosed to the agency, or required by an agency to be
disclosed to it, generally recognized as confidential or proprietary, which
if openly disclosed would permit an unfair commercial advantage to
competitors of the entity that disclosed the records.



         (b)   Upon and after July 15, 1992, records
confidentially disclosed to an agency or required by an agency to be
disclosed to it, generally recognized as confidential or proprietary, which
are compiled and maintained.



            1.   In conjunction with an application for or the
administration of a loan or a grant;



            2.   In conjunction with an application for or the
administration of assessments, incentives, inducements, and tax credits as
described in KRS Ch. 154.



            3.   In conjunction with the regulation of
commercial enterprise, including mineral exploration records, unpatented,
secret commercially valuable plans, appliances, formulae, or processes, which
are used for the making, preparing, compounding, treating, or processing of
articles or materials which are trade commodities obtained from a person; or



            4.   For the grant or review of a license to do
business.



         (c)   The exemptions provided for in divisions (A)(3)(a)
and (b) above, shall not apply to records the disclosure or publication of
which is directed by statute.



      (4)   Public records pertaining to a prospective location of a
business or industry where no previous public disclosure has been made of the
business' or industry's interest in locating in, relocating within, or
expanding within the Commonwealth.  This exemption shall not include those
records pertaining to applications to agencies for permits or licenses
necessary to do business or to expand business operations within the state,
except as provided in division (A)(2) above.



      (5)   Public records which are developed by an agency in
conjunction with the regulation or supervision of financial institutions,
including but not limited to, banks, savings and loan associations, and
credit unions, which disclose the agency's internal examining or audit
criteria and related analytical methods.



      (6)   The contents of real estate appraisals or engineering or
feasibility estimates and evaluations made by or for a public agency relative
to the acquisition of property, until such time as all of the property has
been acquired.  The law of eminent domain shall not be affected by this
provision.



      (7)   Test questions, scoring keys, and other examination data
used to administer a licensing examination, examination for employment, or
academic examination before the exam is given or if it is to be given again.



      (8)   Records of law enforcement agencies or agencies involved
in administrative adjudication that were compiled in the process of detecting
and investigating statutory or regulatory violations, if the disclosure of
the information would harm the agency by revealing the identity of informants
not otherwise known or by premature release of information to be used in a
prospective law enforcement action or administrative adjudication.  Unless
exempted by other provisions of this chapter, public records exempted under
this provision shall be open after enforcement action is completed or a
decision is made to take no action.  The exemptions provided by this
subdivision shall not be used by the custodian of the records to delay or
impede the exercise of rights granted by this chapter.



      (9)   Preliminary drafts, notes, or correspondence with
private individuals, other than correspondence which is intended to give
notice of final action of a public agency.



      (10)   Preliminary recommendations and preliminary memoranda
in which opinions are expressed or policies formulated or recommended.



      (11)   All public records or information the disclosure of
which is prohibited by federal law or regulation.



      (12)   Public records or information the disclosure of which
is prohibited or restricted or otherwise made confidential by enactment of
the General Assembly.



      (13)   (a)   Public records the disclosure of which would
have a reasonable likelihood of threatening the public safety by exposing a
vulnerability in preventing, protecting against, mitigating, or responding to
a terrorist act and limited to:



            1.   Criticality lists resulting from consequence
assessments;



            2.   Vulnerability assessments;



            3.   Antiterrorism protective measures and plans;



            4.   Counterterrorism measures and plans;



            5.   Security and response needs assessments;



            6.   Infrastructure records that expose a
vulnerability referred to in this division through the disclosure of the
location, configuration, or security of critical systems, including public
utility critical systems.  These critical systems shall include but not be
limited to information technology, communication, electrical, fire
suppression, ventilation, water, wastewater, sewage and gas systems.



            7.   The following records when their disclosure
will expose a vulnerability referred to in this division:  detailed
drawings, schematics, maps, or specifications of structural elements, floor
plans, and operating, utility or security systems of any building or facility
owned, occupied, leased or maintained by a public agency; and



            8.   Records when their disclosure will expose a
vulnerability referred to in this division and that describe the exact
physical location of hazardous chemical, radiological, or biological
materials.



         (b)   As used in this division, TERRORIST ACT means a
criminal act intended to:



            1.   Intimidate or coerce a public agency or all
or part of the civilian population;



            2.   Disrupt a system identified in division
(a)5.; or



            3.   Cause massive destruction to a building or
facility owned, occupied, leased, or maintained by a public agency.



         (c)   On the same day that a public agency denies a
request to inspect a public record for a reason identified in this division,
that public agency shall forward a copy of the written denial of the request,
referred to in KRS 61.880(1), to the executive director of the Kentucky
Office of Homeland Security and the Attorney General;



         (d)   Nothing in this division shall affect the
obligations of a public agency with respect to disclosure and availability of
public records under state environmental, health, and safety programs;



         (e)   The exemption established in this division shall
not apply when a member of the Kentucky General Assembly seeks to inspect a
public record identified in this division under the Open Records Law.



      (14)   Public or private records, including books, papers,
maps, photographs, cards, tapes, discs, diskettes, recordings, software, or
other documentation regardless of physical form or characteristics, having
historic, literary, artistic, or commemorative value accepted by the
archivist of a public university, museum, or government depository from a
donor or depositor other than a public agency. This exemption shall apply to
the extent that nondisclosure is requested in writing by the donor or
depositor of such records, but shall not apply to records the disclosure or
publication of which is mandated by another statute or by federal law.



      (15)   Records of a procurement process under KRS Chs. 45A or
56. This exemption shall not apply after:



         (a)   A contract is awarded; or



         (b)   The procurement process is canceled without award
of a contract and there is a determination that the contract will not be
resolicited.



      (16)   Communications of a purely personal nature unrelated to
any governmental function.



   (B)   No exemption under this section shall be construed to prohibit
disclosure of statistical information not descriptive of any readily
identifiable person.  In addition, if any public record contains material
which is not excepted under this section, the city shall separate the
excepted and make the nonexcepted material available for examination, subject
to the possible applicability of § 34.08.



   (C)   The provisions of this section shall in no way prohibit or
limit the exchange of public records or the sharing of information between
public agencies when the exchange is serving a legitimate governmental need
or is necessary in the performance of a legitimate government function.



   (D)   No exemption under this section shall be construed to deny,
abridge, or impede the right of a municipal employee, and applicant for
employment, or an eligible on a register to inspect and copy any record,
including preliminary and other supporting documentation, that relates to
him. Such records shall include, but not be limited to work plans, job
performance, demotions, evaluations, promotions, compensation,
classifications, reallocation, transfers, layoffs, disciplinary actions,
examination scores, and preliminary and other supporting documentation.  A
city employee, applicant, or eligible shall not have the right to inspect or
copy any examination or any documents relating to ongoing criminal or
administrative investigations by any agency.



(KRS 61.878)



§ 34.17  NOTIFICATION OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL.



   The official custodian shall notify the Attorney General of any actions
filed against the city in circuit court regarding the enforcement of the open
records law, KRS 61.870 to 61.884.



CHAPTER 34A:  PUBLIC MEETINGS



Section



General



   34A.01   Definitions



Public Meeting Requirements



   34A.05   Meetings open to the public



   34A.06   Requirements for closed sessions



   34A.07   Public meeting schedules



   34A.08   Special meetings



   34A.09   Video teleconferences



   34A.10   Enforcement



GENERAL



§ 34A.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall
have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.



   ACTION TAKEN.   A collective decision, a commitment or promise to make
a positive or negative decision, or an actual vote by a majority of the
members of the governmental body.



(KRS 61.805(3))



   MEETING.   All gatherings of every kind, including video
teleconferences, regardless of where the meeting is held, and whether regular
or special and informational or casual gatherings held in anticipation of or
in conjunction with a regular or special meeting.



(KRS 61.805(1))



   MEMBER.   A member of the governing body of a public agency. 
"Member" does not include employees or licensees of the agency.



(KRS 61.805(4))



   PUBLIC AGENCY.   Every city government board, commission, and
authority; every city council and council board, commission and committee;
every school district board, special district board, and municipal
corporation; every city government agency, including the policy-making board
of an institution of education created by or pursuant to state or local
statute, executive order, ordinance, resolution, or other legislative act;
any body created by or pursuant to state or local statute, executive order,
ordinance, resolution, or other legislative act in the legislative or
executive branch of government; any entity when the majority of its governing
body is appointed by a "public agency", as defined by this section; a member
or employee of a "public agency", a state or local officer, or any
combination thereof; any board, commission, committee, subcommittee, ad hoc
committee, advisory committee, council or agency, except for a committee of a
hospital medical staff or a committee formed for the purpose of evaluating
the qualifications of public agency employees, established, created, or
controlled by a "public agency" as defined in this section; an interagency
body of two (2) or more public agencies where each "public agency" is defined
in this section.



(KRS 61.805(2))



   VIDEO TELECONFERENCE.   One (1) meeting, occurring in two (2) or more
locations, where individuals can see and hear each other by means of video
and audio equipment.



(KRS 61.805(5))



PUBLIC MEETING REQUIREMENTS



§ 34A.05  MEETINGS OPEN TO THE PUBLIC.



   (A)   All meetings of a quorum of the members of any public agency
at which any public business is discussed or at which any action is taken by
the agency, shall be public meetings, open to the public at all times, except
for the following:



      (1)   Deliberations on the future acquisition or sale of real
property by a public agency, but only when publicity would be likely to
affect the value of a specific piece of property to be acquired for public
use or sold by a public agency;



      (2)   Discussions of proposed or pending litigation against or
on behalf of the public agency;



      (3)   Collective bargaining negotiations between public
employers and their employees or their representatives;



      (4)   Discussions or hearings which might lead to the
appointment, discipline, or dismissal of an individual employee, member, or
student without restricting that employee's, member's or student's right to a
public hearing if requested.  This exception shall not be interpreted to
permit discussion of general personnel matters in secret;



      (5)   Discussions between a public agency and a representative
of a business entity and discussions concerning a specific proposal, if open
discussions would jeopardize the siting, retention, expansion, or upgrading
of the business;



      (6)   Local cabinet meetings and executive cabinet meetings;



      (7)   Deliberations of quasi-judicial bodies regarding
individual adjudications or appointments, at which neither the person
involved, his representatives, nor any other individual not a member of the
agency's governing body or staff is present, but not including any meetings
of planning commissions, zoning commissions, or boards of adjustment;



      (8)   That portion of a meeting devoted to a discussion of a
specific public record exempted from disclosure under KRS 61.878(1)(i).
However, that portion of any public agency meeting shall not be closed to a
member of the Kentucky General Assembly;



      (9)   Meetings which federal or state law specifically require
to be conducted in privacy; and



      (10)   Meetings which the Constitution provides shall be held
in secret; and



      (11)   Meetings of any selection committee, evaluation
committee, or other similar group established under KRS Chs. 45A or 56 to
select a successful bidder for award of a state contract.



   (B)   Any series of less than quorum meetings, where the members
attending one or more of the meetings collectively constitute at least a
quorum of the members of the public agency and where the meetings are held
for the purpose of avoiding the requirements of subsection (A) of this
section, shall be subject to the requirements of subsection (A) of this
section.  Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit
discussion between individual members where the purpose of the discussions is
to educate the members on specific issues.



(KRS 61.810)



§ 34A.06  REQUIREMENTS FOR CLOSED SESSIONS.



   (A)   The following requirements shall be met as a condition for
conducting closed sessions by those public agencies authorized by §
34A.05(A)(1) and (4) except as (4) relates to students:



      (1)   Notice shall be given in regular open meetings of the
general nature of the business to be discussed in closed session, the reason
for the closed session and the specific provision of § 34A.05 authorizing
the closed session;



      (2)   Closed sessions may be held only after a motion is made
and carried by a majority vote in open, public session;



      (3)   No final action may be taken in closed session; and



      (4)   No matters may be discussed at a closed session other
than those publicly announced prior to convening the closed session.



   (B)   Public agencies and activities identified in § 34A.05(A)
paragraphs (2), (3), (4), but only so far as (4) relates to students, (5),
(6), (7), (8), (9) and (10) are excluded from the requirements of
subsection  of this section.



(KRS 61.815)



§ 34A.07  PUBLIC MEETING SCHEDULES.



   (A)   All meetings of a public agency shall be held at specified
times and places which are convenient to the public. In considering locations
for public meetings, the agency shall evaluate space requirements, seating
capacity, and acoustics.



   (B)   All public agencies shall provide for a schedule of regular
meetings by ordinance, order, resolution, bylaws or by whatever other means
may be required for the conduct of business of the public agency.  The
schedule of regular meetings shall be made available to the public.



(KRS 61.820)



§ 34A.08  SPECIAL MEETINGS.



   (A)   Except as provided by subsection (F) of this section, special
meetings shall be held in accordance with the provisions of subsections (B),
(C), and (D) of this section



   (B)   The presiding officer or a majority of the members of the
public agency may call a special meeting;



   (C)   The public agency shall provide written notice of the special
meeting containing the date, time, place of the special meeting and the
agenda.  Discussions and action at the meeting shall be limited to items
listed on the agenda in the notice.



   (D)   (1)   As soon as possible, written notice shall be
delivered personally, transmitted by facsimile, or mailed to every member of
the public agency as well as each media organization which has filed a
written request, including a mailing address, to receive notice of special
meetings. The notice shall be received at least twenty-four (24) hours before
the special meeting.  The public agency may periodically, but no more often
than once in a calendar year, inform media organizations that they will have
to submit a new written request or no longer receive written notice of
special meetings until a new written request is filed.



      (2)   A public agency may satisfy the requirements of
subsection (D)(1) above by transmitting the written notice by electronic mail
to public agency members and media organizations that have filed a written
request with the public agency indicating their preference to receive
electronic mail notification in lieu of notice by personal delivery,
facsimile machine or mail.  The written request shall include the electronic
mail address or addresses of the agency member or media organization.



   (E)   As soon as possible, written notice shall be posted in a
conspicuous place in the building where the special meeting will take place
and in a conspicuous place in the building which houses the headquarters of
the agency.  The notice shall be posted at least twenty-four (24) hours
before the special meeting.



   (F)   In the case of an emergency which prevents compliance with the
notice requirements in this section, this subsection shall govern a public
agency's conduct of a special meeting.  The special meeting shall be called
pursuant to subsection (B) of this section.  The public agency shall make a
reasonable effort, under emergency circumstances, to notify the members of
the agency, media organizations which have file a written request pursuant to
this section, and the public of the emergency meeting.  At the beginning of
the emergency meeting, the person chairing the meeting shall briefly describe
for the record the emergency circumstances preventing compliance with the
notice requirements of this section.  These comments shall appear in the
minutes.  Discussion and action at the emergency meeting shall be limited to
the emergency for which the meeting is called.



(KRS 61.823)



§ 34A.09  VIDEO TELECONFERENCES.



   (A)   A public agency may conduct any meeting, other than a closed
session, through video teleconference.



   (B)   Notice of a video teleconference shall comply with the
requirements of KRS 61.820 or 61.823 as appropriate, in addition the notice
of a video teleconference shall:



      (1)   Clearly state that the meeting will be a video
teleconference; and



      (2)   Precisely identify a primary location of the video
teleconference where all members can be seen and heard and the public may
attend in accordance with KRS 61.840.



   (C)   The same procedure with regard to participation, distribution
of materials, and other matters shall apply in all video teleconference
locations.



   (D)   Any interruption in the video or audit broadcast of a video
teleconference at any location shall result in the suspension of the video
teleconference until the broadcast is restored.



(KRS 61.826)



§ 34A.10  ENFORCEMENT.



   The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced pursuant to KRS 61.846
and 61.848 for enforcing KRS 61.805 to 61.850.



Cross-reference:



   Rules of Procedure, see § 30.018



CHAPTER 35:  TAXATION



Section



   35.01   Position of Tax Assessor established



   35.02   Due date



   35.03   Delinquency



   35.04   Disposition of funds



   35.05   Ad valorem tax on property within city



§ 35.01  POSITION OF TAX ASSESSOR ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   There is hereby established the position of City Tax Assessor.



   (B)   The City Tax Assessor shall be responsible for the assessment
of all real and personal property situated within the city and this shall be
the basis of all ad valorem tax levies ordered or approved by the City
Council.



§ 35.02  DUE DATE.



   All ad valorem taxes, except taxes on motor vehicles, shall become due
on November 30.



(Am. Ord. 17-96, passed 11-5-96;)



§ 35.03  DELINQUENCY.



   (A)   All city taxes shall become delinquent on December 1 following
their due dates.



   (B)   All delinquencies shall be subject to interest at the rate of
twelve percent (12%) per annum and penalties at the rate of ten percent (10%)
on said taxable amount and calculated from December 1 of said tax year until
paid in full.



   (C)   Delinquent taxes shall be collectable under the provisions of
the state law relating to the collection of delinquent taxes by cities of the
fourth class.



(Ord. 17-96, passed 11-5-96; Am. Ord. 22-2003, passed 10-21-03)



§ 35.04  DISPOSITION OF FUNDS. 



   All monies collected from the taxes levied in this chapter shall be
paid into the General Fund of the city to be used for the payment of proper
expenditures as determined by the City Council.



§ 35.05  AD VALOREM TAX ON PROPERTY WITHIN CITY.



   (A)   There shall be and is levied and assessed, an ad valorem tax
in the amount of $1.68 per one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for general fund
assessed valuation of all property, real or personal, assessed by the
Property Valuation Administrator, reviewed and corrected, altered and
returned by the Property Valuation Administrator of the city, also in
corporate franchises assessed and returned to the city by the Department of
Revenue of the Commonwealth of Kentucky and certified by the State Auditor
and State Tax Commissioner, together with any and all other property of any
kind or description wherever situated which may be or is subject to taxation
for municipal purposes in accordance with the authorities aforesaid.



   (B)   All ad valorem taxes assessed by the city shall be due on or
before October 31 of the year they have been assessed and delinquent on
November 1. All delinquencies shall be subject to interest at the rate of
twelve percent (12%) per annum and penalties at the rate of ten percent (10%)
on said taxable amount and calculated from November 1 of said tax year until
paid in full.



(Ord. 8-91, passed 5-9-91; Am. Ord. 15-93, passed 6-24-93; Am. Ord. 34-94,
passed 11-17-94; Am. Ord. 23-95, passed 6-24-95; Am. Ord. 13-96, passed
10-1-96; Am. Ord. 14-97, passed 9-2-97; Am. Ord. 12-98, passed 9-1-98; Am.
Ord. 04-99, passed 10-5-99; Am. Ord. 07-2000, passed 9-19-00; Am. Ord.
09-2001, passed 10-2-01; Am. Ord. 09-2002, passed 11-19-02; Am. Ord. 22-2003,
passed 10-21- 03; Am. Ord. 10-2004, passed 9-21-04; Am. Ord. 11-2005, passed
9-20-05; Am. Ord. 09-2006, passed 9-19-06; Am. Ord. 9-2007, passed 9-18-07;
Am. Ord. 12-2008, passed 9-16-08; Am. Ord. 15-2009, passed 9-15-09; Am. Ord.
08-2010, passed 9-21-10; Am. Ord. 11-2011, passed 9-6-11; Am. Ord. 12-2012,
passed 9-4-12; Am. Ord. 2013-14, passed 9-24-13; Am. Ord. 09-2014, passed
9-16-14; Am. Ord. 05-2015, passed 9-15-15; Am. Ord. 08-2016, passed 9-20-16;
Am. Ord. 04-2017, passed 9-19-17; Am. Ord. 07-2018, passed 9-18-18)



CHAPTER 36:  CITY POLICIES



Section



Reparations for Damaging of City Property



   36.01   Destruction of property; responsibility for reparations,
charges



   36.02   City Clerk-Treasurer to accept payment



REPARATIONS FOR DAMAGING OF CITY PROPERTY



§ 36.01  DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY; RESPONSIBILITY FOR REPARATIONS, CHARGES. 



   (A)   Any person, in any manner, damaging or destroying public
property within the city limits, owned by the city, or over which it has
jurisdiction or control, and for which it is responsible, shall pay for the
repair or replacement and reimburse the city for the damage done in the sums
specifically stated.  These charges shall be deemed to be the amount of the
actual loss to the city and shall be construed merely as a charge to restore
public property to the condition it was in prior to the damage or
destruction, and it shall not be considered as any fine or preclude the
assessment of a fine in any criminal proceeding for the punishment of any
offender guilty of an liable for the damage or destruction.



   (B)   The following charges will be imposed:



      (1)   For the destruction of a city owned light pole, one
hundred dollars ($100.00).



      (2)   For the destruction of a fire plug or hydrant, three
hundred dollars ($300.00).



      (3)   For the destruction of a traffic sign or highway marker,
fifty dollars ($50.00).



      (4)   For the destruction of a park bench, twenty-five dollars
($25.00).



('81 Code, § 1020.4, § 1)



§ 36.02  CITY CLERK-TREASURER TO ACCEPT PAYMENT.



   The City Clerk-Treasurer is authorized to accept payment as provided in
this subchapter from the person proffering it, issue a receipt, and account
for such payment in his regular monthly statement.



('81 Code, § 1020.4, § 3)



CHAPTER 37:  CODE OF ETHICS



Section



   37.01   Definitions



   37.02   Standards of conduct



   37.03   Financial disclosure



   37.04   Nepotism



   37.05   Ethics Commission



   37.06      Filing an investigation complaint



   37.07      Notice of hearing



   37.08      Hearing procedure



   37.09      Appeals



   37.10      Limitation of action



 



   37.99      Penalty



§ 37.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUSINESS ASSOCIATE.  Includes the following: 



      (1)   A private employer;



      (2)   A general or limited partnership; or a general or
limited partner within the partnership;



      (3)   A corporation that is family owned or in which all
shares of stock are closely held, and the shareholders, owners, and officers
of such a corporation; and



      (4)   A corporation, business association, or any other
business entity in which the city government officer or employee serves as a
compensated agent or representative.



   BUSINESS CORPORATION.  Any corporation, partnership, sole proprietor,
firm, enterprise, franchise, association, organization, self-employed
individual, holding company, joint stock company, receivership, trust,
professional service corporation, or any legal entity through which business
is conducted for profit.



   CANDIDATE.  Any individual who seeks nomination or election to a city
municipal office. An individual is a candidate when the individual files a
notification and declaration for a nomination for office with the County
Clerk or the Secretary of State.



   CITY GOVERNMENT AGENCY.  Any board, commission, authority, non-stock
corporation, or other entity formed by the city government or a combination
of local governments.



   CITY GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEE.  Any person, whether compensated or not,
whether full-time or part-time, employed by or servicing the city government
or city government agency who is not a city government officer, but shall not
mean any employees of a school district or school board.



   CITY GOVERNMENT OFFICER.  Any person, whether compensated or not,
whether full-time or part-time, who is elected to any city government office;
or any person who serves as a member of the governing body of any city
government agency or special taxing or non-taxing district, but shall not
mean any officer of a school district or school board.



   MEMBER OF IMMEDIATE FAMILY.  The spouse, an unemancipated child
residing in an individual's household, or a person claimed by the individual
or individual's spouse as dependent for tax purposes.



   RULE OF NECESSITY.  The city government, agency or district may make
or enter into a contract in which an officer or employee or members of his
immediate family or a business associate has an economic interest if:



      (1)   The nature of the transaction and the nature of the
interest is publicly disclosed on the record prior to the time it is engaged
in; and



      (2)   A specific finding is made by the city government,
agency or district and entered on the official record of the proceedings of
the governing body that, notwithstanding the conflict, it is in the best
interest of local government because of limited supply, price or documented
emergency.



(Ord. 31-94, passed 10-26-94; Am. Ord. 01-2011, passed 2-15-2011)



§ 37.02  STANDARDS OF CONDUCT.



   (A)   No city government officer or employee or member of his
immediate family shall have an interest in a business organization or engage
in any business, transaction, or professional activity, which is in
substantial conflict with the proper discharge of his duties in the public
interest.



   (B)   No city government officer or employee shall use or attempt to
use his position to secure unwarranted privileges or advantages for himself
or others.



(Ord. 31-94, passed 10-26-94; Am. Ord. 01-2011, passed 2-15-2011)  Penalty,
see § 37.99



§ 37.03  FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE.



   (A)   Any officer or employee, or any member of his immediate
family, of the city government who shall have any private financial interest,
directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within
any department or agency of the city government shall disclose such private
interest to the City Council or the City Ethics Commission. Any such
disclosure shall require the completion of a disclosure statement revealing
in detail the nature of the direct or indirect financial interest.



   (B)   Financial disclosure statement.



      (1)   The following individuals shall be required to file an
annual financial disclosure statement:



         (a)   Elected officers.



         (b)   Candidates for elective office.



      (2)   The financial disclosure statement shall include the
following information:



         (a)   Name of filer.



         (b)   Current business address, business telephone
number and home address of filer.



         (c)   Title of filer's public office or office sought.



         (d)   Occupations of filer and spouse.



         (e)   Positions held by the filer and any members of the
filer's immediate family in any business organization or non-profit entity
from which the filer or any member of the filer's immediate family received
compensation in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) during the
preceding calendar year, and the name, address, and telephone number of the
business organization or non-profit entity.



         (f)   Name and address of each source of income of filer
and spouse from within the Commonwealth of Kentucky which exceeded five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00) during the preceding year.



         (g)   Name and address of each business organization
located within the Commonwealth in which the filer or any member of the
filer's immediate family had an interest of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00)
at the fair market value.



         (h)   Location of all commercial property within the
city, in which the filer or any member of the filer's immediate family had an
interest of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or more during the past year.



      (3)   Each statement shall be signed and dated by the
individual filing the statement of financial interest. The financial
disclosure statements required by this chapter shall be filed with the City
Ethics Commission.



(Ord. 31-94, passed 10-16-94; Ord. 36-94, passed 12-15-94; Am. Ord. 05-95,
passed 3-16-95; Am. Ord. 01-2011, passed 2-15-2011)  Penalty, see § 37.99



§ 37.04  NEPOTISM.



   No city government officer or city government employee shall act in his
official capacity to hire or cause to be hired any member of his immediate
family at an hourly pay rate or with benefits in excess of any other employee
with similar job duties, responsibilities and qualification requirements.



(Ord. 31-94, passed 10-26-94; Am. Ord. 01-2011, passed 2-15-2011)  Penalty,
see § 37.99



§ 37.05  ETHICS COMMISSION.



   (A)   An Ethics Commission is created which shall have the power to
enforce all provisions of the Code of Ethics adopted in this chapter.



   (B)   The Commission shall be composed of three (3) members
appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council.  Members must
be at least twenty-one (21) years of age.



   (C)   Decisions of the City Ethics Commission regarding violations
may be appealed to the Campbell Circuit Court.



   (D)   The Ethics Commission shall receive, hear and investigate
complaints concerning violations of this Code of Ethics. Any instance in
which the Commission finds that violation of the Code of Ethics exists, it
may impose the appropriate penalty. In hearing and investigating complaints
concerning violations of this Code of Ethics, the Commission shall have the
power to subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony and require
other production of evidence.



(Ord. 31-94, passed 10-26-94; Am. Ord. 04-95, passed 3-16-95; Am. Ord.
01-2011, passed 2-15-2011)



§ 37.06  FILING AN INVESTIGATION COMPLAINT.



   (A)   All complaints alleging any violation of the provisions of
this chapter shall be submitted to the Ethics Commission. All complaints
shall be in writing, signed by the complainant, and shall meet any other
requirements established by the Commission. The Commission shall, within a
reasonable time, acknowledge receipt of a complaint to the complainant and
forward a copy of the complaint to any officer or employee who is the subject
of the complaint.



   (B)   Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the complaint, the
Commission shall conduct a preliminary inquiry. The Commission shall afford a
person who is the subject of the complaint an opportunity to respond. The
person shall have the right to be represented by counsel, to appear and be
heard under oath, and to offer evidence in response to the allegations.



   (C)   The Commission shall make a determination based on its
preliminary inquiry whether the complaint is within its jurisdiction and, if
so, whether there is reasonable cause to believe that the officer or employee
has violated this chapter. If the Commission finds that the complaint is
outside its jurisdiction, frivolous or without factual basis, the Commission
shall immediately terminate the inquiry, reduce the conclusion to writing,
and transmit a copy of its decision to the complainant and to all officers or
employees against whom the complaint was filed.



   (D)   If the Commission concludes, based upon its preliminary
inquiry, that the complaint is within its jurisdiction and there is
reasonable cause to believe that a violation occurred, the Commission shall
notify the officer or employee who is the subject of this complaint and shall
initiate a hearing to determine whether there has been a violation.



(Ord. 01-2011, passed 2-15-2011)



§ 37.07  NOTICE OF HEARING.



   If the Commission determines that a hearing regarding allegations
contained in the complaint is necessary, the Commission shall issue an order,
and mail it to the alleged violator within a reasonable time, setting the
matter for a hearing within thirty (30) days of the date the order is issued,
unless the alleged violator petitions the Commission for a later date.



(Ord. 01-2011, passed 2-15-2011)



§ 37.08  HEARING PROCEDURE.



   (A)   The Kentucky Rules of Civil Procedure and the Kentucky Rules
of Evidence shall not apply to hearings conducted by the Commission; however,
the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with this section and in
accordance with any additional rules and regulations adopted by the
Commission so as to afford all parties the full range of due process rights
required by the nature of the proceedings.



   (B)   Prior to the commencement of the hearing, the alleged
violator, or his representative, shall have a reasonable opportunity to
examine all documents and records prepared by the Commission in connection
with the matters to be heard. The Commission shall inform the alleged
violator, or his representative, of any exculpatory evidence in its
possession.



   (C)   All testimony in a Commission hearing shall be taken under
oath, administered by the presiding officer. All parties shall have the right
to call and examine witnesses, to introduce exhibits, to cross examine
witnesses, to submit evidence, and to be represented by counsel. All
witnesses shall have the right to be represented by counsel.



   (D)   Any person whose name is mentioned during the hearing and who
may be adversely affected thereby may appear personally before the
Commission, with or without counsel, to give a statement regarding the
adverse mention, or may file a written statement regarding the adverse
mention for incorporation into the record of the proceeding.



   (E)   The Commission may, upon its own motion or that of any party,
grant a continuance of a hearing for the receipt of taking of further
evidence. However, the Commission shall make all efforts to complete the
hearing and taking of the evidence at the earliest possible time so as to not
unduly burden the alleged violator or any other interested party.



   (F)   After conclusion of the hearing, the Commission shall, as soon
as practicable, begin deliberations for purpose of reviewing the evidence in
making a determination of whether a violation of this chapter has been
proven. Within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the hearing, the
Commission shall issue a written report of its findings and conclusions.



   (G)   If the Commission concludes in its report that no violation
has occurred, it shall immediately send written notice of this determination
to the officer or employee who was the subject of the complaint, to the party
who filed the complaint, to the Mayor, and to the City Council or the
governing board of the appropriate city agency.



   (H)   If the Commission concludes in its report that, based upon the
evidence, there is clear and convincing proof of a violation, the Commission
may do one or more of the following:



      (1)   Issue an order requiring the violator to cease and
desist the violation.



      (2)   In writing, publicly reprimand the violator for the
violations and provide a copy of the reprimand to the Mayor, City Council,
and the governing board of the appropriate city agency.



      (3)   In writing, recommend to the Mayor and City Council that
the violator be sanctioned as recommended by the Commission, which may
include discipline, dismissal or removal from office.



      (4)   Issue an order requiring the violator to pay, within a
specified period of time, a civil penalty, as set forth in this chapter.



      (5)   Refer evidence of criminal violation of this chapter or
state law to the County Attorney or Commonwealth's Attorney of the
jurisdiction for prosecution.



(Ord. 01-2011, passed 2-15-2011)  Penalty, see § 37.99



§ 37.09  APPEALS.



   Any person who is found guilty of a violation may appeal the finding to
the circuit court within thirty (30) days after the date of the final action
of the Ethics Commission by filing a petition with the court against the
Commission.



(Ord. 01-2011, passed 2-15-2011)



§ 37.10  LIMITATION OF ACTION.



   Except when the period of limitation is otherwise established by state
law, an action for a violation of this chapter must be brought within one
year after the violation is discovered.



(Ord. 01-2011, passed 2-15-2011)



§ 37.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any violation of § 37.02 shall constitute a class A
misdemeanor, and upon conviction, the court may void any contract entered
into in violation thereof. Additionally, such a violation shall be grounds
for removal from office or from employment with the city in accordance with
any applicable provisions of state law and ordinances, rules or regulations
of the city, or other remedies as set forth in §§ 37.08(H)(1) through
(H)(5), as determined by the Commission.



   (B)   Any person who fails to or refuses to file the financial
disclosure statement under § 37.03 above, or who fails or refuses to remedy
a deficiency in the filing of a financial disclosure statement under § 37.03
above within the time period required, shall be guilty of a civil offense and
shall be subject to a civil fine imposed by the Commission in an amount not
to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per day, up to a maximum total civil
fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00). Any civil fine imposed by the
Commission under this section may be recovered by the city in a civil action
in the nature of debt if the offender fails or refuses to pay the penalty
within the prescribed period of time.



   (C)   Any person who intentionally files a financial disclosure
statement under § 37.03 above which he knows to contain false information or
intentionally omits required information shall be guilty of a class A
misdemeanor or other remedies as set forth in §§ 37.08(H)(1) through
(H)(5), as determined by the Commission.



   (D)   Any person who knowingly files with the Commission a false
complaint alleging a violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a class A
misdemeanor or other remedies as set forth in §§ 37.08(H)(1) through
(H)(5), as determined by the Commission.



   (E)   Except when another penalty is specifically set forth in this
chapter, any officer or employee of the city or one of its agencies who is
found by the Commission to have violated any provisions of this chapter shall
be deemed guilty of a civil offense and may be subject to a civil fine
imposed by the Commission not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
which may be recovered by the city in a civil action in the nature of debt if
the offender fails to pay the penalty in a prescribed period of time.



   (F)   In addition to all other penalties which may be imposed under
this chapter, any officer or employee of the city or one of its agencies who
is found by the Commission to have violated any provision of this chapter
shall forfeit to the city an amount equal to the economic benefit or gain
which the officer or employee is determined by the Commission to have
realized as the result of the violation. The amount of any forfeiture that
may be recovered by the city is a civil action in the nature of debt, if the
offender fails to pay the amount of the forfeiture within a prescribed period
of time.



   (G)   In addition to all other penalties which may be imposed in
this chapter any officer or employee of the city or one of its agencies who
is found by the Commission to have violated any provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to removal, suspension, demotion, or other disciplinary
action as determined by the Mayor.



(Ord. 01-2011, passed 2-15-2011)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



Chapter



      50.   GARBAGE AND REFUSE



      51.   WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM



      52.   MUNICIPAL UTILITIES REGULATIONS



      53.   STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM



CHAPTER 50:  GARBAGE AND REFUSE



Section



General Provisions



   50.01   Garbage disposal service



   50.02   Dumpster enclosure requirements



   50.03   Definitions



   50.04   Maintaining private property



   50.05   Private receptacles and recyclable containers



   50.06   City removal



   50.07   Scheduled collection



   50.08   Conflicts with International Property Maintenance Code



Garbage Collection and Disposal Fees



   50.15   Service or user charge



   50.16   Administration of payment and collection



   50.17   Delinquent accounts; penalties



   50.18   Fee for collection



 



   50.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 50.01  GARBAGE DISPOSAL SERVICE.



   The city uses the franchise procedure for providing garbage collection
services.  All commercial/business enterprises which provide for their own
service are to notify the city promptly of this; if not they will be charged
for garbage collection service just as if it were provided by the franchise.



§ 50.02  DUMPSTER ENCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The purpose of this section shall be for the health, safety,
and welfare of the general public.



   (B)   All dumpsters located within the city limits, and within the
general public's view, excluding compactor style dumpsters, shall be enclosed
by a structure (of minimum construction), consisting of galvanized chain-link
fencing with redwood slats with three (3) feet clearance on all sides and
shall totally enclose the dumpster and be at least one foot higher than the
main body of said dumpster.  Each enclosure (excluding lid when open) shall
have a latch four feet from the ground on the gate and be secured at all
times.  All alternate material for construction of the above shall be
approved in writing by the Chief Administrative Officer.  Existing
enclosures shall be permitted to remain but if over fifty percent (50%)
repair is needed then said above guidelines for new construction shall be
used.



   (C)   All new dumpsters from this date forward shall comply with the
above.  All existing dumpsters have ninety (90) days to comply.



('81 Code, § 810.3)  (Am. Ord. 18-82, passed 9-23-82; Am. Ord. 14-83,
passed 6-9-83; Am. Ord. 18-83, passed 7-28-83)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning.



   BLIGHT. Tall (eight (8) inches or above) unkept, uncut grass, weed,
undergrowth or other vegetation that when kept uncut and untrimmed creates a
danger to public health, safety and welfare.



   GARBAGE.  Putrescrible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.



   LITTER.  Garbage, refuse and rubbish as defined herein and all other
waste material which if thrown or deposited as herein provided tends to
create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.



   RECYCLABLES.  All items that are considered appropriate for collection
in the recyclable containers distributed throughout the city by the
contractor hired to collect solid waste and recyclable material within the
city including but not limited to recyclable plastic, glass, and paper
products.



   REFUSE.  All putrescrible and nonputrescrible solid wastes (except
body waste) including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleaning, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles, and solid market and industrial waste.



   RUBBISH.  Nonputrescrible solid waste (except body waste) consisting
of both combustible and non-combustible waste, such as paper, wrappings,
cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass,
bedding, crockery and similar materials.



(Ord. 11-2003, passed 5-6-03; Am. Ord. 09-2009, passed 4-7-09)



§ 50.04  MAINTAINING PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   (A)   The owner or person in control of any private property shall
at all times maintain the premises free of litter, rubbish, refuse, garbage,
blight, and recyclables, provided, however, that this section shall not
prohibit the storage of litter, rubbish, refuse, garbage, or recyclables in
authorized private receptacles for collection.



   (B)   Oil cans, drums, tires, discarded automobile parts or other
miscellaneous items of junk shall not be permitted to accumulate upon a
premises except as permitted by the provisions of permitted uses in an
authorized zone.



(Ord. 11-2003, passed 5-6-03; Am. Ord. 09-2009, passed 4-7-09)



§ 50.05  PRIVATE RECEPTACLES AND RECYCLABLE CONTAINERS.



   (A)   Private receptacles and recyclable containers shall be made of
metal, plastic or plastic bags equipped with suitable handles and tight
fitting covers and shall be water tight or otherwise sealed, and said
receptacles shall be kept in a clean, neat and sanitary condition at all
times.



   (B)   Private receptacles and recyclable containers shall be placed
at the curb of the individual premises for collection no earlier than noon
the day before regular weekly collection occurs and removed from the curb and
returned to the premises by midnight on the day of collection.



   (C)   The owner or resident shall not maintain or keep private
receptacles or recyclable containers forward of the front wall of the
dwelling or building and the same shall be screened so that no part thereof
is visible from the street. Said screening shall be maintained by the owner
or resident in good, serviceable condition so as to maintain the premises in
a manner that is consistent with the intent of this chapter. Properties on a
corner lot which have two (2) or more sides of the dwelling facing the street
shall place their receptacles and recyclable containers in a place within the
premises that is screened from the view by the public at all times.



(Ord. 11-2003, passed 5-6-03; Am. Ord. 09-2009, passed 4-7-09)



§ 50.06  CITY REMOVAL.



   Whenever the city if forced to effect the removal of litter, blight,
garbage, recyclable materials or refuse as defined herein, the actual cost
thereof plus accrued interest at the rate of ten percent (10%) per annum from
the date of the completion of the work, if not paid by such owner prior
thereto, shall be charged to the owner of such property on the next regular
tax bill forwarded to the owner by the city, and said charge shall be due and
payable by the owner at the time of payment of said bill.



(Ord. 11-2003, passed 5-6-03; Am. Ord. 09-2009, passed 4-7-09)



§ 50.07  SCHEDULED COLLECTION.



   All refuse, recyclable materials and waste accumulated by residence or
commercial establishments shall be collected at least once each week and no
commercial pickup shall take place earlier than 6:00 a.m.



(Ord. 11-2003, passed 5-6-03; Am. Ord. 09-2009, passed 4-7-09)



§ 50.08  CONFLICTS WITH INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.



   Nothing herein shall be construed to be in conflict with any of the
city's other litter ordinances or zoning laws including but not limited to
the city's litter ordinance and International Property Maintenance Code
(IPMC).  Any apparent inconsistency between this chapter and the city's
litter ordinance or International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC) shall be
construed in a manner imposing the strictest requirements to prohibit litter,
blight, nuisance, or other unsightly conditions within our city.



(Ord. 09-2009, passed 4-7-09)



GARBAGE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL FEES



§ 50.15  SERVICE OR USER CHARGE.



   (A)   There is levied and imposed upon the owners of improved real
estate within the city, a garbage and recyclable collection service fee due
and owing on July 1 of each year.  The fee shall become delinquent if not
paid by July 30 of each year.



   (B)   The amount of garbage and recyclable collection service fee
shall be established prior to the beginning of the fiscal year each and every
year.



   (C)   The garbage and recyclable collection fee shall be added to
the yearly ad valorem tax bill for each property and shall be collected on or
before the date due for such ad valorem taxes.  All garbage and recyclable
collection fees remaining unpaid after such date shall be deemed delinquent
and shall be subject to the same penalty as set for delinquent ad valorem
taxes for the same year in addition to any other penalty provided under this
chapter.



   (D)   Failure to pay the garbage and recyclable collection fee will
result in an immediate termination of the garbage and recyclable collection
service for the premises that is delinquent.



   (E)   The amount of any outstanding garbage and recyclable
collection fee on any property, and accrued interest and other charges,
including but not limited to attorney fees, shall constitute a lien on the
property to secure payment to the city for charges due.  The lien shall take
precedence over all other liens, except a lien for state and county taxes,
general municipal taxes, and shall not be defeated or postponed by any
private or judicial sale, by any mortgage, or by any error or mistake in the
description of the property or in the names of the owners.  No error in the
proceedings of the city legislative body exempt any property from the lien
established herein, or from payment thereof, or from the penalties or
interest thereon, as herein provided.



(Ord. 30-94, passed 10-20-94)



   (F)   A garbage collection and recycling collection service fee
schedule of rates and charges and billing cycle is hereby adopted by
reference and made a part of this code the same as if set forth at length
herein.



(Ord. 18-94, passed 7-21-94; Am. Ord. 33-94, passed 11-17-94; Am. Ord. 06-98,
passed 6-16-98; Am. Ord. 18-2003, passed 6-17-03; Am. Ord. 06-2005, passed
6-21-05)



§ 50.16  ADMINISTRATION OF PAYMENT AND COLLECTION.



   (A)   The City Clerk-Treasurer shall include by separation notation
any such service fee as required in § 50.15 per establishment or resident
party monthly for payment on the city's billing for water service within the
city.  The obligation of payment shall be the joint or several obligation of
the real property owner where the usage of such service is initiated and the
obligation of the individual user, resident or business occupying the
premises, if not the same person.



   (B)   The payment of any such monthly charge shall become due upon
receipt and shall be considered delinquent by the city if not paid within
thirty (30) days from the date such billing is mailed by the city to the
owner or user.



('81 Code, § 220.6, § 2)



§ 50.17  DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS; PENALTIES.



   (A)   All accounts shall be considered delinquent if not paid by the
thirtieth (30th) of the month after which a bill is received. All delinquent
accounts are subject to stoppage of service without notice. If a delinquent
account is not paid within thirty (30) days the city may cease or refuse
collection for that account at the city's discretion. Ceasing or refusing to
collect the account does not excuse the premises from the fees due herein.
Services shall be resumed thereafter only on payment of the accumulated fees
for the period of collection and period of non-collection plus a ten percent
(10%) penalty.



   (B)   The stoppage of service hereinabove authorized for nonpayment
of collection charges shall be in addition to the right of the city to
proceed for the collection of such unpaid charges in a manner provided by law
for the collection of a municipal claim.



('81 Code, § 220.6, § 3) (Ord. 33-84, passed 11-17-94; Am. Ord. 11-2003,
passed 5-6-03; Am. Ord. 09-2009, passed 4-7-09)



§ 50.18  FEE FOR COLLECTION.



   A fee for collection and disposal of refuse, waste, recyclable
materials placed for collection at the curb or at street level in front of
the premises shall be established by separate ordinance.



(Ord. 11-2003, passed 5-6-03; Am. Ord. 09-2009, passed 4-7-09)



§ 50.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever shall violate § 50.02 shall be guilty of a violation
and fined twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per citation.  No additional citation
shall be given after the previous one until seven (7) days have passed from
the date of the citation in order to allow the owner to comply with § 50.02.



   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of  §§ 50.04
through 50.07, 50.17, or 50.18 shall be fined not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) nor more than five hundred ($500.00) dollars. Each day a violation
is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable as such.



('81 Code, § 810.3) (Am. Ord. 18-82, passed 9-23-82; Am. Ord. 14-83, passed
6-9-83; Am. Ord. 18-83, passed 7-28-83; Am. Ord. 11-2003, passed 5-6-03; Am.
Ord. 09-2009, passed 4-7-09).



CHAPTER 51:  WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM



Section



General Provisions



   51.01   Management, control and operation



   51.02   Enlargement of consolidated water and sanitary sewer system



Service Regulations



   51.15   Connection into sanitary sewer system



   51.16   Sewer tap-in/hook-up inspections



   51.17   Premises to purchase water from city



   51.18   Permit required to alter streets, sidewalks, water or sewer
lines to connect to system



   51.19   Discontinuance of service upon violation



Prohibited Acts



   51.30   Permitting flow of water when not being used prohibited



   51.31   Unauthorized use of fire hydrant



   51.32   Removal of meter without permission



   51.33   Storm or surface water prohibited entry into sanitary sewer
system; disconnection of roof or area drain



   51.34   Discharge of certain substances into storm sewer system
prohibited; disconnection for violation



Rates and Charges



   51.45   Connection and inspection fees



   51.46   Rates and charges for use and services of consolidated
municipal water-works and sewer system



   51.47   Application and responsibility for rates and charges



   51.48   Billing and collection; enforcement



 



   51.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Non-storm water discharges to the storm drainage system, see Ch. 53



   Water and Sewer Commission, see §§ 31.50 through 31.58



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 51.01  MANAGEMENT, CONTROL AND OPERATION.



   The management, control and operation of the combined and consolidated
municipal waterworks and sewer system of the city shall be carried on by the
special commission, pursuant to §§ 31.50 through 31.58, and known as the
Water and Sewer Commission.



   (A)   The Water and Sewer Commission may direct the City Council to
enact ordinances to enforce the management, control and operation of the
water and sanitary sewer systems consistent with the purposes of the original
ordinances providing for the issuance of the water and sewer revenue bonds,
the establishment and revision of rates and charges for the use of said
services, the collection of such charges and the proper use thereof of such
services and their systems.



   (B)   The Water and Sewer Commission shall make available to all
residents of the city and all persons using, desiring or required to use the
public water and sanitary sewer system rules and regulations, which shall be
complied with, and are prescribed by the Water and Sewer Commission provided
such rules and regulations have been approved by the Council and are
consistent with the purposes of any water and sewer bond issuance during the
period any such water and sewer revenue bonds remain outstanding.



('81 Code, § 610.1, § 1)



§ 51.02  ENLARGEMENT OF CONSOLIDATED WATER AND SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM.



   The city may, at the direction and approval of the Water and Sewer
Commission, extend, improve and enlarge the combined and consolidated
municipal waterworks and sanitary sewer system and may, pursuant to law,
acquire easements or rights-of-way over, under, through and across privately
owned property within the city.



('81 Code, § 610.1, § 5)



SERVICE REGULATIONS



§ 51.15  CONNECTION INTO SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM.



   (A)   All owners and occupants of houses, apartments, hotels,
motels, trailer camps, manufacturing or commercial establishments, or any
other building of any kind situated upon lots abutting upon any street, alley
or easement, in which there is hereafter installed a sewer line which is a
part of the combined and consolidated municipal waterworks and sewer system
of the city, shall within sixty (60) days from the date such sewer line is
installed and placed in operation, connect therewith all sanitary sewerage
drainpipes of such houses, apartments, hotels, motels, trailer camps,
manufacturing or commercial establishments, or other buildings conveying the
sewage therefrom into said sewer line, such connections to be made under such
regulations as the City Council may establish by ordinance, and failure to do
so is hereby declared to be unlawful and to constitute a nuisance.



   (B)   All architects, contractors, builders or other persons who
shall hereafter erect new buildings for dwelling, manufacturing or commercial
purposes, on a lot or parcel of ground abutting on a street, alley or
easement, in which there may be hereafter installed and maintained any such
sewer line, shall before erecting any such building exhibit to the City
Council or the Water and Sewer Commission of the city or any other board or
body of the city which may be in charge and control of the combined and
consolidated municipal waterworks and sewer system, satisfactory evidence
that a means has been or will be provided for connecting the sanitary sewage
drainpipes form such building with such sewer line.



   (C)   Each and all parties required under this chapter to tap-in to
the waterworks or sanitary sewer system of the city shall be required to pay
a separate charge as may be enacted by special ordinance per tap-in made.



('81 Code, § 610.1, § 4)



§ 51.16  SEWER TAP-IN/HOOK-UP INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Property owners shall be responsible for the expense of sewer
inspection by tele-electronic camera where timely notice of proposed sanitary
sewer hook-up is not provided to city personnel to enable same to make the
required visual inspection of sanitary sewer hook-up/tap-in.



   (B)   The requirements of this section shall be added to city
building permits or addendum thereto. 



('81 Code, § 810.4)  (Am. Ord. 19-83, passed 8-11-83)



§ 51.17  PREMISES TO PURCHASE WATER FROM CITY.



   (A)   Any premises within the city that has tapped into the city
sewerage system is hereby required to purchase the water for that premises
from the city.



   (B)   A premises will not be permitted to tap into the city sewerage
system unless they also agree to purchase their water from the city.



   (C)   When a premises does tap into the city sewerage system they
will be entitled to all the rights and benefits that all premises within the
city enjoy with regard to the maintenance of the sewerage system and the
distribution of water.



(Ord. 17-88, passed 8-25-88)



§ 51.18  PERMIT REQUIRED TO ALTER STREETS, SIDEWALKS, WATER OR SEWER LINES
TO CONNECT TO SYSTEM.



   No person or entity shall cut, excavate, damage or in any way alter any
street, sidewalk, water line or sewer line in the city in order to connect
into the consolidated water or sewer system of the city without first
obtaining a permit for such action form the City Clerk-Treasurer.  Nor shall
any person cause such action to be done or suffer or permit any person acting
on his behalf or under his control to do such action without first obtaining
such permit.  This chapter shall apply to water and sewer lines on private
property if such lines are part of or connected with the water and sewer
systems operated by the city.



   (A)   Such permit shall be granted pursuant to application therefore
made to the City Clerk-Treasurer in such manner and in such form as he may
prescribe.



   (B)   Every cut, excavation or alteration made pursuant to this
chapter shall be fully repaired and restored by the permittee or the person
or entity on whose behalf the permittee is acting, according to generally
accepted engineering standards.  Such repair or restoration shall be
inspected by the City Engineer, or such qualified person as he may
designate.  The permittee shall notify the City Engineer of the progress of
such repair or restoration and shall comply with the reasonable directions of
the City Engineer concerning the time and manner of such inspection.  The
Engineer may promulgate regulations, subject to the approval of the City
Council, setting forth the standards and requirements of acceptable repair
and restoration. 



   (C)   The permittee shall pay to the city a fee in the amount set
forth in the fee schedule established by ordinance which is hereby adopted by
reference.



   (D)   The City Clerk-Treasurer shall, as a condition precedent to
granting a permit under this chapter, require the permittee to post a
performance bond in an amount, specified by the City Engineer, sufficient to
defray the cost of performing the repair and restoration work that will arise
out of the work to be done pursuant to that permit.



   (E)   The term PERMITTEE as used herein shall include and apply to
any person or entity on behalf of whom the work being done under the permit
is to be performed, and the application for such permit shall be signed by
such person or entity in addition to the person or entity actually doing the
work.



('81 Code, § 610.1, § 6(F))



§ 51.19  DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE UPON VIOLATION.



   (A)   In addition to the provisions for discontinuance of services
in order to effect collection of delinquent accounts, as relates to all other
provisions of this chapter, the Chairperson of the Water and Sewer Commission
of the city is hereby authorized to cause water and/or sewer service to be
discontinued to any premises on which a violation of this chapter is suffered
or continued to exist after ten (10) days' notice of the existence of such
violation, and that such service will be discontinued has been given to that
owner or occupant by certified mail.  The Chairperson of the Water and Sewer
Commission shall order such discontinuance only upon certification by an
engineer employed by the city or by an engineer employed by Sanitation
District No. 1 of Campbell and Kenton Counties, Kentucky, that any provision
of this chapter are being violated and relating specifically the cause and
nature of such violations.  If the owner or occupant of such premises files
with the City Clerk-Treasurer an affidavit that said condition does not exist
on said premises, the Water and Sewer Commission may either hold a hearing
itself to determine the issue or may cause the property owner to be cited to
the Kentucky Water Pollution Control Commission for the determination of such
issue, and any reasonable cost incurred incident to such hearing or hearings
shall be charged to the owner or user, jointly or severally, should such
actions result in a finding against the owner or user with regard to any
alleged violations which is the cause of the hearing.



   (B)   Service as may be discontinued under this section shall not be
resumed until the condition causing the violation has been corrected, or
until a course of remedial action directed to correct the resultant violation
has been made, submitted by proof, and accepted by the Water and Sewer
Commission or their representative.



('81 Code, § 610.1, § 7(B))



PROHIBITED ACTS



§ 51.30  PERMITTING FLOW OF WATER WHEN NOT BEING USED PROHIBITED.



   No person shall waste water by leaving open a hydrant or faucet
connected to the water system and to allow water to flow from same when such
water is not being used, unless authorized by the city. 



('81 Code, § 610.1, § 6(A))  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.31  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF FIRE HYDRANT.



   No person, other than an employee of the city or an authorized member
of the Fire Department, shall use a fire hydrant on the city water system, or
use thereon any wrench or tool other than a regulation Fire Department
spanner, except in cases of emergency, without first having secured from the
city a license for such use.



('81 Code, § 610.1, § 6(B))  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.32  REMOVAL OF METER WITHOUT PERMISSION.



   No person, other than an authorized employee of the city, shall remove
a meter without permission of the city.  When a meter has been unlawfully
removed, it shall be unlawful to use water supplied by the service branch to
which the meter was attached.  Where a meter is found to have been
unlawfully removed, the water shall be shut off forthwith and not turned on
again until payment has been made for the estimated amount of the water used
in addition to any fine that may be imposed.



('81 Code, § 610.1, § 6(C))  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.33  STORM OR SURFACE WATER PROHIBITED ENTRY INTO SANITARY SEWER
SYSTEM; DISCONNECTION OF ROOF OR AREA DRAIN.



   (A)   No owner or occupant of any premises in the city shall cause
or permit the introduction of storm or surface water into the sanitary sewer
system of the city as a result of any conditions existing on the premises,
including but not limited to the connection of roof or other drains (whether
inside or outside a building) through which such introduction occurs to said
sanitary sewer system or to any sewer line connected with said sanitary sewer
system.  And no owner or occupant of premises served by any sanitary sewer
line not accepted by the city shall permit such line to fall into such a
state of disrepair that such introduction occurs.



('81 Code, § 610.1, § 6(D))



   (B)   Every owner or occupant of the premises on which such drain
exists shall have the affirmative duty to disconnect any roof or area drain
through which any introduction of storm or surface water into the sanitary
sewer system of the city occurs (whether the drain be located inside or
outside a building) or otherwise to prevent such introduction.  Every owner
or occupant of premises served by a sanitary sewer line which has not been
accepted by the city, which is connected directly or indirectly with the
city's sanitary sewer system shall maintain such line in such a state of
repair that no introduction of storm or surface water into the city's
sanitary sewer lines will occur through breaks or leaks in such unaccepted
line. 



('81 Code, § 610.0, § 6(E))  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.34  DISCHARGE OF CERTAIN SUBSTANCES INTO STORM SEWER SYSTEM
PROHIBITED; DISCONNECTION FOR VIOLATION.



   (A)   No person, firm, or corporation shall discharge or cause to be
discharged into any natural outlet or storm sewer, any sanitary sewage,
polluted waters, harmful waters or waste, whether liquid, solid or gas,
capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, damage or hazard to
structures, equipment and personnel who work on the sewer system or otherwise
interferes with the proper operation of the storm sewer system.



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation found in violation of this
section may be grounds for the city disconnecting the water service to
prohibit the objectionable substance from entering into the city's storm
sewer system.



(Ord. 07-2001, passed 8-21-01)



RATES AND CHARGES



§ 51.45  CONNECTION AND INSPECTION FEES.



   (A)   All new and existing developments that have not yet obtained a
permit to tap into the city's water system shall pay a permit fee for the
privilege in the amount set forth in the fee schedule adopted by ordinance,
which is hereby adopted by reference. 



   (B)   Any existing or future development that has not yet tapped
into or connected into the city sewerage system is hereby assessed a permit
fee as set forth in the fee schedule adopted by reference above, for the
privilege. 



   (C)   If the applicants for the above described permits have met all
the requirements as set out by the Water and Sewer Commission and the Water
and Sewer Commission's Engineer for connecting into the city's sewer and
water system and have paid the fees required, the permit shall be issued to
the applicant. 



   (D)   Effective immediately upon all inspections required by the
Water and Sewer Commission or the Water and Sewer Engineer an inspection fee,
in the amount specified in the fee schedule adopted herein by reference will
be assessed. 



(Ord. 16-88, passed 8-11-88)



§ 51.46  RATES AND CHARGES FOR USE AND SERVICES OF CONSOLIDATED MUNICIPAL
WATERWORKS AND SEWER SYSTEM.



   There is hereby established a schedule of rates and charges for the use
and services of the portion of the combined and consolidated municipal
waterworks and sewer system furnishing water and sewer service.  The
schedule is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this code the same
as if set forth at length herein.



(Am. Ord. 11-91, passed 5-23-91)



§ 51.47  APPLICATION AND RESPONSIBILITY FOR RATES AND CHARGES.



   (A)   The Water and Sewer Commission shall establish rates and
charges for any water or sewer services provided for under this chapter and
shall establish a separate charge for each and every tap-in to or connection
with the water or sewer system.  The schedules of rates and charges as
provided under § 51.46 and as may be in effect from time to time shall apply
to all residential, commercial and industrial establishments in any manner
directly or indirectly connected with and served by the combined and
consolidated municipal waterworks and sewer system of the city.



   (B)   In the event any building or premises uses water in excess of
2,000 cubic feet per month as shown by the water meter readings for two
consecutive months, and it can be shown that a substantial portion of the
water as so measured does not and cannot enter the municipal sewer
facilities, then the City Council or the Water and Sewer Commission, or any
other board or body of the city which may be in charge and control of the
operation of the combined and consolidated municipal works and system may
determine in such manner as may be found practicable the amount of water
entering the sewers and the sewer rate or charge shall be based thereon, or
may require or permit the installation of additional meters or measuring
devices in such manner as to determine the quantity of water or sewage
actually entering the municipal sewer facilities, in which case, the sewer
rate or charge shall be based thereon. 



   (C)   In the event the sewage, water or other liquid wastes being
discharged into the municipal sewer facilities from any building or premises
contain unduly high concentrates of any substances which add to the operating
costs of the municipal sewer facilities then special rates, rentals or
charges may be established, charged and collected as to such building or
premises, or the owner or other interested party may be required to specially
treat such sewage, water or other liquid wastes before it is discharged into
the municipal sewer facilities.



   (D)   Whenever it is determined by the Water and Sewer Commission to
be necessary to classify any commercial institutions or industries by reason
of the usual purpose for which water is used or the character of the sewage,
water or other liquid wastes discharged therefrom, or whenever the
established schedules of rates and charges for any reason are not applicable,
then special rates or other charges may be established by the City Council by
ordinance and any person, firm or corporation being dissatisfied with the
established schedules of rates and charges by reason of peculiar or unusual
use or occupancy of any premises, and consequently, alleging peculiar or
unusual uses of water, may file application with the Water and Sewer
Commission for special classification rates and charges.



   (E)   The rates and charges as may be in effect from time to time
shall be billed to the owners or occupants of the premises, and if the
occupant of any of the premises is not the owner, both the occupant and the
owner shall be responsible for the payment of the water and/or sewer bills.



   (F)   The rates and charges in effect from time to time for water
service, sanitary sewer service and tap-in charges as necessary by special
ordinance in order that the city may comply with the covenants and
undertaking securing said Water and Sewer Revenue Bonds of the city.



('81 Code, § 610.1, § 2)



§ 51.48  BILLING AND COLLECTION; ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Any properly revised schedule of water service rates and
charges shall be put into effect and collection on all water bills rendered
after the effective date of this chapter and the schedule of sewer service
rates and charges shall be put into effect and collection from and after the
date of connection of the respective buildings and premises to the municipal
sewer facilities.  The rates and charges aforesaid shall be billed quarterly
and all bills for such services shall be payable within fifteen (15) days
after rendition and if not paid within this period, a ten percent (10%)
penalty shall be added.  The Water and Sewer Commission shall render the
bills for waterworks and sewer services as aforesaid and same shall be
collected and accounted for in the manner as prescribed by law and the
proceedings pursuant to which the Water and Sewer Revenue Bonds of the city
are issued.  It is the express intention that bills for sewer service and
water delivered to the same premises shall be billed collected and enforced
together.  The City Attorney is hereby authorized and directed to enforce
and collect any charges remaining delinquent for sixty (60) days.



('81 Code, § 610.1, § 3)  (Am. Ord. 2-90, passed 3-8-90)



   (B)   Collection of bills.  If any water bill is not paid as billed
within the 15-day period following the day upon which they are mailed to such
owner or user as hereinabove mentioned, such bill shall be considered
delinquent, and, accordingly, a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of
such outstanding bill shall be levied and imposed for each month or portion
thereof per month the bill remains outstanding, unpaid and delinquent. 
Service may also be disconnected by the city in accordance with division (C).



   (C)   Disconnection for late payment.  The city shall disconnect
utility service in accord with the following policies:



      (1)   When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue
utility service to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be
reinstated only after all bills for service then due have been paid and any
deposit required has been made.  It is the policy of the city to discontinue
utility service to customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after
notice and a meaningful opportunity to be heard on disputed bills.  The
city's form for application for utility service and all bills shall contain,
in addition to the titles, address, room number and telephone number of the
official in charge of billing, clearly visible and easily readable provisions
to the effect that:



         (a)   All bills are due and payable on or before the
date set forth on the bill; and



         (b)   If any bill is not paid by or before that date, a
second bill will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not
paid within forty-five (45) days of the mailing of the second bill, service
will be discontinued for nonpayment; and



         (c)   Any customer disputing the correctness of his bill
shall have a right to a hearing at which time he may be represented in person
and by counsel or any other person of his choosing and may present orally or
in writing his complaint and contentions to the city official in charge of
utility billing.  This official shall be authorized to order that the
customer's service not be discontinued and shall have the authority to make a
final determination of the customer's complaint.



      (2)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be
entertained; only questions of proper and correct billing will be
considered.  In the absence of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the
hearing procedure provided herein, service will be discontinued at the time
specified.



      (3)   An additional charge of twenty-five dollars ($25.00)
shall be imposed and collected for reinstatement of services as herein caused
to be terminated incident to collection of any unpaid account.



      (4)   All receipts toward payment of any bills outstanding
shall first be applied toward any penalty as may be due on such account
incident to the provisions of this chapter.



('81 Code, § 61.01, § 7(A))



§ 51.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   In addition to the remedies provided for in § 51.19, every
owner or occupant of premises who causes or permits a violation of this
chapter other than with regard to payment of bills to exist on said premises
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be fined not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned upon conviction of such offense.  Each day
such violation is caused or permitted to exist shall constitute a separate
offense.



   (B)   Further, the City Council may, if deemed necessary to protect
the public ways and public utilities of the city, refuse to grant additional
permits under this chapter to anyone twice convicted of violating it.



('81 Code, § 610.1, § 7(C))



   (C)   For any violation of § 51.34 the party or parties responsible
may be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation, and each day shall constitute a
separate offense.



(Ord. 07-2001, passed 8-21-01)



CHAPTER 52:  MUNICIPAL UTILITIES REGULATIONS



Section



   52.01   Installation of cable television and other media lines



 



   52.99   Penalty



§ 52.01  INSTALLATION OF CABLE TELEVISION AND OTHER MEDIA LINES.



   All cable television lines or terminals or other forms of media systems
and communications requiring wiring or cable lines shall be installed
underground within all areas within the city where the existing electrical
utility lines of any such areas are also located underground.



('81 Code, § 420.2, § 1)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of violating § 52.01
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined one hundred dollars
($100.00) for each occurrence with each day and any such violation continues
being considered a separate violation.



('81 Code, § 420.2, § 2)



CHAPTER 53:  STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM



Section



   53.01   Purpose and intent



   53.02   Definitions



   53.03   Applicability



   53.04   Responsibility for administration



   53.05   Ultimate responsibility



   53.06   Discharge prohibitions



   53.07   Suspension of MS4 access



   53.08   Industrial or construction activity discharges



   53.09   Monitoring of discharges



   53.10   Requirements to prevent, control, and reduce storm water
pollutants by the use of best management practices



   53.11   Watercourse protection



   53.12   Notification of spills



   53.13   Enforcement



   53.14   Appeal of notice of violation



   53.15   Enforcement measures after appeal



   53.16   Cost of abatement of the violation



   53.17   Injunctive relief



   53.18   Alternative actions



   53.19   Violations deemed a public nuisance



 



   53.99   Penalty



§ 53.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety, and
general welfare of the citizens of the city through the regulation of
non-storm water discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent
practicable as required by federal and state law. This chapter establishes
methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The
objectives of this chapter are:



   (A)   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges by any user.



   (B)   To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the
municipal separate storm sewer system.



   (C)   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection,
surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with
this chapter.



(Ord. 16-2005, passed 11-15-05)



§ 53.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:



   AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY.  Employees or designees of the director
of the municipal agency designated to enforce this chapter.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS). Schedules of activities, prohibitions
of practices, general good house keeping practices, pollution prevention and
educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices
to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to
stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also
include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control
site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from
raw materials storage.



   CLEAN WATER ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. §
1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.



   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES construction
permits. Currently these include construction projects resulting in land
disturbance of five (5) acres or more. Beginning in March 2003, NPDES Storm
Water Phase II permits will be required for construction projects resulting
in land disturbance of one (1) acre or more. Such activities include but are
not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.



   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.  Any material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.



   ILLEGAL DISCHARGE.  Any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge
to the storm drain system, except as exempted in § 53.09.



   ILLICIT CONNECTIONS. An illicit connection is defined as either of the
following:



      (1)   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or
subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system
including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-storm water
discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the
storm drain system;



      (2)   Any connections to the storm drain system from indoor
drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been
previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement
agency; or



      (3)   Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or
industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented
in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized
enforcement agency.



   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY.  Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits
as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b)(14).



   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORM WATER
DISCHARGE PERMIT.   A permit issued by EPA (or by a state under authority
delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of
pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable
on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.



   NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGE.  Any discharge to the storm drain system
that is not composed entirely of storm water.



   PERSON.  Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner
or as the owner's agent.



   POLLUTANT.  Anything which causes or contributes to pollution.
Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and
solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid
wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded
or abandoned objects, ordnances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or
contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers;
hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens;
dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that
result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive
matter of any kind.



   PREMISES.  Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land
whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking
strips.



   STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM.  Publicly-owned facilities by which storm water
is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm
drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and
human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage
structures.



   STORM WATER.  Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting
entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from
such precipitation.



   STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN.  A document which describes the
best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or
business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the
actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater
conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.



   WASTEWATER.  Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated
storm water, discharged from a facility.



(Ord. 16-2005, passed 11-15-05)



§ 53.03  APPLICABILITY.



   This chapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system
generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted
by an authorized enforcement agency.



(Ord. 16-2005, passed 11-15-05)



§ 53.04  RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.



   The city shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of
this chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the authorized
enforcement agency may be delegated in writing by the Director of the
authorized enforcement agency to persons or entities acting in the beneficial
interest of or in the employ of the agency.



(Ord. 16-2005, passed 11-15-05)



§ 53.05  ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY.



   The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter
are minimum standards; therefore this chapter does not intend nor imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.



(Ord. 16-2005, passed 11-15-05)



§ 53.06  DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   Prohibition of illegal discharges.



      (1)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into
the municipal storm drain system or watercourses any materials, including but
not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or
contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than
storm water.



      (2)   The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal
discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as
follows:



         (a)   The following discharges are exempt from discharge
prohibitions established by this chapter: water line flushing or other
potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream
flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains,
uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not
including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air
conditioning condensation, springs, noncommercial washing of vehicles,
natural riparian habitat or wet-land flows; swimming pools (if dechlorinated
- typically less than one (1) PPM chlorine), fire fighting activities, and
any other water source not containing pollutants.



         (b)   Discharges specified in writing by the authorized
enforcement agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety.



         (c)   Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but
requires a verbal notification to the authorized enforcement agency prior to
the time of the test.



         (d)   The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stolui
water discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge
order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the
Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in
full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and
other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has
been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system.



   (B)   Prohibition of illicit connections.



      (1)   The construction, use, maintenance or continued
existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.



      (2)   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation,
illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time
of connection.



      (3)   A person is considered to be in violation of this
chapter if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows
such a connection to continue.



(Ord. 16-2005, passed 11-15-05)



§ 53.07  SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS.



   (A)   Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency
situations.  The city may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge
access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or
threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial
danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the
MS4 or waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a
suspension order issued in an emergency, the authorized enforcement agency
may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the
MS4 or Waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons.



   (B)   Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge.



      (1)   Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this
chapter may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate
or reduce an illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement agency will notify
a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may
petition the authorized enforcement agency for a reconsideration and hearing.



      (2)   A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4
access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior
approval of the authorized enforcement agency.



(Ord. 16-2005, passed 11-15-05)



§ 53.08  INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES.



   Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES
storm water discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit.
Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to
the city prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.



(Ord. 16-2005, passed 11-15-05)



§ 53.09  MONITORING OF DISCHARGES.



   (A)   Applicability.  This section applies to all facilities that
have storm water discharges associated with industrial activity, including
construction activity.



   (B)   Access to facilities.



      (1)   The city shall be permitted to enter and inspect
facilities subject to regulation under this chapter as often as may be
necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. If a discharger has
security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance
before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary
arrangements to allow access to representatives of the authorized enforcement
agency.



      (2)   Facility operators shall allow the city ready access to
all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of
an NPDES permit to discharge storm water, and the performance of any
additional duties as defined by state and federal law.



      (3)   The city shall have the right to set up on any permitted
facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the authorized
enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's
storm water discharge.



      (4)   The city has the right to require the discharger to
install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to
measure storm water flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their
accuracy.



      (5)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy
access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the city and shall
not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the
operator.



      (6)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to a
permitted facility is a violation of a storm water discharge permit and of
this chapter. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES permit
to discharge storm water associated with industrial activity commits an
offense if the person denies the authorized enforcement agency reasonable
access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity
authorized or required by this chapter.



   (C)   If the city has been refused access to any part of the
premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he or she is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a
routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with
this chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public
health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement
agency may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent
jurisdiction.



(Ord. 16-2005, passed 11-15-05)



§ 53.10  REQUIREMENTS TO PREVENT, CONTROL, AND REDUCE STORM WATER
POLLUTANTS BY THE USE OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.



   The city will adopt requirements identifying best management practices
for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to
pollution or contamination of storm water, the storm drain system, or waters
of the U.S. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment
shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental
discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm
drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and
non-structural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or
premise, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be
required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and
non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the
municipal separate stonn sewer system. Compliance with all terms and
conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of storm water
associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be
deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be
part of a stoiniwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as necessary for
compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit.



(Ord. 16-2005, passed 11-15-05)



§ 53.11  WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.



   Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or
such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse
within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other
obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow
of water through the watercourse. in addition, the owner or lessee shall
maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a
watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use,
function, or physical integrity of the watercourse.



(Ord. 16-2005, passed 11-15-05)



§ 53.12  NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS.



   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal
discharges or pollutants discharging into storm water, the storm drain
system, or water of the U.S. said person shall take all necessary steps to
ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event
of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify
emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch
services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person
shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone or
facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by
phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city
within three (3) business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of
prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment,
the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site
written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its
recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three (3) years.



(Ord. 16-2005, passed 11-15-05)



§ 53.13  ENFORCEMENT.



   Notice of violation.



   (A)   Whenever the city finds that a person has violated a
prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the authorized
enforcement agency may order compliance by written notice of violation to the
responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation:



      (1)   The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;



      (2)   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;



      (3)   That violating discharges, practices, or operations
shall cease and desist;



      (4)   The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; and



      (5)   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and
remediation costs; and



      (6)   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.



   (B)   If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected
property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further
advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the
established deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental
agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the
violator.



(Ord. 16-2005, passed 11-15-05)



§ 53.14  APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination
of the authorized enforcement agency. The notice of appeal must be received
within days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal
before the appropriate authority or his or her designee shall take place
within fifteen (15) days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal.
The decision of the municipal authority or their designee shall be final.



(Ord. 16-2005, passed 11-15-05)



§ 53.15  ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL.



   If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements
set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within
thirty (30) days of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the
decision of the authorized enforcement agency, then representatives of the
authorized enforcement agency shall enter upon the subject private property
and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the
violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person,
owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the
government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the
purposes set forth above.



(Ord. 16-2005, passed 11-15-05)



§ 53.16  COST OF ABATEMENT OF THE VIOLATION.



   Within thirty (30) days after abatement of the violation, the owner of
the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including
administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting
to the amount of the assessment within fifteen (15) days. If the amount due
is not paid within a  timely manner as determined by the decision of the
municipal authority or by the expiration of the time in which to file an
appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property
and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the city by reason of such violation. The liability shall be paid
in not more than twelve (12) equal payments. Interest at the rate of percent
per annum shall be assessed on the balance beginning on the      day
following discovery of the violation.



(Ord. 16-2005, passed 11-15-05)



§ 53.17  INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to
comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. If a person has violated
or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, the authorized
enforcement agency may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction
restraining the person from activities which would create further violations
or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.



(Ord. 16-2005, passed 11-15-05)



§ 53.18  ALTERNATIVE ACTIONS.



   In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized
by this chapter, the authorized enforcement agency may impose upon a violator
alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance
at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, and the like.



(Ord. 16-2005, passed 11-15-05)



§ 53.19  VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is
declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at
the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise
compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.



(Ord. 16-2005, passed 11-15-05)



§ 53.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person that has violated or continues to violate this
chapter shall be liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the
law, and shall be subject to a criminal penalty of five hundred dollars
($500) per violation per day and/or imprisonment for a period of time not to
exceed three hundred and sixty-five (365) days.



   (B)   The authorized enforcement agency may recover all attorney's
fees court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this
chapter, including sampling and monitoring expenses.



(Ord. 16-2005, passed 11-15-05)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



Chapter



      70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      71.   TRAFFIC RULES



      72.   PARKING REGULATIONS



      73.   BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES



      74.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



      75.   PARKING SCHEDULES



CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   70.01   Definitions



   70.02   Required obedience to traffic directions



   70.03   Powers and duties of Police Department



   70.04   Authority for enforcement



   70.05   Temporary regulations



Traffic-Control Devices



   70.15   Signal legends



   70.16   Establishment and maintenance of traffic-control devices



   70.17   Obedience to signals



   70.18   Interference with signals



   70.19   Unauthorized signals or markings



   70.20   Device to be legible and in proper position



   70.21   Temporary disregard of devices by police officers



 



   70.99   General penalty



§ 70.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this title the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES. Vehicles of the Fire Department or
Police Department, vehicles of the Commonwealth Attorney's office when on
official business, and ambulances on an authorized emergency run.



   BOULEVARD.   Any legally designated street at which cross traffic is
required to stop before entering or crossing such boulevard.



   BUSINESS DISTRICT.   Any portion of any street between two consecutive
intersections in which 50% or more of the frontage on either side of the
street is used for business purposes.



   CROSSWALK.   That portion of the roadway included within the extension
of the sidewalk across any intersection, and such other portions of the
roadway between two intersections, as may be legally designated as crossing
places and marked by stanchions, paint lines, or otherwise.



   CURB.   The boundary of that portion of the street used for vehicles
whether marked by curbstones or not.



   FUNERAL PROCESSION.   Two (2)  or more vehicles accompanying the body
of a deceased person when each vehicle has its headlights on or is displaying
a pennant attached in such a manner as to be clearly visible to approaching
traffic.



(KRS 189.378(1))



   INTERSECTION.   That part of the public way embraced within the
extensions of the street lines of two or more streets which join at an angle
whether or not one such street crosses the other.



   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.   All signs, signals, warnings,
directions, markings, and devices placed or erected or maintained by
authority of the Chief of Police.



   ONE-WAY STREET.   A street on which vehicles are permitted to move in
one direction only.



   OPERATOR.   Every person who is in actual physical control of the
guidance, starting, and stopping of a vehicle.



   PARK.   When applied to vehicles, to leave a vehicle standing, whether
occupied or not, for a period of time longer than is necessary to receive or
discharge passengers or property.



   PEDESTRIAN.   Any person afoot or in a wheelchair.



   PLAY STREET.   Any street or portion thereof so designated by the
Chief of Police and reserved as a play area for children, from which all
traffic is barred, except vehicles to and from abutting properties.



   POLICE DEPARTMENT.   The Police Department or other persons or agency
authorized to perform the duties of § 70.03 or any other acts necessary to
implement and enforce this traffic code.



   PUBLIC WAY.   The  entire width between property lines of every way,
dedicated passway, or street set aside for public travel, except bridle paths
and foot paths.



   REVERSE TURN.   To turn a vehicle on any street in such a manner as to
proceed in the opposite direction.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY.   The privilege of the immediate and preferential use of
the street.



   ROADWAY.   That portion of any street, improved, designated, or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel.



   SIDEWALK.   That portion of the street between the curb and the
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.



   STOPPING.   As applied to vehicles, to stop a vehicle longer than is
actually necessary to receive or discharge passengers.



   STREET.   Every public way, including alleys.



   TRAFFIC.   Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, buses, and
other conveyances, individually or collectively, while using any street for
the purpose of travel.



   VEHICLE.   Includes all agencies for the transportation of persons or
property over or upon the public highways of the Commonwealth and all
vehicles passing over or upon the highways.  MOTOR VEHICLE.   Includes all
vehicles, as defined above except, road rollers; road graders; farm tractors;
vehicles on which power shovels are mounted; construction equipment
customarily used only on the site of construction and which is not practical
for the transportation of persons or property upon the highways; vehicles
that travel exclusively upon rails; vehicles propelled by electric power
obtained from overhead wires while being operated within any municipality or
where the vehicles do not travel more than five (5) miles beyond the city
limits of any municipality; and vehicles propelled by muscular power.



(KRS 189.010(19))



§ 70.02  REQUIRED OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC DIRECTIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to
comply with any lawful order, signal, or direction given by a uniformed
police officer, or to fail or refuse to comply with any of the traffic
regulations of this traffic code.



   (B)   The provisions of this traffic code shall apply to the driver
of any vehicle owned or used in the service of the United States government,
this state, county, or city, and it shall be unlawful for any such driver to
violate any of the provisions of this traffic code, except as otherwise
permitted in this traffic code or by state statute.



   (C)   Every person propelling any pushcart or riding a bicycle or an
animal on any roadway, and every person driving any animal on any roadway,
and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle shall be subject to the
provisions of this traffic code applicable to the driver of any vehicle,
except those provisions of this traffic code which by their very nature can
have no application.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.03  POWERS AND DUTIES OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.



   It shall be the duty of the Police Department to direct all traffic in
conformance with this traffic code and to enforce the traffic regulations as
set forth in this traffic code, to make arrest for traffic violations, to
investigate accidents, and to cooperate with other officers of the city in
the administration of the traffic laws, and in developing ways and means to
improve traffic conditions.



§ 70.04  AUTHORITY FOR ENFORCEMENT.



   Authority to direct and enforce all traffic regulations of this city in
accordance with the provisions of this traffic code and to make arrests for
traffic violations is given to the Police Department, and except in case of
emergency, it shall be unlawful for any other person to direct or attempt to
direct traffic by voice, hand, whistle, or any other signal.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.05  TEMPORARY REGULATIONS.



   When required for the convenience and safety of the public and to
alleviate unusual traffic problems, the Chief of Police or other authorized
city official shall, at his discretion, have authority to impose such traffic
regulations as he may deem necessary for temporary periods not to exceed two
weeks.  If these temporary regulations are necessary for a period longer
than two weeks, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall be notified in writing of the
extended order.



TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES



§ 70.15  SIGNAL LEGENDS.



   Whenever traffic is regulated or controlled exclusively by a
traffic-control sign or signs exhibiting the words "Go", "Caution", or
"Stop", or exhibiting different colored lights for purposes of traffic
control, the following colors only shall be used, and these terms and lights
shall indicate and be obeyed as follows:



   (A)   Green alone or "Go":  Vehicular traffic facing the signal may
proceed straight through or  turn right or left unless a sign at such place
prohibits either such turn.  However, vehicular traffic shall yield the
right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the
intersection at the time such signal is exhibited.



   (B)   Steady yellow alone or "Caution" when shown following the
green or "Go" signal:  Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow signal is
thereby warned that the related green movement is being terminated or that a
red indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular
traffic shall not enter the intersection.  Vehicular traffic facing a steady
yellow signal may enter and clear the intersection.



   (C)   Red alone or double red or "Stop":  Vehicular traffic facing
the signal shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an
intersection or at such other point as may be indicated by a clearly visible
line, and shall remain standing until green or "Go" is shown alone.



   (D)   Flashing red alone:  Vehicular traffic facing the signal
shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at
such other point as may be indicated by a clearly visible line, and shall not
again proceed until it can do so without danger.



   (E)   Flashing yellow alone:  Vehicular traffic facing the signal
shall reduce its speed and proceed cautiously across the intersection
controlled by such signal.



   (F)   "Yield Right-of-Way":  Vehicular traffic facing the "Yield
Right-of-Way" sign shall bear the primary responsibility  of safely entering
the primary intersecting or merging right-of-way. All traffic facing the sign
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles and pedestrians within such
primary intersecting or merging right-of-way.  No vehicle facing a "Yield
Right-of-Way" sign shall enter the merging or intersecting right-of-way at a
speed in excess of 15 miles per hour, except that this speed limit shall not
apply to vehicles entering an expressway.



   (G)   Lane lights:  When lane lights are installed over any street
for the purpose of controlling the direction of flow of traffic, vehicular
traffic shall move only in traffic lanes over which green arrows appear. 
However, when flashing yellow lights appear above a lane all left turns shall
be made from that lane.  Where red arrows appear above such lanes, vehicles
shall not move against them.  If flashing yellow lights show above a lane,
that lane shall be used only for passing and for left turns unless a sign at
such place prohibits such turn.



Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Traffic-control signals, see KRS 189.338



§ 70.16  ESTABLISHMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.



   The city shall establish and maintain all official traffic-control
devices necessary within the city.  All traffic-control devices, including
signs, shall be employed to indicate one particular warning or regulation,
shall be uniform, and as far as possible shall be placed uniformly.  All
traffic-control devices and signs shall conform to required state
specifications.



§ 70.17  OBEDIENCE TO SIGNALS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to disobey
the signal of any official traffic-control device placed in accordance with
the provisions of this traffic code or of a traffic barrier or sign erected
by any of the public departments or public utilities of the city, or any
electric signal, gate, or watchman at railroad crossings, unless otherwise
directed by a police officer. However, the type and the right to or necessity
for such barrier or sign must be approved by the city.



   (B)   Such sign, signal, marking, or barrier shall have the same
authority as the personal direction of a police officer.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.18  INTERFERENCE WITH SIGNALS.



   No person shall without authority attempt to or in fact alter, deface,
injure, knock down, or remove any official control device or any railroad
sign or signal, or any inscription, shield, or insignia thereon, or any part
thereof.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.19  UNAUTHORIZED SIGNALS OR MARKINGS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, maintain, or
display on or in view of any street any unauthorized sign, signal, marking,
or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official
traffic device or railroad sign or signal which attempts or purports to
direct the movement of traffic, or which conceals or hides from view or
interferes with the effectiveness of any official control device or any
railroad sign or signal.  No person shall place or maintain, nor shall any
public authority permit on any street, any traffic sign or signal any
commercial advertising.  Nothing in this section shall be construed as
restricting any public department or public utility of the city in any
emergency or temporarily from marking or erecting any traffic barrier or sign
whose placing has been approved by the city.



   (B)   Every such prohibited sign, signal, or marking is declared to
be a public nuisance and the city is empowered forthwith to remove it or
cause it to be removed.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.20  DEVICE TO BE LEGIBLE AND IN PROPER POSITION.



   No provision of this traffic code for which signs or any other
traffic-control device is required shall be enforceable against an alleged
violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation the required
device was not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an
ordinarily observant person.



§ 70.21  TEMPORARY DISREGARD OF DEVICES BY POLICE OFFICERS.



   In an emergency any police officer may at his discretion disregard
traffic-control lights or signals or established regulations in order to
facilitate the movement of traffic.



§ 70.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   Fines and penalties for moving violations within the city and upon the
city streets shall be consistent with and, accordingly, the same as those
fines and penalties as may be established and set by state statute.  All
persons being issued a citation for any such violations shall be cited to the
County District Court.



('81 Code, § 510.1, § 2)



CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC RULES




Section




Operation Generally




   71.01   Obstructing traffic





   71.02   Reverse or U turns





   71.03   Backing vehicles





   71.04   Vehicles crossing sidewalks





   71.05   Speed limits




Accidents




   71.15   Duty of operator





   71.16   Accident report




Prohibitions




   71.25   Operator of vehicle to drive carefully





   71.26   Right-of-way of emergency vehicles; following emergency
vehicles; driving over fire hose





   71.27   Smoke emission or other nuisance




Funeral Processions




   71.30   Funeral processions




Parades and Special Events




   71.40   Definitions





   71.41   Permit required





   71.42   Application for permit





   71.43   Standards for issuance of permit





   71.44   Notice of rejection of permit





   71.45   Appeal procedure when permit denied





   71.46   Alternative permit





   71.47   Notice to city and other officials when permit issued





   71.48   Contents of permit





   71.49   Duties of permittee





   71.50   Public conduct during parades or special events





   71.51   Revocation of permit




   71.52   Performance bond/rental fees



   71.53   Insurance, hold harmless agreement and security plan required



   71.54   Notices




   71.55   Sanitation and cleanup




Weight and Width Limits




   71.60   Definition





   71.61   Weight limitations





   71.62   Width, height and length limitations





   71.63   Permit procedures





   71.64   Exceptions









   71.99   Penalty



OPERATION GENERALLY



§ 71.01  OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle or permit it to
remain standing in any street in such manner as to create an obstruction
thereof.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to enter
any intersection or crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other
side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle without
obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding the
indication of any traffic-control signal which may be located at the
intersection or crosswalk.



   (C)   Any intersection deemed by the city to be of special or
critical importance to the movement of traffic shall be marked in a
distinctive manner in order to indicate its importance. Should the operator
of any vehicle enter any intersection so marked when there is insufficient
room on the other side of the intersection to accommodate the vehicle, the
indication of any traffic-control signal notwithstanding, he shall be deemed
to have violated this division rather than division (B) above.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.02  REVERSE OR U TURNS.



   The operator of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to
proceed in the opposite direction unless such movement can be made in safety
without interfering with other traffic.



(KRS 189.330(8))  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.03  BACKING VEHICLES.



   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to back the
vehicle at any intersection for the purpose of executing a turning
movement.  A vehicle from any parking position shall be backed by the
operator in such manner as to proceed on the same side of the roadway in the
lawful direction of travel.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.04  VEHICLES CROSSING SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive
within any sidewalk space except at a permanent or temporary driveway or by
special permit from the Chief of Police or other authorized city official.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive
the vehicle out of any alley, driveway, building, or lot and across a
sidewalk, or its extension across the alley, unless the vehicle has been
brought to a complete stop immediately prior to crossing the sidewalk or its
extension.  On entering the roadway from the alley, driveway, or building
the operator shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the
roadway.  The operator of any vehicle intending to cross a sidewalk and turn
into an alley from the roadway may do so at low speed and with caution.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.05  SPEED LIMITS.



   (A)   It is hereby determined that the speed permitted by state law
is greater than is safe or reasonable under conditions existing on certain
streets and certain areas within the incorporated limits of the city, and,
therefore, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle, except
an emergency vehicle during an emergency, at a speed in excess of the speeds
established by this section when signs are in place giving notice of such
speed limit.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate a
motor vehicle upon and over the streets in the city at a speed greater than
twenty (20) miles per hour, except in safety zones where the speed limit is
decreased and designated on traffic signs, and except upon and over those
portions of the interstate highways of Alexandria Pike and Johns Hill Road,
as they are located within the city where the speed limit shall be that speed
which is set and designated according to state law.



('81 Code, §  520.1)



   (C)   Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be
subject to the fine schedule set forth in KRS 189.394.



Cross-reference:



   Traffic schedules, speed limits, see Ch. 74, Sch. III



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate speed, see KRS 189.390(4)



ACCIDENTS



§ 71.15  DUTY OF OPERATOR.



   It shall be the duty of the owner of, operator of, or passenger in any
motor vehicle which is involved in an accident in which any person is injured
or property damaged to stop immediately and ascertain the extent of the
injury or damage and render such assistance as may be needed.



Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Duty in case of accident, see KRS 189.580



§ 71.16  ACCIDENT REPORT.



   The operator, owner, or passenger involved in an accident resulting in
the injury or death of any person, or an accident in which property is
damaged, shall immediately report the accident or property damage to the
Police Department.



Penalty, see § 70.99



PROHIBITIONS



§ 71.25  OPERATOR OF VEHICLE TO DRIVE CAREFULLY.



   (A)   The operator of any vehicle upon a highway shall operate the
vehicle in a careful manner, with regard for the safety and convenience of
pedestrians and other vehicles upon the highway.



   (B)   No person shall willfully operate any vehicle on any highway
in such a manner as to injure the highway.



(KRS 189.290)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.26  RIGHT-OF-WAY OF EMERGENCY VEHICLES; FOLLOWING EMERGENCY VEHICLES;
DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.



   (A)   Upon the approach of an emergency vehicle equipped with, and
operating, one or more flashing, rotating, or oscillating red or blue lights
visible under normal conditions from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to
the front of such vehicle; or when the driver is giving audible signal by
siren, exhaust whistle, or bell, the driver of every other vehicle shall
yield the right-of-way, immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as
close as possible to, the edge or curb of the highway clear of any
intersection, and stop and remain in such position until the emergency
vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer or
firefighter.



   (B)   Upon the approach of any emergency vehicle operated in
conformity with the provisions of division (A) above, the operator of every
vehicle shall immediately stop clear of any intersection and shall keep such
position until the emergency vehicle has passed, unless directed otherwise by
a police officer or firefighter.



   (C)   No operator of any vehicle, unless he is on official business,
shall follow any emergency vehicle being operated in conformity with the
provisions of division (A) above closer than five hundred (500) feet, nor
shall he drive into, park the vehicle into, or park the vehicle within the
block where the vehicle has stopped in answer to an emergency call or alarm,
unless he is directed otherwise by a police officer or firefighter.



   (D)   No vehicle, train, or other equipment shall be driven over any
unprotected hose of a fire department when the hose is laid down on any
street, private driveway, or track for use at any fire alarm unless the fire
department official in command consents that the hose be driven over.



   (D)   No vehicle, train, or other equipment shall be driven over any
unprotected hose of a fire department when the hose is laid down on any
street, private driveway, or track for use at any fire alarm unless the fire
department official in command consents that the hose be driven over.



   (E)   Upon approaching a stationary emergency vehicle or public
safety vehicle, when the emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle is giving
a signal by displaying alternately flashing yellow, red, red and white, red
and blue or blue lights, a person who drives an approaching vehicle shall,
while proceeding with due caution:



      (1)   Yield the right-of-way by moving to a lane not adjacent
to that of the authorized emergency vehicle if:



         (a)   The person is driving on a highway having at least
four lanes with not fewer than two lanes proceeding in the same direction as
the approaching vehicle; and



         (b)   It is possible to make the lane change with due
regard to safety and traffic conditions; or



      (2)   Reduce the speed of the vehicle, maintaining a safe
speed to road conditions, if changing lanes would be impossible or unsafe.



   (F)   This section does not operate to relieve the person who drives
an emergency vehicle from the duty to operate the vehicle with due regard for
the safety of all persons using the highway.



(KRS 189.930)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.27  SMOKE EMISSION OR OTHER NUISANCE.



   Every vehicle when on a highway shall be so equipped as to make a
minimum of noise, smoke, or other nuisance, to protect the rights of other
traffic, and to promote the public safety.



(KRS 189.020)  Penalty, see § 70.99



FUNERAL PROCESSIONS



§ 71.30  FUNERAL PROCESSIONS.



   (A)   A vehicle in a funeral procession has the right-of-way at an
intersection and may proceed through the intersection if the procession is
led by an escort vehicle displaying flashing yellow, red, or blue lights,
except:



      (1)   When the right-of-way is required by an emergency
vehicle as defined by KRS 189.910;



      (2)   When vehicles in the procession are directed otherwise
by a police or safety officer; or



      (3)   When the vehicle is a train or locomotive.



   (B)   Before assuming the right-of-way, a person who drives a
vehicle in a funeral procession shall exercise due caution with regard to
crossing traffic.



   (C)   A person who drives a vehicle that is not part of a funeral
procession shall not drive the vehicle between the vehicles of the funeral
procession or otherwise interfere with the progress of the procession, except
when:



      (1)   The person is authorized to do so by a police or safety
officer; or



      (2)   The vehicle is an emergency vehicle as defined by KRS
189.910.



   (D)   A person who drives a vehicle that is not part of a funeral
procession shall not illuminate the vehicle headlights or engage in any other
act for the purpose of securing the right-of-way granted to funeral
processions.



   (E)   The escort vehicle, hearse, or other vehicles in a procession
may be equipped with flashing yellow lights for the purpose of notifying the
general public of the procession and gaining the right-of-way at
intersections, or signaling the end of a procession.



   (F)   Persons authorized to use flashing lights as defined in KRS
189.920 may use them while accompanying a funeral procession to warn traffic
that a procession is approaching or that it is in progress.



   (G)   When a funeral procession is in progress, a person driving a
vehicle not in the procession shall not pass or overtake any vehicle in the
procession unless:



      (1)   The person is directed to do so by a police or safety
officer;



      (2)   The  procession is on a street, road, or highway
outside the corporate limits of city, town, or urban-county; or



      (3)   The procession is on an interstate highway or a state
parkway.



(KRS 189.378)



PARADES AND SPECIAL EVENTS



§ 71.40  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CHIEF OF POLICE. Shall include the Chief of Police for the City of
Highland Heights and his or her designee.



   PARADE.  Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant, or
procession of any kind, or any similar display in or on any street, sidewalk,
park, or other public place in the city.



   PERMIT.  A permit or written authorization required by this subchapter.



   SPECIAL EVENT. Any activity which occurs upon private or public
property that will affect the ordinary use of the public property, alleys,
streets, rights-of-way, parking lots or sidewalks. This includes, but is not
limited to fairs, festivals, foot runs, bicycle runs, block parties and
public displays of personal or group feelings about a particular person or
cause. Private social gatherings which will not require the use of city
streets other than for lawful parking are not included.



(Am. Ord. 08-2014, passed 8-5-14)



§ 71.41  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person or persons shall engage in, participate in, aid,
form, or start any parade or special event unless a permit has been obtained
from the Chief of Police or other authorized city official.



   (B)   This subchapter shall not apply to:



      (1)   Funeral processions; or



      (2)   A governmental agency acting within the scope of its
functions.



(Am. Ord. 08-2014, passed 8-5-14)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.42  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   A person seeking issuance of a permit for a parade or special event
shall file an application with the Chief of Police on forms provided by the
Chief of Police.



   (A)   Filing period. The application for a permit shall be filed not
less than five (5) days or not more than sixty (60) days before the date on
which it is proposed to conduct the parade.



   (B)   The application for a permit shall set forth the following
information:



      (1)   The name, address, and telephone number of the person
seeking to conduct the parade or special event;



      (2)   If the parade or special event is proposed to be
conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address, and
telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and of the
authorized and responsible heads of the organization;



      (3)   The name, address, and telephone number of the person
who will be the parade or special event chairman and who will be responsible
for its conduct;



      (4)   The date and hours when the parade or special event is
to be conducted;



      (5)   If the proposed activity is a parade, then the proposed
route to be traveled for the parade, the starting point, and the termination
point. If the proposed activity is to be a special event, then the proposed,
or requested, location and time of such special event. For either activity,
the applicant shall include a statement as to whether the parade or special
event is proposed to occupy all or any portion of the width of any street
within the city.



      (6)   The approximate number of persons, animals, and vehicles
which will constitute the parade, the type of animals, if any, and the
description of the vehicles;



      (7)   A statement as to whether the parade or special event
will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets, sidewalk,
park, or other public place proposed to be traversed;



      (8)   If the proposed activity is a parade, the location by
street of any assembly area for the parade and the time at which units of the
parade will begin to assemble at such assembly areas;



      (9)   If the parade or special event is designed to be held
by, and on behalf of or for, any person other than the applicant, the
applicant for the permit shall file a communication in writing from the
person authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf;



      (10)   Any additional information reasonably necessary for a
fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued.



   (C)   Filing fee. There shall be paid at the time of filing an
application for a parade or special event permit a fee in an amount of
twenty-five dollars ($25).



(Am. Ord. 08-2014, passed 8-5-14)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.43  STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   The Chief of Police shall issue a permit when, from a consideration of
the application and from other information obtained, he finds that:



   (A)   The parade or special event will not substantially interrupt
the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route;



   (B)   The parade or special event will not require the diversion of
so great a number of police officers of the city as to prevent normal police
protection to the city;



   (C)   The parade or special event will not require the diversion of
so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to
portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed parade or
special event;



   (D)   The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at the
parade or special event will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police
protection of, or ambulance service.



(Am. Ord. 08-2014, passed 8-5-14)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.44  NOTICE OF REJECTION OF PERMIT.



   The Chief of Police shall act on the application for a parade or
special event permit within three days, Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays
excluded.  If he disapproves the application, he shall mail to the applicant
within the three days, Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays excluded, a notice of
his action stating the reasons for his denial of the permit.



(Am. Ord. 08-2014, passed 8-5-14)



§ 71.45  APPEAL PROCEDURE WHEN PERMIT DENIED.



   Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a
parade or special event permit to the City Council.  The appeal shall be
taken within thirty (30) days after notice of denial.  The City Council
shall act on the appeal within thirty (30) days after its receipt.



(Am. Ord. 08-2014, passed 8-5-14)



§ 71.46  ALTERNATIVE PERMIT.



   The Chief of Police, in denying an application for a parade or special
event permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade or
special event on a date, at a time, or over a route different than that named
by the applicant.  An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall
file a written notice of his acceptance.  An alternate permit shall conform
to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a parade permit under
this subchapter.



(Am. Ord. 08-2014, passed 8-5-14)



§ 71.47  NOTICE TO CITY AND OTHER OFFICIALS WHEN PERMIT ISSUED.



   Immediately on the issuance of a parade permit, a copy thereof shall be
sent to the following persons: 



   (A)   The Mayor;



   (B)   The City Attorney;



   (C)   The Fire Chief; and



   (D)   The general manager or responsible head of each public
utility, the regular routes of whose routes vehicles will be affected by the
route of the proposed parade.



(Am. Ord. 08-2014, passed 8-5-14)



§ 71.48  CONTENTS OF PERMIT.



   Each parade or special event permit shall state the following
information:



      (A)   Starting and end time;



      (B)   If the proposed activity is a parade, the minimum and
maximum speed of the parade, and the maximum interval of space to be
maintained between the units of the parade;



      (C)   The portions of the street, sidewalk, park, or other
public place to be occupied or traversed by the proposed activity; and



      (D)   Such other information as is reasonably necessary to the
enforcement of this subchapter.



(Am. Ord. 08-2014, passed 8-5-14)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.49  DUTIES OF PERMITTEE.



   A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and
conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances.  The parade chairman
or other person heading or leading the activity shall carry the parade permit
on his person during the conduct of the parade. 



(Am. Ord. 08-2014, passed 8-5-14)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.50  PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING PARADES OR SPECIAL EVENTS.



   (A)   Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct,
impede, or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person,
vehicle, or animal participating or used in a parade or special event.



   (B)   Driving through parades. No driver of a vehicle except a
police car or other emergency vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or
persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and
are conspicuously designated as a parade. 



   (C)   Unpermitted parade or special event activity. Any person in
charge of or responsible for a parade or special event to knowingly conduct
the parade or event in the City of Highland Heights without a permit shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor and be subject to
penalties as provided in the Kentucky Revised Statutes.



   (D)   Failure to comply with permit conditions. Any person in charge
of or responsible for the conduct of a duly licensed parade, special event,
or outdoor demonstration to knowingly fail to comply with any condition of
the permit shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor and be
subject to penalties as provided in the Kentucky Revised Statutes.



(Am. Ord. 08-2014, passed 8-5-14)



Cross reference:



   Parking on parade routes, see § 72.07



§ 71.51  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   The city shall have the authority to revoke a parade or special event
permit issued hereunder on application of the standards for issuance as
herein set forth.



(Am. Ord. 08-2014, passed 8-5-14)



§ 71.52 PERFORMANCE BOND/RENTAL FEES.



   (A)   If deemed necessary by the Chief of Police, a performance bond
may be required before the parade, special event, or outdoor demonstration
permit is issued. The type and amount of the performance bond shall be
determined within the discretion of the Chief of Police based on information
contained in the application. The purpose of the performance bond is to pay
for damages to city property and to pay the costs incurred by the city in the
cleanup of the parade, special event, or outdoor demonstration. Any part of
the bond not withheld by the city will be returned to the permit holder
within thirty (30) business days after the event has occurred.



   (B)   In addition to the performance bond, persons requesting the
rental of certain city property shall be required to comply with established
rental fees.



(Ord. 08-2014, passed 8-5-14)



§ 71.53  INSURANCE, HOLD HARMLESS AGREEMENT AND SECURITY PLAN REQUIRED.



   (A)   If required by the Chief of Police, the permittee shall obtain
and present evidence of comprehensive liability insurance naming the city as
an additional insured in an amount and from an insurance company satisfactory
to the city.



   (B)   The applicant shall provide a hold harmless agreement in which
the applicant agrees to defend, pay and hold harmless the city, its officers
and employees, from any and all claims for personal or property injuries or
damages arising from or in any way connected to the parade or special event.



   (C)   The applicant shall cooperate with the Highland Heights Police
Department in designing a security plan for the parade or special event that
will involve the use of police officers, whether on duty or off duty.



(Ord. 08-2014, passed 8-5-14)



§ 71.54  NOTICES.



   If required by the Chief of Police, the applicant shall pay the cost of
publication of two (2) announcements in the local newspaper one (1) and two
(2) weeks prior to the event.



(Ord. 08-2014, passed 8-5-14)



§ 71.55  SANITATION AND CLEANUP.



   A parade or special event permit may be issued only after adequate
waste disposal facilities have been identified and obtained by the applicant.
The applicant will clean the rights-of-way or other public property of solid
waste and litter, returning it to its pre-event condition immediately at the
conclusion of the event. If the applicant fails to clean up such solid waste,
such clean up shall be arranged by the city and the costs charged to the
applicant.



(Ord. 08-2014, passed 8-5-14)



WEIGHT AND WIDTH LIMITS



§ 71.60  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   VEHICLE and APPARATUS.   Any vehicle or any apparatus which may be
attached thereto shall be defined unless the context requires otherwise
according to the definitions as found in KRS 189.010, 189.011, and 189.265 or
as they may be amended hereafter.



('81 Code, § 520.2, § 1)



§ 71.61  WEIGHT LIMITATIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, push, pull, propel, haul,
operated or park any vehicle, motor vehicle, motor truck, motor bus,
semitrailer, truck tractor, trailer, wrecker or equipment thereto any of the
foregoing whose gross weight is more than 36,000 pounds, as determined by its
rated load, on any street or public way in the city.



('81 Code, § 520.2, § 2)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.62  WIDTH, HEIGHT AND LENGTH LIMITATIONS. 



   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, push, pull, propel, haul,
operate or park any vehicle, motor vehicle, motor truck, motor bus,
semitrailer, truck tractor, trailer, wrecker or equipment thereto any of the
foregoing upon or over any street or public way in the city which unladen or
with load is of a greater height than eleven (11) feet six (6) inches, or of
a greater length than 26.5 feet for motor-trucks except semi-trailers or
thirty (30) feet for semitrailers, or of a greater width than ninety six (96)
inches.



('81 Code, §520.2, § 3)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.63  PERMIT PROCEDURES.



   (A)   (1)   The City Administrative Officer of the city, upon
application in writing and the nonrefundable payment of a ten dollars
($10.00) application fee by the owner or person having charge thereof, may
grant permission for the moving of vehicles, objects and structures in excess
of the limits as set forth in §§ 71.61 and 71.62.  The permission shall be
in writing, and the City Administrative Officer may grant the same, subject
to such conditions and restrictions as in his judgment are necessary for the
preservation and protection of the highways, avenues, streets, alleys,
bridges and culverts, including the posting of an appropriate bond with
surety.



      (2)   However, whenever it appear upon the permit application
or where it is otherwise brought to the attention of the City Administrative
Officer that the purpose for the need of the permit involves a development
project which may be subject to bonding and surety requirements imposed by
the zoning code or subdivision regulations (as either may be amended,
hereafter), the City Administrative Officer shall first before issuing a
permit submit the application to the City Council for their consideration and
direction and, accordingly the City Administrator Officer shall not act on
the permit until so directed by Council.



   (B)   The standards for determining the amount of bond and
requirements of surety that both Council or the City Administrative Officer
shall not be unreasonably imposed and shall conform to generally accepted
engineering requirements as the City Engineer may require, giving due
consideration to the weight of the total load (vehicle, equipment and
materials) to be traveling any protected street, the frequency such loads
will be traveling such street or streets, the pre-existing condition and
strength of the street or streets to be traveled, the term or period of time
the permit is to cover, and any other fair and reasonable standards the City
Engineer may consider. Further consideration as to the size and nature of the
vehicle, its equipment in relation to the width and nature of the streets to
be traveled along with traffic density shall also be considered incident to
bonding amounts and methods of surety as may be required at the time of
application.



   (C)   The nonrefundable fee shall be submitted to the City
Clerk-Treasurer by the City Administrative Officer upon receipt of same.



   (D)   Any police officer having reason to believe the length, height
or width of any vehicle, equipment or load or any combination thereof is in
violation of this subchapter is authorized to require the driver to stop and
submit to a measuring of the same, and if incident to such measuring, it is
determined there is such a violation, may require the driver to stop the
vehicle in a suitable place and remain standing until such violation is
corrected so as to be in conformity with this subchapter.



   (E)   Any police officer, having reason to believe that the weight
of a vehicle, equipment or load is in violation of this subchapter, is
authorized to require the driver to stop and submit to a weighing of the same
either by means of portable or stationary scales, and may require that the
vehicle be driven to the nearest scales.



   (F)   Whenever such officer, upon weighing a vehicle and load as
above provided, determines that the weight is unlawful, the officer may
require the driver to stop the vehicle in a suitable place and remain
standing until such portion of the load is removed as may be necessary to
reduce the gross weight of the vehicle to such limit as is permitted under
this subchapter.



('81 Code, §  502.2, §  5)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.64  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   The provisions and prohibitions of §§ 71.61 and 71.62 shall
not apply to any form of vehicle or equipment as therein above noted in
either section traveling upon or over any portion of the interstate highways,
Johns Hill Road, or Alexandria Pike as they are located within the city.



   (B)   The provisions and prohibitions of §§ 71.61 and 71.62 shall
not apply to any form of vehicle or equipment as therein above noted in
either section belonging to the city or owned or leased by the Volunteer Fire
Department of the city or of any other city including fire engines or fire
trucks or other emergency vehicles or equipment while such other city's
vehicle or equipment is traversing or parked upon any prohibited streets
within the city incident to assisting the city's fire or emergency services,
or vehicles or equipment of public utility companies engaged in the
transportation of poles, pipes or other necessary materials to or from the
place of installation to or from the nearest practicable loading or unloading
point.



   (C)   The provisions and prohibitions of §§ 71.61 and 71.62 shall
not apply to any person or corporation operating or causing to be operated a
vehicle or equipment as therein above noted in either section when a permit
to operate or park such form of vehicle or equipment has been permitted to so
operate pursuant to this section.



('81 Code, §  520.2, §  4)



§ 71.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates § 71.30 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be fined not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or
imprisoned for not more than ninety (90) days, or both.



(KRS 189.378)



CHAPTER 72:  PARKING REGULATIONS



Section



Parking Generally



   72.01   Obstructional parking; double parking



   72.02   Manner of parking



   72.03   Limitations of stopping and parking



   72.04   Restrictions and prohibitions on designated areas



   72.05   Parking restricted to allow street cleaning



   72.06   Parking in excess of certain number of hours prohibited;
towing authorized



   72.07   Parking on parade route



   72.08   Parking on off-street facility



   72.09   Owner responsibility



   72.10   Parking in parks



   72.11   Parking permits for persons with disabilities



   72.12   Restricted parking of certain vehicles



   72.13   Parking prohibited in “T” or cul-de-sac areas



   72.14   Reserved parking spaces for persons with disabilities



   72.15   Prohibiting parking near certain intersections



Impounding



   72.20   Impoundment of vehicles authorized



   72.21   Enforcement procedures; towing and storage; costs



   72.22   Sale of vehicle



Snow Emergency



   72.35   Announcement of snow emergency



   72.36   Termination of emergency



   72.37   Snow emergency routes



Administration



   72.50   Parking Citation Act



   72.51   Hearing Board



 



   72.99   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   Revenues from fees, fines, and forfeitures related to parking, see KRS
65.120



PARKING GENERALLY



§ 72.01  OBSTRUCTIONAL PARKING; DOUBLE PARKING.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any vehicle or
any other thing that may be a nuisance, obstruction, or hindrance in or on
any street, alley, or sidewalk within the city either during the day or night.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop or park any
vehicle on the roadway side of any other vehicle stopped or parked at the
edge or curb of a street.



Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.02  MANNER OF PARKING.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop
or park the vehicle in a manner other than with its right-hand side toward
and parallel with the curb, except that where parking is permitted on the
left side of a one-way street, the left-hand side shall be so parked, and
except for commercial loading and unloading on one-way streets.



   (B)   No vehicle shall be parked or left standing on any street
unless its two (2) right wheels are within six (6) inches of and parallel
with the curb, except that on one (1) way streets where parking is permitted
on the left side the two left wheels are to be within six (6) inches of and
parallel with the curb.



   (C)   No vehicle shall be backed to the curb on any street, except
that wagons and trucks may do so when loading and unloading providing that
such loading and unloading and delivery of property and material shall not
consume more than thirty (30) minutes.  Such backing of trucks or wagons is
prohibited at all times and on all streets in the city where any truck or
wagon so backed interferes with the use of the roadway of moving vehicles or
occupies road space within ten (10) feet of the center line of the street.



   (D)   The city may establish diagonal parking at certain places,
requiring the parking of vehicles at a certain angle to the curb and within a
certain portion of the roadway adjacent thereto. However, diagonal parking
shall not be established where the roadway space required therefore would be
within ten feet of the centerline of any street.  Such diagonal parking
places shall be designated by suitable signs, and shall indicate by markings
on the pavement the required angle and the width of the roadway space within
which such vehicle shall park.



   (E)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to so
park such vehicle that any part thereof shall extend beyond the lines marking
the side or the rear of the space assigned for one (1) vehicle.



Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.03  LIMITATIONS OF STOPPING AND PARKING.



   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop or park
such vehicle except in a case of real emergency or in compliance with the
provisions of this traffic code or when directed by a police officer or
traffic sign or signal at any time in the following places:



   (A)   On the mainly-traveled portion of any roadway or on any other
place in the roadway where vehicles stand in any manner other than as
specified in § 72.02.



   (B)   On a sidewalk.



('81 Code, § 540.1, § 3(b))



   (C)   In front of sidewalk ramps provided for persons with
disabilities.



   (D)   In front of a public or private driveway.



('81 Code, § 540.1, § 3(j))



   (E)   Within an intersection or crosswalk.



('81 Code, § 540.1, § 3(c))



   (F)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping or
parking.  This does not apply to police officers when operating properly
identified vehicles during the performance of their official duties.



   (G)   Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing
beacon, stop sign, or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway.



   (H)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control
into any such prohibited area.



(KRS 189.450(5),(6))



   (I)   On any controlled access highway.



   (J)   Within a highway tunnel.



   (K)   In an area between the roadways of a divided highway.



   (L)   Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant.



('81 Code, § 540.1, § 3(i))  (KRS 189.450(5), (6))



   (M)   Upon a public street in such a manner as to constitute double
parking. 



('81 Code, § 540.1, § 3(a))



   (N)   So as to leave available less than twelve (12) feet of the
width of the roadway. 



('81 Code, § 540.1, § 3(d))



   (O)   Within an alley or upon a street in such a position as to
block any driveway entrance. 



('81 Code, § 540.1, § 3(e))



   (P)   At or alongside a curb which has been painted white, yellow or
orange. 



('81 Code, § 540.1, § 3(f))



   (Q)   At or upon any paved surface which has been painted white,
yellow or orange.



('81 Code, § 540.1, § 3(g))



   (R)   Within fifteen (15) feet of the driveway entrance to the fire
station. 



('81  Code, § 540.1, § 3(h))



   (S)   Seventy (70) feet of any street corner located at any
intersection.



('81 Code, § 540.1, § 3(k))



   (T)   Within twelve (12) feet of any stop sign, or other traffic
signal located at the side of the roadway.



('81 Code, § 540.1, § 3(l))  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.04  RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS ON DESIGNATED STREETS.



   (A)   The provisions of this section prohibiting the stopping and
parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein
specified or as indicated on official signs except when it is necessary to
stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or official traffic-control devices.



   (B)   The provisions of this section imposing a time limit on
parking shall not relieve any person from his duty to observe other and more
restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping or parking of
vehicles in specific places or at specified times.



   (C)   When signs are erected in compliance with the provisions of
division (F) below giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at
any time on any street so marked by official signs.



   (D)   When a curb has been painted in compliance with the provisions
of division (F) below, no person shall park a vehicle at any time at or
adjacent to any curb so marked.



   (E)   When signs are erected in compliance with the provisions of
division (F) below, in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park
a vehicle between the hours specified by official signs on any day except
Sundays on any street so marked.



   (F)   (1)   The city shall determine on what streets or portions
thereof stopping or parking shall be restricted or prohibited.  Whenever
under authority of or by this traffic code or any other ordinance any parking
limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets, or parking
areas are restricted for persons with disabilities parking, appropriate signs
shall be erected giving notice thereof.  However, in lieu of erecting such
signs or in conjunction therewith, the face and top of a curb or curbs at or
adjacent to which parking is prohibited at all times may be painted a solid
yellow color.



      (2)   No such regulations or restrictions shall be effective
unless the signs have been erected and are in place or the curbs are painted
yellow at the time of any alleged offense, except in the case of those
parking restrictions which by their very nature would not require such signs
and markings.



   (G)   When signs are erected in compliance with division (F) above
in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for a
time longer than specified on official signs any day except Sunday and on any
street so marked.



   (H)   No parking signs shall be erected on such streets or portions
thereof as determined by order of the City Council, and no person shall park
a vehicle in any area indicated as "No Parking" by such sign at any time of
the day specified by the sign, except Sundays and public holidays.  If no
time is specified on the sign, it shall mean at any time. 



('81 Code, § 540.1, § 1)



   (I)   "No Stopping" signs shall be erected on such streets or
portions thereof or at areas of paved or unpaved parking lots or driveways
and for such times as determined by order of the City Council, and no person
shall stop any vehicle, except as required by traffic conditions, in any area
indicated as "No Stopping" by the sign except Sundays and public holidays. 
If no time is specified on the sign, it shall mean at any time. 



('81 Code, § 540.1, § 2)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.05  PARKING RESTRICTED TO ALLOW STREET CLEANING.



   The city is authorized to designate street cleaning areas and shall
provide suitable signs and markings on the street to be cleaned, restricting
parking on that particular day.  It shall be unlawful for the operator of
any vehicle to stop on any street so designated.



Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.06  PARKING IN EXCESS OF CERTAIN NUMBER OF HOURS PROHIBITED; TOWING
AUTHORIZED.



   It shall be unlawful for anyone to park any one place any vehicle on
any of the public ways or streets of the city for a period of forty eight
(48) hours or longer.  Any vehicle left parked in any one place on any of
the public ways or streets of the city for a period of twenty four (24) hours
or longer shall be deemed abandoned, and shall be subject to all existing
regulations of the city pertaining to abandoned motor vehicles.



Penalty, see § 72.99



Cross-reference:



   Removal of abandoned vehicles, see § 72.21et seq.



§ 72.07  PARKING ON PARADE ROUTE.



   (A)   The Chief of Police or other authorized city official shall
have the authority, whenever in his judgment it is necessary, to prohibit or
restrict the parking of vehicles along a street or part thereof constituting
a part of the route of a parade or procession, to erect temporary traffic
signs to that effect, and to prohibit and prevent such parking.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to park or leave unattended any vehicle
in violation of such signs or directions.



Penalty, see § 72.99



Cross-reference:



   Parades, see §§ 71.40 through 71.51



§ 72.08  PARKING ON OFF-STREET FACILITY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of a motor vehicle to park
or abandon the vehicle or drive on or otherwise trespass on another's
property, or on an area developed as on off-street parking facility, without
the consent of the owner, lessee, or person in charge of such property or
facility.



   (B)   If at any time a vehicle is parked, abandoned, or otherwise
trespass in violation of division (A) of this section, the owner, lessee, or
person in charge of the property or facility may have the unauthorized motor
vehicle removed in accordance with the provisions of §§ 72.20 through 72.22.



   (C)   Every property owner or operator of an off-street parking
facility shall post signs stating thereon that the property or parking lot or
facility is privately owned and that unauthorized vehicle will be removed at
the owner's expense before exercising the authority granted in division (B).



Penalty, see § 72.99



Statutory reference:



   Removal of vehicles by owners of private parking lots; signs, see KRS
189.725



§ 72.09  OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.



   If any vehicle is found illegally parked in violation of any provisions
of this subchapter regulating stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles, and
the identity of the driver cannot be determined, the owner or person in whose
name the vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie responsible for the
violation.



Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.10  PARKING IN PARKS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle in or on
any section of any public park, playground, play lot, or tot lot within the
city not designed as a parking area or designed and regularly maintained as a
roadway.  However, nothing contained in this section shall be construed as
prohibiting the parking of a motor vehicle parallel to a designated and
regularly maintained roadway in any such park or playground where at least
two wheels of the motor vehicle are resting on such roadway.



Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.11  PARKING PERMITS FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES.



   (A)   Any other provision to the contrary notwithstanding, a motor
vehicle bearing a decal in its front windshield issued by the County Clerk
pursuant to appropriate county ordinances for persons with disabilities, when
operated by persons with disabilities or when transporting persons with
disabilities, may be parked in a designated parking place for persons with
disabilities, or when parked in a metered parking space may be parked for two
hours for no fee, or when parked where any parking limit is imposed may be
parked for two hours in excess of the parking limit.  The motor vehicle may
be parked in a loading zone for that period of time necessary to permit
entrance or exit of the persons with disabilities to or from the parked
vehicle, but in no circumstances longer than thirty (30) minutes.



   (B)   This section shall not permit parking in a "no stopping" or
"no parking" zone nor where parking is prohibited for the purpose of creating
a fire lane or to accommodate heavy traffic during morning, afternoon, or
evening hours, nor permit a motor vehicle to be parked in such a manner as to
constitute a traffic hazard.



Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.12  RESTRICTING PARKING OF CERTAIN VEHICLES.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      (1)    RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.   Any vehicle or wheeled unit
fitted for the purpose of moving recreational facilities or articles.



      (2)    TRUCK. Any wheeled vehicle used or fitted for the
purpose of moving heavy articles or which is customarily or ordinarily used
for commercial delivery, hauling, or service purposes or any wheeled
automotive vehicle equipped with a swivel or attachment suited for engaging
or connecting a trailer which may be customarily used for commercial
delivery, hauling or service purposes.



      (3)    VEHICLE. Any device, not designated for operation upon
fixed tracks or rails, moving or designed to move upon runners or wheels
except baby carriages and toy vehicles designed for use by children in play
or exercise.



   (B)   No person shall park any truck or recreational vehicle larger
than a 3/4-ton chassis capacity upon a street within the city for a period of
time longer than thirty (30) minutes of any day or night, except physicians
or paramedicals on emergency calls, or police, fire or public utility company
vehicles on emergency or maintenance calls, or commercial vehicles on service
calls.



   (C)   No person shall park any vehicle upon any front residential
yard area nor shall any person park any vehicle within any side residential
yard area lying from the rear foundation of the residence forward to the
fronting street serving such residence, unless that area whereupon such
vehicle may be so parked is a paved surface approved by the city's Building
Inspector, and, accordingly, in conformity with the city's official zoning
ordinance.



   (D)   (1)   Exception to the compliance to divisions (B) and (C)
of this section may be granted by permit under the following circumstances:



         (a)   Application to the Mayor must be filed requesting
such a permit.



         (b)   A showing within such application that no
off-street parking is available to the applicant shall be alleged and
supported.



         (c)   The applicant must be a resident of the city.



         (d)   A five dollar ($5.00) application fee must be paid
with the application.



         (e)   Upon granting of the application, a proper decal
must be displayed on the lower right corner of such vehicle as has been
approved pursuant to this section.



      (2)   An application for such a permit may be obtained at the
City Clerk-Treasurer's office.



('81 Code, § 540.4)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.13  PARKING PROHIBITED IN "T" OR CUL-DE-SAC AREAS.



   (A)   The area on all streets containing a "T" or cul-de-sac area
within the city, and both sides of the street for a distance of fifteen (15)
feet approaching or coming from said area, be and the same hereby now is
designated a "No Parking Area."



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in said area herein
designated a "No Parking Area."



('81 Code, § 540.6)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.14  RESERVED PARKING SPACES FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES.



   (A)   The Police Chief shall designate from time to time reserved
parking spaces in the city to be located in publicly owned parking lots, and
on public streets where there is provided on-street parking, so as to
accommodate persons with disabilities as defined in Kentucky Revised Statute
189.456.



   (B)   Handicapped persons who have obtained a special parking permit
from the Campbell County Clerk, pursuant to KRS 189.456, shall make
application with the Chief of Police for a handicapped parking space.  If
the Chief of Police finds that the person making the application has obtained
the required permit from the Campbell County Clerk, and that local ordinances
or state statutes do not prohibit parking on the street, he shall designate a
reserved parking space for persons with disabilities in the front, rear or
side of the residence of a person with disabilities, if there is no
off-street parking accommodating such residence or if the off street parking
that accommodates the residence is in the Chief of Police's opinion, unusable
or impractical for use by the handicapped person.



   (C)   There shall be a one-time fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for
the establishment of the reserved handicapped parking space permitted
pursuant to this section to help defray the cost of signage and processing.



   (D)   The handicapped person shall be subject to all other local
ordinances and state statutes governing the parking of vehicles on the street
where the reserved space has been designated including but not limited to the
provisions of KRS 189.456 and 186.042.



   (E)   The handicapped person making the application pursuant to this
section shall be required to register annually with the Highland Heights
police department within five (5) days of the anniversary of the date in
which the reserved parking space for persons with disabilities is first
designated.



   (F)   Any person who occupies the designated reserved parking space
for persons with disabilities created pursuant to this section with a vehicle
they are operating or exercising control of and do not possess the proper
permit shall be subject to the same penalty provisions of KRS 189.456 and
189.990(1).



(Ord. 03-97, passed 2-18-97; Am. Ord. 20-2003, passed 9-2-03)



§ 72.15  PROHIBITING PARKING NEAR CERTAIN INTERSECTIONS.



   (A)   Pursuant to a recommendation from the Police Chief and the
Safety Committee for the city, it is determined that there shall be no
parking within twenty (20) feet of certain designated intersections within
the city.



   (B)   The designated intersections prohibiting parking within twenty
(20) feet of same shall be clearly marked with signage and/or yellow painting
of the curb or both.



   (C)   The penalty for any person cited for disregarding this traffic
control device shall be the same as that provided by state law.



(Ord. 12-2003, passed 5-6-03)



IMPOUNDING



§ 72.20  IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES AUTHORIZED.



   Any city police officer may impound, or cause to be impounded, any
vehicle parked at a place where parking is prohibited under the provisions of
any ordinance of this city, or which has been parked in excess of the time
allowed for parking in any place in the city, or which has been involved in
two or more violations of any traffic or parking ordinance of the city, for
which citation tags have been issued, or fines have been imposed by an
appropriate court having jurisdiction, and such citations have not been
presented as required by law, or such fines have not been paid.



('81 Code, § 540.3, § 1)



§ 72.21  ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES; TOWING AND STORAGE; COSTS.



   When any police officer enforces the provisions of § 72.20 with
respect to any motor vehicle, he may arrange for the towing of the vehicle
from the place where said vehicle is parked to a place where it may be stored
until claimed by the owner or sold according to the provisions of this
subchapter.  The towing and storage may be performed by persons or firms
engaged in the business of towing and storing motor vehicles.  All towing
charges and storage charges shall be paid by the owner of the impounded
vehicle to the person or persons towing and/or storing the vehicle in order
to redeem it.  No police officer shall arrange for the towing away or
storage of any such motor vehicle, unless the persons or firms performing
said towing or with whom said vehicle is stored, agrees to hold the owner of
the impounded vehicle solely liable for the cost of said services; and to
indemnify and hold harmless the city from any damage to the vehicle occurring
in the process of said towing or storage.  Performance of towing or storage
services of an impounded vehicle shall constitute acceptance of these
provisions by the persons or firms performing said services.



('81 Code, § 540.3, § 2)



§ 72.22  SALE OF VEHICLE.



   Whenever any vehicle which has been caused to be impounded by a police
officer under the provisions of this subchapter remains in the possession of
the city or the person storing the same, unclaimed by any person having the
right to the possession of such vehicle, shall make disposition of such
vehicle pursuant to the provisions of KRS 376.275 et seq. The proceeds of
such sale shall first be used to defray first, the costs of the sale of such
vehicle including but not limited to advertising costs; then, to defray the
costs of towing and storing said vehicle; then the balance, if any, shall be
payable to the General Fund of the city.



('81 Code, § 540.3, § 3)



SNOW EMERGENCY



§ 72.35  ANNOUNCEMENT OF SNOW EMERGENCY.



   (A)   A snow emergency exists whenever the city has any single
accumulation of three (3) inches or more of snow in a twenty-four (24) hour
period; or



   (B)   Whenever the Chief of Police or other authorized city official
finds that falling snow, sleet, or freezing rain will create a condition
which makes it necessary that the parking of motor vehicles on snow emergency
routes be prohibited, or whenever he finds on the basis of a firm forecast of
snow, sleet, or freezing rain that the weather conditions so forecasted may
create a condition making it necessary that such parking be prohibited, he is
authorized to announce such prohibition, to become effective at a time
specified by him.  After the effective time of such prohibition no person
shall park any vehicle or permit any vehicle to remain parked on a snow
emergency route.  However, if a fall of snow, sleet, or freezing rain occurs
after 11:00 p.m. and prior to 6:00 a.m., and the Chief of Police or other
authorized city official has not announced prior to 11:00 p.m. that parking
on snow emergency routes is to be prohibited after a specified time, a
vehicle parked on a snow emergency route may remain so parked until 7:00 a.m.
following such fall.  The prohibition of parking announced by the Chief of
Police or other authorized city official under the authority of this section
shall remain in effect until he announces the termination of the snow
emergency, in part or in which the prohibition of parking authorized by this
section shall no longer be in effect.



(Ord. 4-96, passed 6-11-96; Am. Ord. 06-2009, passed 4-7-09)  Penalty, see
§ 72.99



§ 72.36  TERMINATION OF EMERGENCY.



   Whenever the Chief of Police or other authorized city official shall
find that some or all of the conditions which gave rise to the snow emergency
prohibition no longer exist, he is authorized to declare the termination of
the emergency, in part or in whole, effective immediately on announcement. 
If such announcement is made other than between 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., it
shall be repeated between those hours.



§ 72.37  SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES.



   (A)   The term SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTE shall mean any route designated
by the Chief of Police or other authorized city official. On such street or
highway designated as a snow emergency route, special signs shall be posted
to this effect.



   (B)   Snow emergency signs shall be erected on the following streets
designating the streets as snow emergency routes: Renshaw Road; Sunset Drive;
Knollwood Drive; Ridge Hill Drive; Katherine Court; Elblaine Drive; Hope
Lane; Robinson Road; Steelman Avenue; Malibu; Pleasant Drive.



(Am. Ord. 18-96, passed - -; Am. Ord. 05-97, passed - -; Am. Ord. 07-2009,
passed 4-7-09)



ADMINISTRATION



§ 72.50  PARKING CITATION ACT.



   Pursuant to KRS 82.600 through 82.640, the Local Government Parking
Citation Act of 1984 is hereby adopted by reference as authorized in KRS
83A.060, Section 5(5), within the corporate limits of the city.



(Ord. 1-91, passed 1-24-91)



§ 72.51  HEARING BOARD.



   There is hereby established, pursuant to the provisions of this act, a
Hearing Board for the city which shall hear appeals as provided in said Act.
The Hearing Board shall be composed of three citizens of the city appointed
by the Mayor with the approval of Council who shall each sit for a term of
two years.  Any or all members of the Hearing Board may be appointed by the
Board as Hearing Officer and any action of the Hearing Officers shall be
deemed an action that the Board has provided in the Act.



(Ord. 1-91, passed 1-24-91)



§ 72.99  PENALTY.



   The City Council has established a set procedure for parking control
and it is set out below in the following procedure.



   (A)   For the violation of the following items there shall be a fine
(payable to the city and put in the General Fund) of twenty-five dollars
($25.00) per violation: For the violation of any of these regulations in this
section, there shall be a fine (payable to the city and put in the General
Fund) of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per violation.



   (B)   A penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be imposed if
the above fines are not paid within seven (7) working days.



   (C)   All law enforcement offices of the city shall have authority
to issue the above citation.



(Ord. 10-82, passed 7-22-82; Am. Ord. 07-2007, passed 9-4-07)



CHAPTER 73:  BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES



Section



   73.01   Operation of bicycles



   73.02   Operation of motorcycles and motorscooters



   73.03   Skating and coasting



   73.04   Changing to vehicles



 



   73.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Required obedience to traffic directions, see § 70.02(C)



§ 73.01  OPERATION OF BICYCLES.



   (A)   No person shall operate a bicycle on the sidewalks of the city.



   (B)   No person shall operate a bicycle on any section of a public
park, playground, play lot, or tot lot, except on a roadway or in a parking
area.



   (C)   No operator of any bicycle shall carry another person on such
bicycle.



   (D)   Persons making a left turn are required to extend the left arm
out horizontally. Right turns shall be indicated by extending the left arm
out horizontally and turned upward at the elbow.  A stop or slowing of a
bicycle shall be indicated by extending either arm out horizontally and
turned down at the elbow.



(KRS 189.010)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.02  OPERATION OF MOTORCYCLES AND MOTORSCOOTERS.



   (A)   No operator of any motorcycle, motorscooter, or power-driven
bicycle shall carry another person except on a seat attached thereto or in a
side car attached to the vehicle.



   (B)   No operator of a motorcycle, motorscooters, or power-drive
bicycle shall operate such vehicle in any public park, except on a roadway or
in a parking area.



   (C)   No operator of a motorcycle, motorscooters, or power-drive
bicycle shall operate



such vehicle in any play lot or tot lot.



Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.03  SKATING AND COASTING.



   Except on streets which may be declared from time to time as "play
streets" by the city and protected by barriers or official signs, it shall be
unlawful for any person on skates or riding on a coaster sled or toy vehicle
of any kind, to go on any roadway except at a crosswalk.



Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.04  CLINGING TO VEHICLES.



   (A)   No person while riding on a bicycle, coaster sled, roller
skates, or any toy vehicle shall cling to any moving vehicle on any street,
or fasten or attach the vehicle on which he is riding thereto.



   (B)   No person shall ride on the projection, running board, or
fenders of any bicycle.



Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
violation and shall be deemed to have committed a violation and shall be
fined not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense.



CHAPTER 74:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Stop streets



   II.   Traffic-control devices



   III.   Speed limits



   IV.   Through traffic prohibited



SCHEDULE I: STOP STREETS.



   The location of stop signs within the city shall be as follows:



 

Location
 
Corner
 
Ord. No.
 
Date Passed




Arbor at Ridge Hill
 
Southwest corner facing west
 
 


Blange at U.S. 27
 
Northeast corner facing east
 
 


Bon Jan Lane at E-Jay Plaza
 
Northwest corner of access road
 
11-96
 
8-06-96


Bordeaux at U.S. 27
 
Northeast corner facing east
 
 


Boron property at Hidden Valley Drive
 
At all four exits
 
530.2(70)
 
3-28-85


Bramble at Piedmont
 
Northeast corner facing east
 
 


Bramble at Piedmont
 
Southwest corner facing west
 
 


Bramble at U.S. 27
 
Southwest corner facing west
 
 


Bramble at Wilson
 
 
 


Camp Road at U.S. 27
 
Southwest corner facing north
 
 


Campbell Drive and Three Mile Road
 
Northeast corner facing north
 
 


Campbell Drive and Three Mile Road
 
Southwest corner facing north
 
 


Campbell Drive and Three Mile Road
 
Northeast corner facing east
 
 


Campbell Drive and Three Mile Road
 
Southwest corner facing west
 
 


Chalon at Bordeaux
 
Southeast corner facing south
 
 


Civic Center
 
Southeast corner at rear
 
30-95
 
10-19-95


Civic Center Lot and Johns Hill
 
Northwest corner facing north
 
 




 



 

Location
 
Corner
 
Ord. No.
 
Date Passed




Clara Avenue
 
Northeast corner
 
30-95
 
10-19-95


Clara Avenue and Harriet Avenue
 
Northeast corner
 
14-98
 
10-20-98


Clearview at Johns Hill
 
Northwest corner facing north
 
 


Covington at Marshall
 
Southwest corner facing west
 
 


Crestwood at U.S. 27
 
Southwest corner facing west
 
 


Dale at Crestwood
 
Northwest corner facing north
 
 


Dale at U.S. 27
 
Southwest corner facing west
 
 


Dietrich at Main
 
Northwest corner facing north
 
 


Faren Drive at Sunset
 
Northeast corner facing east
 
 


Fifth Avenue at Bordeaux
 
Southeast corner facing south
 
 


Forest Avenue at Dietrich Road
 
Northeast corner
 
14-96
 
10-15-96


Hale at Bramble
 
Southeast corner facing south
 
 


Hardee's Restaurant at Hidden Valley Drive
 
Northwest and northeast sides
 
23-83
 
10-27-83


Hardee's at Elblaine Drive
 
The south side
 
23-83
 
10-27-83


Harriet Avenue
 
Northwest corner
 
30-95
 
10-19-95


Harrison at Sunset
 
Southwest corner facing west
 
 


High at Dale
 
Northeast side of High and Dale
 
01-2018
 
1-16-18


High at Dale
 
Northwest corner facing north
 
 


Highland Meadows Circle approximately 400 feet from Highland Meadows
Drive/Highland Meadows Circle
 
Northwest corner approximately 740 feet from south intersection of Martha
Lane Collins and Highland Meadows Drive
 
6-96
 
7-2-96


Highland Meadows Circle approximately 160 feet from Highland Meadows
Drive/Highland Meadows Circle
 
Southwest corner approximately 740 feet from south intersection of Martha
Lane Collins and Highland Meadows Drive
 
6-96
 
7-2-96




 



 

Location
 
Corner
 
Ord. No.
 
Date Passed




Highland Meadows Circle approximately 210 feet from Highland Meadows
Drive/Highland Meadows Circle
 
Northwest corner approximately 414 feet from north intersection of Martha
Lane Collins and Highland Meadows Drive
 
6-96
 
7-2-96


Highland Meadows Circle approximately 145 feet from Highland Meadows
Drive/Highland Meadows Circle
 
North intersection approximately 414 feet from Martha Lane Collins and
Highland Meadows Drive
 
6-96
 
7-2-96


Highland Meadows Drive at unnamed driveway
 
Northwest quadrant approximately 420 feet from south intersection of Martha
Lane Collins and Highland Meadows Drive
 
6-96
 
7-2-96


Highland Meadows Drive/Deep Woods Drive
 
Southeast quadrant
 
6-96
 
7-2-96


Highland Meadows Drive/Deerwoods Drive
 
Southeast quadrant
 
6-96
 
7-2-96


Highland Meadows Drive/Deerwoods Drive
 
Southeast quadrant
 
01-2000
 
3-7-00


Highland Meadows Drive/Dogwood Drive
 
Northwest quadrant
 
6-96
 
7-2-96


Highland Meadows Drive/Highland Meadows Circle
 
Southeast quadrant of intersection approximately 414 feet from north
intersection of Martha Lane Collins and Highland Meadows Drive
 
6-96
 
7-2-96


Highland Meadows Drive/Highland Meadows Circle
 
Southwest quadrant of intersection approximately 414 feet from north
intersection of Martha Lane Collins and Highland Meadows Drive
 
6-96
 
7-2-96


Highland Meadows Drive/Highland Meadows Lane
 
Southeast quadrant at east entrance
 
6-96
 
7-2-96


Highland Meadows Drive/Highland Meadows Lane
 
Southeast quadrant at west entrance
 
6-96
 
7-2-96




 



 

Location
 
Corner
 
Ord. No.
 
Date Passed




Hilltop and Brandywine
 
Southeast corner
 
12-86
 
9-25-86


Hilltop and Johns Hill
 
Northeast corner
 
33-92
 
9-24-92


Hilltop and Knollwood
 
Southeast corner
 
12-86
 
9-25-86


HoneyTree Lane at Robinson
 
Southeast corner facing south
 
 


Jillian and Knollwood
 
Northeast corner
 
12-86
 
9-25-86


Katherine Drive at Robinson Road
 
At the northwest corner
 
2-89
 
1-26-89


Knollwood and Brandywine
 
Northeast corner
 
12-86
 
9-25-86


Knollwood Drive at Hilltop Drive
 
Southwest corner
 
8-96
 
7-16-96


Knollwood at Ridge Hill
 
Northeast corner facing east
 
 


Knollwood at Ridge Hill
 
Southwest corner facing west
 
 


Knollwood at Timberview
 
Northwest corner facing north
 
 


Knollwood Drive at Timberview Court
 
Southwest corner
 
33-95
 
11-16-95


Knollwood Drive at Johns Hill
 
Southwest corner facing west
 
 


Linet at Steelman
 
Northwest corner facing north
 
 


Main at Renshaw
 
Southwest corner facing north
 
 


Main at Renshaw
 
Northeast corner
 
22-91
 
9-26-91


Main at Singleton
 
Southwest corner facing west
 
 


Main Avenue at Baker Road
 
Northwest corner
 
03-98
 
5-5-98


Malibu at Ridge Hill
 
Northwest corner facing west
 
 


Malibu at Ridge Hill
 
Northwest corner facing west
 
 


Maple at U.S. 27
 
Northeast corner facing east
 
 


Monroe at Sunset
 
Southwest corner facing west
 
 


Myrtle at U.S. 27
 
Southwest corner facing west
 
 


Old Alexandria Pike at U.S. 27
 
Southwest corner facing west
 
 




 



 

Location
 
Corner
 
Ord. No.
 
Date Passed




Old U.S. 27 (Alexandria Pike)
 
Northeast corner of exit from E-Jay's Plaza
 
04-98
 
5-5-98


Parking lot
 
Southwest side of lot before South Martha Lane
 
8-87
 
6-25-87


Perkins Restaurant lot at U.S. 27
 
Northern exit
 
17-98
 
12-15-98


Pleasant at U.S. 27
 
Northeast corner facing east
 
 


Preston at Johns Hill
 
Northeast corner facing east
 
 


Regency Court at Robinson
 
Northeast corner facing north
 
 


Renshaw at Main
 
Southeast corner facing south
 
 


Ridge Hill at Arbor
 
Northeast corner facing east
 
 


Ridge Hill at Arbor
 
Southwest corner facing west
 
 


Ridge Hill at Knollwood
 
Southeast corner facing south
 
 


Ridge Hill at Malibu
 
Southeast corner facing east
 
 


Ridge Hill at Squire Court
 
Northeast corner facing east
 
 


Ridge Hill at Squire Court
 
Southwest corner facing west
 
 


Robinson Road at U.S. 27
 
Northeast corner facing east
 
 


Rose Avenue at U.S. 27
 
Northeast corner facing east
 
 


South Main at Sunset
 
Southwest corner facing west
 
 


South Miller at Sunset
 
Southwest corner facing west
 
 


Squire Court at Ridge Hill
 
Southwest corner facing west
 
 


Steelman at Linet
 
Northeast corner facing east
 
 


Steelman at Linet
 
Southwest corner facing west
 
 


Steelman at U.S. 27
 
Northeast corner facing east
 
 


Steelman at Winkler
 
Southwest corner facing west
 
 


Sunset Drive at South Main Avenue
 
Northeast corner
 
26-93
 
11-11-93


Sunset Drive at South Main Ave. in front of 228 Sunset Drive
 
Southwest corner
 
26-93
 
11-11-93




 



 

Location
 
Corner
 
Ord. No.
 
Date Passed




Sunset Drive in front of 269 Sunset Drive
 
East side
 
26-93
 
11-11-93


Sunset Drive across from 269 Sunset Drive
 
West side
 
26-93
 
11-11-93


Taylor at Main
 
Southeast corner facing south
 
 


Taylor at U.S. 27
 
Southwest corner facing west
 
 


Three Mile Road at U.S. 27
 
Southwest corner facing west
 
 


Thriftway lot at Marshall
 
Northwest corner facing north
 
 


Timberview at Knollwood
 
Southeast corner facing south
 
 


Towanda at U.S. 27
 
Northwest corner facing west
 
 


Towanda Drive at Towanda Apts.
 
Northeast corner of street
 
34-95
 
12-14-95


Towanda at Bon Jan Lane
 
Northeast corner
 
34-95
 
12-14-95


Veterans Drive at U.S. 27
 
Southwest corner facing west
 
 


Washington Avenue and South Main Avenue
 
Northwest corner
 
21-2003
 
9-2-03


Wilson at Sunset
 
Southwest corner facing west
 
 


Winkler at Steelman
 
Southwest corner facing south
 
 


Woodcrest at Ridge Hill
 
Southeast corner facing south
 
 




 



('81 Code, §  530.2)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE II:  TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.



   Traffic-control devices are hereby established at the following
designated intersections:



 

Intersection
 
Location
 
Ord. No.
 
Date Passed




U.S. 27 and Bon Jan
 
North and south
 
 


U. S. 27 and Bon Jan
 
East and west
 
 


U. S. 27 and Elblaine
 
North and south
 
 


U.S. 27 and Elblaine
 
East and west
 
 


U.S. 27 and Johns Hill
 
North, south and east
 
 


U. S. 27 in from of K-Mart
 
North, south and west
 
 


U.S. 27 and Nunn Drive
 
North and south
 
 


U.S. 27 and Nunn Drive
 
East and west
 
 


U.S. 27 and Renshaw
 
North, south and east
 
 


U.S. 27 and I-471 and Sunset
 
North and south
 
 


U.S. 27 and I-471 and Sunset
 
East and west
 
 




 



('81 Code, § 530.03)



SCHEDULE III:  SPEED LIMITS



   Speed limits are hereby established for the following roadways:



 

Roadway
 
Location
 
Speed Limit
 
Ord. No.
 
Date Passed


Old Section of U.S. 27
 
Beginning at the new intersection of reconstructed US 27 and the existing old
US 27 (Old Alexandria Pike) pavement opposite Marshall Lane; Thence
continuing southward along the centerline of the old US 27 (Old Alexandria
Pike) pavement past its intersections with Elbaine Drive, Pleasant Drive,
Robinson Road, and Myrtle Avenue for a distance of approximately 1100 feet;
Ending at the new  intersection of reconstructed US 27 and the existing old
US 27 (Old Alexandria Pike) pavement opposite Johns Hill Road.
 
25 mph
 
06-99
 
11-16-99



 



Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE IV:  THROUGH TRAFFIC PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Through traffic shall be prohibited on the following premises:



 

Location
 
Ord. No.
 
Date Passed


Highland Heights Civic Center
 
23-2003
 
11-4-03



 



   (B)   Pursuant to the Chief of Police's instructions, public works
is authorized to post signs alerting the public of this traffic control
restriction.



   (C)   The penalty for violating this section shall be the same as
set by state law for the violation of disregarding a traffic control signal.



(Ord. 23-2003, passed 11-4-03)



CHAPTER 75:  PARKING SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   No parking locations



   II.   Fire lanes



SCHEDULE I:  NO PARKING LOCATIONS.



 

Street
 
Location
 
Ord. No.
 
Date Passed




Abby Ridge Road
 
On the south side
 
11-88
 
6-9-88


Delco Center's main building (K-Mart)
 
Beginning at the north corner and continuing along the immediate front of the
entire shopping complex to the existing general customer parking area
 
 


Delco Center's main building (K-Mart)
 
Along the entire north side of the building
 
 


High Street
 
From the intersection of US 27 and High Street on the east and west side of
High Street for a distance of 100 feet Monday through Friday, except holidays
between the hours of 6:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
 
13-2006
 
12-19-06


Hilltop Drive
 
On either the east or west side starting at the city boundary line and
running to the corner of Hilltop and Knollwood Drive
 
24-91
 
10-10-91


Knollwood Drive
 
On the north and south side entering into the Knollwood Subdivision at the
intersection of Martha Layne, Johns Hill and Knollwood Drive for
approximately 150 feet
 
12-88
 
7-14-88


Linet
 
West side at the north end and at a point 62 feet south of the first sign
 
 


Marshall Lane
 
At the easterly side of lot 166 (124 Marshall) and the westerly side of lot
167
 
15-82
 
9-9-82


Old U.S. 27
 
East side adjacent to 1954 and 1962 Alexandria Pike for approximately 25 feet
 
21-92
 
6-11-92


Singleton Avenue
 
East and west sides, from Taylor to corner of Singleton and U.S. 27
 
17-92
 
5-14-92


Taylor Avenue
 
East and west sides, from Main to corner of Taylor and U.S. 27
 
5-92
 
2-27-92


Wilson east of Bramble
 
North side at the east and west ends
 
 


Wilson east of Bramble
 
South side at the intersection and at a point 64 feet from the center of
Bramble
 
 




 



('81 Code, § 540.2, § 1)  Penalty, see § 72.99



SCHEDULE II:  FIRE LANES.



   The following fire lanes are established and parking shall be
prohibited in such areas:



 

Street
 
Description
 
Ord. No.
 
Date Passed




Delco Center's main building (K-Mart)
 
Beginning at the north corner for approximately 32 feet and continuing from
such northerly and westwardly points in a straight line to the southern
corners of the building and that point westward approximately 32 feet out
from the southern corner of the building
 
2-82
 
- - 82


Delco Center complex
 
Along the immediate front of the building's plaza walkway and extending
outward therefrom to the existing marked general customer parking area and
along the entire north side of the building
 
2-82
 
- - 82


Katherine Court
 
Extending from Robinson Road down the east side of Katherine Court to the
cul-de-sac
 
2-91
 
1-24-91


Knollwood Drive
 
Running form Martha Layne Collins Blvd. to 203 Knollwood Drive on the east
side of the street to approximately three feet from the driveway of 203
Knollwood Drive
 
12-90
 
5-10-90


Linet
 
On the north side extending eastward 48 feet from the west side of Linet
 
7-84
 
3-22-84


Linet Avenue
 
On the southeast side (or right hand side as proceeding from the beginning of
Linet to its end), at the beginning of Linet Avenue, where it intersects with
Steelman Avenue, and running the entire length of Linet Avenue
 
12-2011
 
9-20-11


Linet
 
On the west side for a distance of 62 feet beginning at the north end of
Linet and extending south
 
7-84
 
3-22-84


Tammy Lane
 
At the intersection of Fifth Avenue and Tammy Lane running the entire length
of the west side of Tammy Lane.
 
08-2005
 
6-21-05


Wilson Street
 
On the north side east of Bramble
 
6-84
 
3-22-84


Wilson Street
 
On the south side east of Bramble, 64 feet from the center of Bramble
 
6-84
 
3-22-84




 



TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS



Chapter



      90.   ABANDONED VEHICLES



      91.   ANIMAL CONTROL



      92.   CIVIL EMERGENCIES; 911



      93.   FIREWORKS; FIRE PREVENTION; SMOKE DETECTORS; OUTDOOR
WOOD FURNACES



      94.   HAZARDOUS WASTE TRANSPORT



      95.   HEALTH AND SAFETY



      96.   LITTERING



      97.   PARKS AND RECREATION



      98.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



CHAPTER 90:  ABANDONED VEHICLES



Section



   90.01   Definitions



   90.02   Abandoned vehicles



   90.03   Inoperable vehicles



   90.04   Impoundment



 



   90.99   Penalty



§ 90.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PROPERTY.   Any real property within the city which is not a street or
highway.



   STREET or HIGHWAY.   The entire width between the boundary lines of
every public way when any part is open to use by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel.



   VEHICLE.   A machine propelled by power, other than by human power,
designed to travel on the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners, or slides
and to transport persons or property or pull machinery and shall include,
without limitation, automobiles, trucks, trailers, motorcycles, tractors,
buggies, wagons, campers, and what is commonly referred to as a boat.  The
definition for "vehicle" offered herein shall not serve to alter or abridge
the designation of a bicycle as a vehicle in accordance with KRS 189.010 or
other provisions of the KRS that may apply.



(Ord. 26-91, passed 10-10-91)



§ 90.02  ABANDONED VEHICLES.



   No person shall leave any vehicle upon a street or highway within the
city for such time and under such circumstances that indicate the vehicle has
been abandoned.  Any vehicle left upon the street or highway 48 hours
without moving therefrom shall be presumed to be abandoned.



(Ord. 26-91, passed 10-10-91)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.03  INOPERABLE VEHICLES.



   No person shall leave any inoperable vehicle on any street or highway
within the city for more than 48 hours.



(Ord. 26-91, passed 10-10-91)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.04  IMPOUNDMENT.



   Any member of the Police Department is authorized to remove or have
removed any vehicle left at any place within the city, in which the vehicle
reasonably appears to be in violation of this chapter or to be lost, stolen,
or unclaimed.  The vehicle shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or
disposed of and shall be removed and disposed of in conformity with the
Kentucky Revised Statutes.



(Ord. 26-91, passed 10-10-91)



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of a violation and shall be fined in an amount of not less
than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00).  Each
day of the violation shall constitute a separate offense.



CHAPTER 91: ANIMAL CONTROL



Section



General Provisions



   91.01   Definitions



   91.02   Inhumane treatment of animals



   91.03   Adequate food, water, shelter and care to be provided



   91.04   Frequent or continual noise; disturbing the peace



   91.05   Animal fights and races



   91.06   Animal exhibitions, circuses or horse shows; restrictions



   91.07   Giving animals as prizes



   91.08   Coloring animals



   91.09   Sale of wild animals



   91.10   Exposure of animals to poisonous substances



   91.11   Motor vehicles striking domestic animals; procedure



   91.12   Keeping and storage of livestock



   91.13   Commercial animal establishment



   91.14   Animal containment systems



Dog and Cat Control



   91.25   Dogs and cats to be controlled on leash or chain; running at
large prohibited



   91.26   Dogs or cats in season



   91.27   Noise disturbance



   91.28   Licensing procedure



   91.29   Rabies inoculation



   91.30   Seizure and impoundment



   91.31   Rabid dog or cat



   91.32   Concealing rabid dog or cat



   91.33   Exemptions



Vicious Dogs



   91.45   Definitions



   91.46   Vicious dogs to be confined



   91.47   Dogs to be securely leashed and muzzled



   91.48   Sale of vicious dogs prohibited



Administration and Enforcement



   91.60   Dog warden and animal control officer; powers



   91.61   Inspections



 



   91.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 91.01 DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDON.  Desert, forsake, complete disinterest in the fate of the
animal, turned loose to fend on its own, dumped.



   ANIMAL.  Any live vertebrate creature.



   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.   Any person designated by the Director of the
County Animal Shelter as a law enforcement officer who is qualified to
perform such duties under the laws of the Commonwealth of Kentucky and the
county.



   ANIMAL SHELTER. A facility to house stray and unwanted animals,
operated by a local government or a humane agency.



   AT LARGE.   Off the premises of the owner and not under the immediate
effective control of the owner or custodian either by leash, cord or chain or
effectively confined within the area of the owner's premises.



   CAT.  Any cat of either sex, over six months of age.



   COMMERCIAL ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENT.   Any pet shop, boarding or breeding
kennel, a riding, boarding or breeding stable, grooming facility, auction,
petting zoo, zoological park, circus or performing animal exhibition.



   DIRECTOR OF HUMANE SERVICES.  Director of County Animal Shelter, as
appointed by the County Judge/Executive and approved by the County Fiscal
Court.



   DOG. Any dog of either sex, over six months of age.



   DOG WARDEN. Person named by the County Fiscal Court to be chief animal
control officer.



   DOMESTICATED. Any animal kept, cared for, sheltered, fed or harbored
for use in work, for use as a pet, or as a source of food, raw materials or
income.



   HARBORING. Permitting any animal to remain, be lodged and fed within
the person's home, yard, place of business or enclosure.



   HUMANE OFFICER. Same as ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.



   IMPOUNDED.  Having been received into custody of the County Animal
Shelter, or any authorized representative thereof.



   INOCULATE.   The administration of an anti-rabic vaccine in a manner
approved by the Board of Health of the Commonwealth of Kentucky.



   OWNER.   Includes every person having a right of property in the dog
or cat or any other animal and every person who keeps or harbors an animal or
has it in his care or permits it to remain on or about premises owned by him.
If an animal is owned by a family, all adult members of the family,
individually and jointly, shall be deemed owners of the animal for the
purpose of this chapter.



   PERSON. All natural persons, partnerships, firms, associations,
governmental bodies and agencies and corporations, and whenever used in any
interpretation.



   PET.  Domesticated animal kept for pleasure rather than utility.



   PUBLIC NUISANCE.  Any animal or animals that:



      (1)   Molest passersby or passing vehicles;



      (2)    Is repeatedly at large;



      (3)   Attacks people or other animals;



      (4)   Damages public or private property;



      (5)   Barks, whines or howls in an excess or continuous or
untimely fashion.



   RESTRAINT.   To be secured by a leash or chain or in an enclosed pen
or yard.



   RUNNING AT LARGE. Any animal that is off the property of the owner,
custodian, possessor or harborer and is not under control of a leash.



   STRAY.   Any animal running at large.



   VETERINARIAN. Any person licensed to practice the profession of
veterinary medicine in this Commonwealth, or in any other state in which the
standards and requirements therefor are equal or superior to those in this
Commonwealth.



   VETERINARY HOSPITAL.  Any establishment maintained and operated by a
licensed veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis and treatment of diseases and
injuries of the animal.



   VICIOUS.   Any animal or animals that constitute a physical threat to
human beings or other animals.



   WILD ANIMAL.   Any animal not domesticated or not ordinarily tame,
such as, monkeys, raccoons, skunks, wolves, foxes, deer, wild cats, snakes or
any other animal which can normally be found in the wild state.



('81 Code, § 820.1, § 1) (Ord. 445, passed 7-11-74)



§ 91.02 INHUMANE TREATMENT OF ANIMALS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to inhumanely treat any animal,
including but not limited to the deprivation of necessities, beating,
mutilating, torturing, killing, overloading, overworking or otherwise abuse
any animal. Nothing herein shall preclude the County Animal Shelter from the
humane euthanization of any animal when euthanasia is necessitated by
over-population, disease or injury.



('81 Code, § 820.5, § 1(b))  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.03  ADEQUATE FOOD, WATER, SHELTER AND CARE TO BE PROVIDED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit, display or keep any
animal without providing food, water, shelter, adequate space, ventilation,
shading from the sun, proper sanitation, care and medical attention.



('81 Code, § 820.1, § 5(c))  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.04  FREQUENT OR CONTINUAL NOISE; DISTURBING THE PEACE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep within the city limits, any
animal which by reason of frequent or continual noise or unsanitary
conditions, disturbs the peace, comfort, or health of the neighbors.



('81 Code, § 820.1, § 5(j))  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.05  ANIMAL FIGHTS AND RACES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stage, cause,
instigate, permit, observe, or attend any dogfight, cockfight, bullfight or
other combat between animals or between animals and humans.



('81 Code, § 820.1, § 5(d))



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to set free any hare,
rabbit or other animals in the city for the purpose of chasing, fighting, or
having a race thereafter.



('81 Code, § 820.1, § 5(e))  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.06  ANIMAL EXHIBITIONS, CIRCUSES OR HORSE SHOWS; RESTRICTIONS.



   No performing animal exhibition, circus, or horse show shall be
permitted in which the animals are induced or encouraged to perform through
the use of chemical, mechanical, electrical or manual devices in a manner
which will cause or likely to cause physical injury or suffering.  All
equipment used on an animal shall fit properly and be in good working
condition.



('81 Code, § 820.1, § 5(k))  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.07  GIVING ANIMALS AS PRIZES.



   No person shall give away any live animal as a prize or for inducement
to enter any contest, game or other competition, or as inducement to enter
any place of business or to use as an incentive to enter into any business
agreement, whereby the offer was for the purpose of attracting the trade. 



('81 Code, § 820.1, § 5(n))  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.08  COLORING ANIMALS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to color, stain or dye or otherwise
change the natural color of any live animal or to offer such colored animals
for sale in the city.



('81 Code, § 820.1, § 5(o))  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.09  SALE OF WILD ANIMALS.



   It shall be unlawful in the city to sell or keep as a pet a wild animal
not native to the United States.



('81 Code, § 820.1, § 5(p))  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.10  EXPOSURE OF ANIMALS TO POISONOUS SUBSTANCE.



   No person shall expose any poisonous substance whether mixed with food
or not, so that the same shall be liable to be eaten by an animal, provided
that it shall not be unlawful for a person to expose on his own property,
common rat poison, mixed only with vegetable substances.



('81 Code, § 820.1, § 5(l))  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.11  MOTOR VEHICLES STRIKING DOMESTIC ANIMALS PROCEDURE.



   Any person, who as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic
animal, shall stop at once and render such assistance as may be possible and
shall immediately report such injury or death to the animal's owner, if
known, or to the County Animal Shelter or city police station.



('81 Code, § 820.1, § 5(m))  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.12  KEEPING AND STORAGE OF LIVESTOCK.



   (A)   The keeping of fowl or small animals whether or not primarily
for gain is permitted provided that the enclosures for such fowl and small
animals shall be at least twenty (20) feet distance from every lot line.



   (B)   The keeping of horses, cows, and other livestock whether or
not primarily for gain shall be permitted only in an enclosure which shall be
a distance of at least one hundred (100) feet from every lot line.



   (C)   Animal wastes.  No manure or bedding shall be stored or kept
within one hundred (100) feet of any lot line and same is prohibited unless
stored or kept in a sanitary manner and so as not to emit or produce noxious
or objectionable odors to the extreme that such may constitute a public
nuisance.



   (D)   Any person using the public streets of the city for riding of
or transportation of horses, cows, or other livestock shall be responsible
for the cleaning and proper disposal of manure, waste, or any other matter
left on said streets as a result.



('81 Code, § 820.2)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.13  COMMERCIAL ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENT.



   Any person operating a commercial animal establishment shall post a
visible notice containing the names and phone numbers of persons to be
notified in case of an emergency.



('81 Code, § 820.1, § 5(h))  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.14  ANIMAL CONTAINMENT SYSTEMS.



   (A)   Definition.  For the purpose of this subchapter, the
following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



   INVISIBLE ANIMAL CONTAINMENT SYSTEMS.  A transmission of radio signals
or electricity from a radio transmitter or other electrical transmitting
device, by which a radio receiver or other receiving instrument near the wire
is activated by radio signals or electrical impulses therefrom, to cause a
noise and/or electrical shock signaling the nearness of the radio receiver or
electrical receive to the wire as a boundary or separation of one area from
another.



   (B)   Nobody shall cause, promote, permit, aid, assist, allow,
encourage or engage in the operation or use of an invisible animal
containment system in the city unless:



      (1)   The animal containment system is located at least six
(6) feet from any public right-of-way; and is in compliance with side yard
setback requirements as set forth in the zoning ordinance.



      (2)   A sign clearly in public view, no larger than four (4)
inches by eight (8) inches, identifies the invisible animal containment
system to pedestrians within abutting public streets and right-of-way.



      (3)   A permit therefore has been issued by the City Building
Inspector.



   (C)   A permit for an invisible animal containment system shall be
issued by the City Building Inspector upon: 



      (1)   A written application therefore, verifying according to
law, by or on behalf of the owners of the property for which the invisible
animal containment system is proposed, which includes the address or other
identification of the property, with a plat of the boundary lines thereof and
all public rights-of-way adjacent thereto, indicating the location of the
proposed invisible animal containment system thereon and the distance
therefrom to all boundaries and buildings on the property and all adjacent
public rights-of-way; and



      (2)   An application fee of ten dollars ($10.00) is paid to
the city; and



      (3)   The application and the invisible animal containment
system proposed thereby is approved by the Building Inspector, as being in
conformity with the provisions hereof and all other applicable laws and
ordinances.



   (D)   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to all invisible
animal containment systems existing within the city as defined by this
ordinance, as well as all proposed invisible animal containment systems.



   (E)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be interpreted as the city
condoning the use of invisible animal containment systems as a means for the
controlling or containing animals.



(Ord. 19-92, passed 5-28-92)



DOG AND CAT CONTROL



§ 91.25  DOGS AND CATS TO BE CONTROLLED ON LEASH OR CHAIN; RUNNING AT LARGE
PROHIBITED.



   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper of any
dog or cat, licensed or unlicensed, to permit such dog or cat, at any time to
leave or be beyond the premises upon which such dog or cat is usually kept,
except when accompanied and controlled by such owner or keeper, or some
responsible person acting for such owner or keeper and when so accompanied
such dog or cat must be secured by means of a collar or harness, with chain
or leash attached thereto, and held by the owner, keeper or person acting for
such owner or keeper.



(Ord. 445, passed 7-11-74)



      (2)   In addition, if it is determined that an animal running
at large while not being kept securely restrained by a leash or other device,
per division (A) of this section, has not been spayed or neutered, an
additional fine of $50 shall be imposed. Such additional fine shall be
reimbursed to the animal owner of the animal running at large if animal owner
submits written documentation to the city or its designated agent within 30
days of the date of the citation confirming that the animal has been spayed
if female or neutered if male. The city may designate an Animal Control
Officer as its agent. Such written documentation shall be in the form of a
letter from the veterinarian performing the spay or neuter procedure. Such
written confirmation shall give descriptive detail of the animal which has
been spayed or neutered in such a manner that will allow it to be identified.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any dog or cat,
owned or harbored by him, to run at large in any area of the city.



(‘81 Code, § 820.1, § 5(a)) (Am. Ord. 03-2012, passed 3-6-12)  Penalty,
see § 91.99



§ 91.26  DOGS OR CATS IN SEASON.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons owning or having in
possession or control any bitch or female dog or cat, to suffer or permit
such animal to run at large in the city while in season or during her proud
period.



(Ord. 445, passed 7-11-74)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.27  NOISE DISTURBANCE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor or keep any animal of the
dog or cat kind which may be loud, or which by loud and frequent or habitual
barking or crying, howling or yelping, shall cause serious annoyance or
disturbance to the neighborhood.



(Ord. 445, passed 7-11-74)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.28  LICENSING PROCEDURE.



   The owners of all dogs or cats or those who harbor or maintain such
animals in the city shall have such animals licensed and registered with the
County Animal Shelter, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and
applicable Kentucky Revised Statute.  Licenses shall be issued by the County
Animal Shelter.  Upon payment, the owner shall be issued a certificate of
registration and a license tag, the tag to be attached to the dog's or cat's
collar and worn by the dog or cat at all times.  Fees for the licenses, and
the like shall be as set annually by the Director of Humane Services with the
approval of the County Fiscal Court.



('81 Code, § 820.1, § 3)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.29  RABIES INOCULATION.



   (A)   Any person who shall allow any animal of the dog or cat kind
to remain and be lodged and be fed within his home, store, enclosure, or
elsewhere on his premises, shall be considered to be harboring an animal
within the terms and meaning of this chapter.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of every person who owns or harbors a dog
or cat in the city to have such dog or cat inoculated with anti-rabic vaccine
by a veterinarian at least once each year, during the period.  Failure to so
have such dog or cat vaccinated shall constitute and be deemed a misdemeanor,
and shall be subject to punishment as hereinafter provided.  Furthermore, it
shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep or harbor a dog or cat in the
city unless such dog or cat shall have been inoculated with anti-rabic
vaccine as aforesaid.



   (C)   It shall be the duty of each veterinarian, after inoculation
of a dog or cat with anti-rabic vaccine, which dog or cat is owned or
controlled by a resident of this city, to furnish such person with a
certificate in which shall be recorded the name and address of the owner or
keeper, the name and age of the dog or cat, and the date upon which such
vaccine was administered.



(Ord. 445, passed 7-11-74)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.30  SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of all police officers of the city to
seize and impound any dog or dogs, cat or cats observed and found off the
premises which such dog or dogs, cat or cats should normally be kept, when
not accompanied by the owner, keeper or agent aforesaid.



   (B)   When  any dog or cat bearing a license or other identifying
tag shall be so seized and impounded, the Chief of Police shall cause such
dog or cat to be properly kept and fed, and shall cause notice, either
personal or by registered mail, to be given immediately to the person in
whose name such license was issued or contained on the identifying tag, if it
can be ascertained, to claim such dog or cat within ten (10) days from the
date of such notice. If any impounded dog or cat, bearing a license or other
identifying tag, is claimed by the owner or keeper thereof within ten (10)
days from the giving of such notice, then the dog or cat shall be returned to
the owner or keeper upon the payment of an impounding fee of five dollars
($5.00), and the further payment of a sum equal to the actual cost for the
keeping of the dog or cat. If any impounded dog or cat, with license or other
identifying tag, is not claimed within ten (10) days, the Chief of Police
shall cause the dog or cat to be disposed of by gift, sale or destruction in
some humane manner.



   (C)   Any dog or cat seized and impounded as provided herein, which
does not bear any identifying tag, shall be impounded or otherwise kept under
the direction of the Chief of Police for three (3) days.  If the dog or cat
is claimed by the owner or keeper thereof within three (3) days, it shall be
surrendered upon the payment of the impounding fee of five dollars ($5.00)
and a sum equal to the actual cost of the keeping of the dog or cat while so
impounded.  However, if any impounded dog or cat, without identifying tag,
is not claimed within three (3) days after it is incarcerated, the Chief of
Police shall cause such dog or cat to be disposed of by gift, sale or
destruction in some humane manner.



(Ord. 445, passed 7-11-74)



§ 91.31  RABID DOG OR CAT.



   When it has been charged that a dog or cat is rabid, or has been bitten
by a rabid dog or cat, the judge of the appropriate court shall hear proof in
order to determine whether or not there is reason to believe that the dog or
cat so charged or so bitten is actually rabid, and the judge may, in his
discretion, have the dog or cat impounded for observation or order such dog
or cat killed. However, the owner or keeper of the dog or cat may make a
request in writing that the dog or cat be held by some reliable veterinarian
for the proper period of observation, in which event the owner shall agree in
writing to pay all charges for holding and observing the dog or cat, the
court costs, and all other fees incidental thereto.  The court will
thereupon deliver the dog or cat to a veterinarian, and the veterinarian
will, at the termination of the observation period, make his professional
report to the court, whereupon the judge shall return his findings.  Any dog
or cat adjudged rabid shall be destroyed immediately by the Chief of Police,
or at his direction.



(Ord. 445, passed 7-11-74)



§ 91.32  CONCEALING RABID DOG OR CAT.



   It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to conceal a dog or cat
knowing that there is reasonable grounds to believe that the dog or cat is
rabid, or has been bitten by a rabid dog or cat; or to conceal a dog or cat
ordered to be impounded or killed; or in any manner to prevent, or attempt to
prevent the execution of the orders of the Police Court concerning rabid dogs
or cats or dogs or cats bitten by a rabid dog or cat.



(Ord. 445, passed 7-11-74)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.33  EXEMPTIONS.



   This subchapter shall not apply to dogs or cats kept by regularly
chartered medical colleges, or other educational or scientific institutions,
wherein such dogs or cats are used for scientific purposes; and to dogs or
cats, brought to the city temporarily for exhibition or show purposes.



(Ord. 445, passed 7-11-74)



VICIOUS DOGS



§ 91.45  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   UNCONFINED.   A vicious dog is UNCONFINED as defined in §§ 91.46
through 91.48 if such dog is not securely confined indoors or confined in a
securely enclosed and locked pen or structure upon the premises of the person
or persons described in §§ 91.46 through 91.48.  Such pen or structure
must have secure sides and a secure top.  If the pen or structure has no
bottom secured to the sides then the sides must be embedded two (2) feet in
the ground and secured by concrete anchors to a depth of three (3) feet at
each corner.



   VICIOUS DOG.   As described in §§ 91.46 through 91.48 means:



   (1)   Any dog with a propensity, tendency or disposition to attack,
to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings or other
domestic animals;



   (2)   Any dog that attacks a human being or other domestic animal
one or more times.



('81 Code, § 830.3, § 2)  (Ord. 830.3, passed 8-8-84; Am. Ord. 01-98,
passed 1-20-98)



§ 91.46  VICIOUS DOGS TO BE CONFINED.



   No person owning or harboring or having the care of a vicious dog shall
suffer or permit such animal to go unconfined on the premises of such person.



('81 Code, § 830.3, § 1(A))  (Ord. 445, passed 7-11-74; Ord. 830.3, passed
8-8-84; Am. Ord. 01-98, passed 1-20-98)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.47  DOGS TO BE SECURELY LEASHED AND MUZZLED.



   No person owning or harboring or having the care of a vicious dog shall
suffer or permit such dog to go beyond the premises of such person unless
such dog is securely leashed and muzzled.



('81 Code, § 830.3, § 1(B))  (Ord. 830.3, passed 8-8-84)  Penalty, see §
91.99



§ 91.48  SALE OF VICIOUS DOGS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall possess with intent to sell, offer for sale, purchase
or attempt to purchase within the city, any vicious dog as defined in §
91.45.



('81 Code, § 830.3, § 1(C))  (Ord. 830.3, passed 8-8-84; Am. Ord. 01-98,
passed 1-20-98)



Penalty, see § 91.99



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 91.60  DOG WARDEN AND ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER; POWERS.



   (A)   The County Dog Warden and all officers of the County Animal
Shelter shall have the same powers as the city's peace officers for the
purpose of enforcing animal control laws and ordinances in the city.



   (B)   All city police officers and officers and agents of the County
Animal Shelter shall comply with KRS 61.300.



   (C)   All dogs and cats of any age, running at large in the city,
may be picked up by the city police officers and by the Dog Warden or Animal
Control Officers of the County Animal Shelter and impounded in said shelter.



   (D)   In addition to or in lieu of impounding a dog or cat running
at large, the Dog Warden, Animal Control Officer or police officer may issue
a citation to the known owner.



('81 Code, § 820.1, § 2)



§ 91.61  INSPECTIONS.



   Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the
provisions or to perform any duty imposed by this chapter, or any other
applicable state statute, the city police or the County Animal Shelter or any
representatives thereof is hereby empowered to enter such property at a
reasonable time and inspect the same and perform any duty on behalf of the
County Animal Shelter or their representatives by this chapter or other
applicable law, but only if the consent of the occupant or owner of the
property is freely given or a search or inspection warrant is obtained.



('81 Code, § 820.1, § 7)



§ 91.99 PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter not
specifically enumerated shall be guilty of a violation and shall be fined not
less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
Each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.



   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of §§ 91.02, 91.04
through 91.06 and 91.13 shall be guilty of a violation and shall be fined not
less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
Each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.



   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of §§ 91.07 and 91.11
shall be guilty of a violation and shall be fined not less than ten dollars
($10.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00).  Each day that such
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.



   (D)   Any person violating the provisions of §§ 91.03 and 91.10
shall be guilty of a violation and shall be fined not less than twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00).  Each day that
such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.



('81 Code, § 820.1, § 6)



   (E)   Any person violating any provision of § 91.12 shall be guilty
of a violation and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not
more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus costs of court for each offense.



('81 Code, § 830.2)



   (F)   Any person owning a dog or cat, or dogs or cats, or failing or
refusing to cause the dog or cat, or dogs or cats to be vaccinated as
provided in § 91.29 or anyone who violated any of  the provisions of §§
91.25 through 91.33 shall be guilty of a violation and upon conviction
thereof shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) or confined in the county jail for not less than
twenty-four (24) hours nor more than ten (10) days or both.  Each day of
violation shall be considered a separate offense.



(Ord. 445, passed 7-11-74; Am. Ord. 14-90, passed 5-24-90)



   (G)   (1)   Any person who violates the provisions of §§ 91.46
through 91.48 shall be subject to imposition of a fine, upon conviction, of
one hundred ($100.00) dollars and/or incarceration in the county jail for not
more than thirty (30) days.



      (2)   In addition to the penalties imposed by Section (G)(1)
above, any vicious dog which attacks a human being or another domestic animal
may be ordered destroyed when in the court's judgment such vicious dog
represents a continuing threat of serious harm to human beings or other
domestic animals.  Additionally, any person who violates §§ 91.46 through
91.48 shall pay, upon conviction, all expenses, including shelter, food,
veterinary expenses for identification or certification of the breed of the
animal, boarding expense, and expenses necessitated by the seizure of any dog
for the protection of the public, and such other expenses as may be required
for the destruction of any such dog.



      (3)   In addition to all other relief heretofore provided, if
in the judgment of the investigating officer said vicious dog represents a
continuing threat of serious harm to human beings or other domestic animals,
the animal posing such a threat may be seized even if the animal is confined.
This animal may be impounded at a veterinarian or licensed kennel or animal
shelter of the officer's choice and at the expense of the owner.



('81 Code, § 830.3, § 4)  (Ord. 830.3, passed 8-8-84; Am. Ord. 14-90,
passed 5-24-90; Am. Ord. 01-98, passed 1-20-98; Am. Ord. 13-98, passed
10-20-98)



   (H)   Any person who violates any of the terms of provisions of §
91.14 shall, upon conviction thereof in a court of competent jurisdiction, be
sentenced to pay a fine for each offense or violation of no less than ten
dollars ($10.00) or more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or a sentence
to imprisonment for no more than ninety (90) days, according to law, or any
combination of such sentence or fines and imprisonment.



(Ord. 19-92, passed 5-28-92)



CHAPTER 92:  CIVIL EMERGENCIES; 911



Section



General Provisions



   92.01   Definition



   92.02   Declaration of proclamation



   92.03   Powers of Mayor



   92.04   Possession or use of bombs or missiles prohibited



   92.05   Termination of proclamation; extension for additional
periods of time



911 Emergency Telephone Service



   92.20   Establishment of service



 



   92.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Fire Chief designated as Director of Civil Defense, see § 31.10



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 92.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CIVIL EMERGENCY.   A riot, mob gathering or other unlawful assembly
characterized by the use of actual force or violence or any threat to use
force if accompanied by immediate power or apparent power to execute same by
three or more persons acting together without authority of law, occurring
within the corporate limits of the city, or elsewhere in the Northern
Kentucky or Greater Cincinnati area, whereby an immediate threat to the
lives, person or property of residents of this city exists.



('81 Code, § 320.4, § 1)



§ 92.02  DECLARATION OF PROCLAMATION.



   Whenever, in the judgment of the Mayor of the city, a civil emergency
as defined in § 92.01 is deemed to exist, the mayor shall forthwith proclaim
in writing the existence of a civil emergency.  Such proclamation, which
shall be known as a Proclamation of Emergency, shall be effective upon its
issuance and dissemination to the public by appropriate news media.  A copy
of such proclamation shall also be immediately delivered to the Chief of
Police of this city where it shall be available for inspection by any
interested person, firm or corporation.



('81 Code, § 320.4, § 2)



§ 92.03  POWERS OF MAYOR.



   In issuing the proclamation of emergency pursuant to § 92.01, the
Mayor shall have the power to impose any or all of the following regulations
or invoke any or all of the following powers necessary to preserve the peace
and order of the city. 



   (A)   Order the closing of all retail liquor stores dispensing
whiskey, wine or malt beverages by the package.



   (B)   Order the closing of all retail liquor stores dispensing
whiskey, wine or malt beverages by the drink.



   (C)   Order the closing of all taverns and bars.



   (D)   Order the closing of all restaurants.



   (E)   Order the closing of all private clubs or portions thereof
wherein the consumption of intoxicating liquor and/or beer is permitted.



   (F)   Order the discontinuance of the sale of whiskey, wine or malt
beverages, or all thereof.



   (G)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving
away gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any
container other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle. 



   (H)   Order the closing of gasoline stations and other
establishments, the chief activity of which is the sale, distribution or
dispensing of liquid flammable or combustible products.



   (I)   Order a general curfew applicable to the city as a whole or
any portion thereof, and applicable during any specified or all hours of the
day or night, thereby requiring all persons in such designated curfew areas
to forthwith remove themselves from the public streets, alleys or other
public places.  However, physicians, nurses and ambulance operators
performing medical services, utility personnel maintaining essential public
services, firemen, police personnel, city officials, and other authorized
personnel may be exempted from such curfew.



   (J)   Order the closing of all or any part of any public street,
thoroughfare, or vehicle parking area to motor vehicles and pedestrian
traffic.



   (K)   Issue such other orders as are imminently and reasonably
necessary for the protection of life and property.



('81 Code, § 302.4, § 3)



§ 92.04  POSSESSION OR USE OF BOMBS OR MISSILES PROHIBITED.



   During the existence of a civil emergency as proclaimed under § 92.02,
no person shall make, carry, possess or use any type of gasoline or petroleum
base fire bomb, "Molotov Cocktail" or other incendiary missile.



('81 Code, § 320.4, § 4)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.05  TERMINATION OF PROCLAMATION; EXTENSION FOR ADDITIONAL PERIODS OF
TIME.



   A proclamation of emergency shall terminate after forty-eight (48)
hours from the issuance thereof, or upon the issuance of a proclamation
determining a civil emergency no longer exists, whichever occurs first;
provided, however, such civil emergency may be extended for such additional
periods of time as determined necessary by the issuing authority referred to
in § 92.02.



('81 Code, § 320.4 § 5)



911 EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SERVICE



§ 92.20  ESTABLISHMENT OF SERVICE.



   There is hereby authorized the establishment of a 911 Emergency
Telephone Service within the city.  The Mayor is further authorized, if it
becomes necessary, to enter into an interlocal cooperation agreement among
the cities and county to create such a joint 911 Emergency Telephone Service,
and to adopt regulations concerning the provisions of this service.



(Ord. 11-86, passed 8-14-86; Am. Ord. 15-2005, passed 12-6-05; Am. Ord.
17-2013, passed 11-19-13)



§ 92.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who shall fail or refuse to
comply with the proclamation of emergency or the orders of duly authorized
law enforcement officers during the existence of such emergency, as set forth
in §§ 92.01 through 92.05, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and
upon conviction therefore shall be punished by a fine of not more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) or by imprisonment in jail for a period of not to
exceed sixty (60) days, or by such fine and imprisonment.



('81 Code, § 320.4, § 6)



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate § 92.04
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction therefor shall
be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or by
imprisonment in jail for a period of not more than six (6) months, or by both
such fine and imprisonment.



('81 Code, § 320.4, § 7)



CHAPTER 93:  FIREWORKS; FIRE PREVENTION; SMOKE DETECTORS; OUTDOOR WOOD
FURNACES



Section



Fireworks



   93.01   Definitions; legality of items



   93.02   Sale or use prohibited; exception for public display



   93.03   Consumer fireworks; restrictions on sale



   93.04   Bond or liability insurance requirement



   93.05   Exempted sales and uses



   93.06   Destruction of fireworks



Fire Prevention



   93.20   Blasting permit



   93.21   Storage of flammable and other matter



Smoke Detectors



   93.35   Installation of approved automatic fire/smoke warning system
required



   93.36   Alarm standards



   93.37   Placement of detectors



   93.38   Insurance of certificate of occupancy or building permits
restricted until compliance with regulations



Outdoor Wood Furnaces



   93.50   Definitions



   93.51   Regulations for outdoor wood furnaces



   93.52   Requirements for outdoor wood furnaces



 



   93.99   Penalty



FIREWORKS



§ 93.01  DEFINITIONS; LEGALITY OF ITEMS.



   (A)   As used in KRS 227.700 to 227.750, FIREWORKS means any
composition or device for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible
effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation, and which meets the
definition of "consumer fireworks" as defined in division (B) or "display"
fireworks as defined in division (D) and as set forth in the U.S. Department
of Transportation's (DOT) hazardous materials regulations.  FIREWORKS does
not include:



      (1)   Exception number 1:  Toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns,
or other devices in which paper or plastic caps manufactured in accordance
with DOT regulations, and packed and shipped according to said regulations,
are not considered to be fireworks and shall be allowed to be used and sold
at all times.



      (2)   Exception number 2:  Model rockets and model rocket
motors designed, sold, and used for the purpose of propelling recoverable
aero models are not considered to be fireworks.



      (3)   Exception number 3:  Propelling or expelling charges
consisting of a mixture of sulfur, charcoal, and saltpeter are not considered
as being designed for producing audible effects.



(KRS 227.700)



   (B)   As used in KRS 227.700 through 227.750, CONSUMER FIREWORKS
means fireworks that are suitable for use by the public, designed primarily
to produce visible effects by combustion, and comply with the construction,
chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the U.S. Consumer Product
Safety Commission. The types, sizes, and amount of pyrotechnic contents of
these devices are limited as enumerated in this chapter.  Some small devices
designed to produce audible effects are included, such as whistling devices,
ground devices containing fifty (50) milligrams or less of explosive
composition, and aerial devices containing one hundred thirty (130)
milligrams or less of explosive composition.  Consumer fireworks are further
defined by the Consumer Product Safety Commission in CPSC, 16 CFR Pts. 1500
and 1507, are classified as Division 1.4G explosives by the U.S. Department
of Transportation and include the following:



      (1)   Ground and hand-held sparkling devices.



         (a)   Dipped stick-sparkler or wire sparkler.  These
devices consist a metal wire or wood dowel that has been coated with
pyrotechnic composition.  Upon ignition of the tip of the device, a shower
of sparks is produced.  Sparklers may contain up to one hundred (100) grams
of pyrotechnic composition per item.  Those devices containing any
perchlorate or chlorate salts may not exceed five (5) grams of pyrotechnic
composition per item.  Wire sparklers which contain no magnesium and which
contain less than one hundred (100) grams of composition per item are not
included in this category, in accordance with DOT regulations.



         (b)   Cylindrical fountain.  Cylindrical tube
containing not more than seventy-five (75) grams of pyrotechnic
composition.  Upon ignition, a shower of colored sparks, and sometimes a
whistling effect or smoke, is produced.  This device may be provided with a
spike for insertion into the ground (spike fountain), a wood or plastic base
for placing on the ground (base fountain), or a wood or cardboard handle, if
intended to be hand-held (handle fountain). When more than one (1) tube is
mounted on a common base, total pyrotechnic composition may not exceed two
hundred (200) grams, or five hundred (500) grams if the tubes are separated
from each other on the base by a distance of at least one-half (1/2) inch.



         (c)   Cone fountain.  Cardboard or heavy paper cone
containing up to fifty (50) grams of pyrotechnic composition.  The effect is
the same as that of a cylindrical fountain. When more than one (1) cone is
mounted on a common base, the total pyrotechnic composition may not exceed
two hundred (200) grams, or five hundred (500) grams if the tubes are
separated from each other on the base by a distance of at least one-half
(1/2) inch.



         (d)   Illuminating torch.  Cylindrical tube containing
up to one hundred (100) grams of pyrotechnic composition.  Upon ignition,
colored fire is produced.  May be spike, base, or hand-held. When more than
one (1) tube is mounted on a common base, the total pyrotechnic composition
may not exceed two hundred (200) grams, or five hundred (500) grams if the
tubes are separated from each other on the base by a distance of at least
one-half (1/2) inch.



         (e)   Wheel.  A device attached to a post or tree by
means of a nail or string.  A wheel may have one (1) or more drivers, each
of which may contain not more than sixty (60) grams of pyrotechnic
composition.  No wheel may contain more than two hundred (200) grams total
pyrotechnic composition.  Upon ignition, the wheel revolves, producing a
shower of color and sparks and, sometimes, a whistling effect.



         (f)   Ground spinner.  Small device containing not more
than twenty (20) grams of pyrotechnic composition, similar in operation to a
wheel but intended to be placed on the ground and ignited.  A shower of
sparks and color is produced by the rapidly spinning device.



         (g)   Flitter sparkler.  Narrow paper tube attached to
a stick or wire and filled with not more than one hundred (100) grams of
pyrotechnic composition that produces color and sparks upon ignition. The
paper at one end of the tube is ignited to make the device function.



         (h)   Toy smoke device.  Small plastic or paper item
containing not more than one hundred (100) grams of pyrotechnic composition
that, upon ignition, produces white or colored smoke as the primary effect.



      (2)   Aerial devices.



         (a)   Sky rockets and bottle rockets.  Cylindrical tube
containing not more than twenty (20) grams of pyrotechnic composition.  Sky
rockets contain a wooden stick for guidance and stability and rise into the
air upon ignition.  A burst of color or noise or both is produced at the
height of flight.



         (b)   Missile-type rocket.  A device similar to a sky
rocket in size, composition, and effect that uses fins rather than a stick
for guidance and stability.



         (c)   Helicopter, aerial spinner.  A tube containing up
to twenty (20) grams of pyrotechnic composition.  A propeller or blade is
attached, which, upon ignition, lifts the rapidly spinning device into the
air.  A visible or audible effect is produced at the height of flight.



         (d)   Roman candles.  Heavy paper or cardboard tube
containing up to twenty (20) grams of pyrotechnic composition.  Upon
ignition, up to ten (10) stars (pellets of pressed pyrotechnic composition
that burn with bright color) are individually expelled at several second
intervals.



         (e)   Mine, shell.  Heavy cardboard or paper tube
usually attached to a wood or plastic base and containing up to sixty (60)
grams of total chemical composition (lift charge, burst charge, and visible
or audible effect composition).  Upon ignition, "stars," components
producing reports containing up to one hundred thirty (130) milligrams of
explosive composition per report, or other devices are propelled into the
air.  The term MINE refers to a device with no internal components
containing a bursting charge, and the term SHELL refers to a device that
propels a component that subsequently bursts open in the air.  A mine or
shell device may contain more than one (1) tube provided the tubes fire in
sequence upon ignition of one (1) external fuse.  The term CAKE refers to a
dense-packed collection of mine or shell tubes. Total chemical composition
including lift charges of any multiple tube devices may not exceed two
hundred (200) grams. The maximum quantity of lift charge in any one (1) tube
of a mine or shell device shall not exceed twenty (20) grams, and the maximum
quantity of break or bursting charge in any component shall not exceed
twenty-five percent (25%) of the total weight of chemical composition in the
component.  The tube remains on the ground.



         (f)   Aerial shell kit, reloadable tube.  A package kit
containing a cardboard, high-density polyethylene (HDPE), or equivalent
launching tube with multiple-shot aerial shells. Each aerial shell is limited
to a maximum of sixty (60) grams of total chemical composition (lift charge,
burst charge, and visible or audible effect composition), and the maximum
diameter of each shell shall not exceed one and three-fourths (1 3/4) inches.
In addition, the maximum quantity of lift charge in any shell shall not
exceed twenty (20) grams, and the maximum quantity of break or bursting
charge in any shell shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the total
weight of chemical composition in the shell.  The total chemical composition
of all the shells in a kit, including lift charge, shall not exceed four
hundred (400) grams.  The user lowers a shell into the launching tube, at
the time of firing, with the fuse extending out of the top of the tube. 
After the firing, the tube is then reloaded with another shell for the next
firing.  All launching tubes shall be capable of firing twice the number of
shells in the kit without failure of the tube.  Each package of
multiple-shot aerial shells must comply with all warning label requirements
of the Consumer Product Safety Commission.



      (3)   Audible ground devices.



         (a)   Firecrackers, salutes.  Small paper-wrapped or
cardboard tube containing not more than fifty (50) milligrams of pyrotechnic
composition.  Those used in aerial devices may contain not more than one
hundred thirty (130) milligrams of explosive composition per report.  Upon
ignition, noise and a flash of light is produced.



         (b)   Chaser.  Small paper or cardboard tube that
travels along the ground upon ignition.  A whistling effect, or other noise,
is often produced.  The explosive composition used to create the noise may
not exceed fifty (50) milligrams.



(KRS 227.702)



   (C)   Items listed below are classified as NOVELTIES and TRICK
NOISEMAKERS and are not classified as consumer fireworks by the U.S.
Department of Transportation, and their transportation, storage, retail sale,
possession, sale, and use shall be allowed throughout the state at all times.



      (1)   Snake, glow worm.  Pressed pellet of pyrotechnic
composition that produces a large, snake-like ash upon burning.  The ash
expands in length as the pellet burns.  These devices may not contain
mercuric thiocyanate.



      (2)   Smoke device.  Tube or sphere containing pyrotechnic
composition that, upon ignition, produces white or colored smoke as the
primary effect.



      (3)   Wire sparkler.  Wire coated with pyrotechnic
composition that produces a shower of sparks upon ignition.  These items may
not contain magnesium and must not exceed one hundred (100) grams of
composition per item.  Devices containing any chlorate or perchlorate salts
may not exceed five (5) grams of composition per item.



      (4)   Trick noisemaker.  Item that produces a small report
intended to surprise the user.  These devices include:



         (a)   Party popper.  Small plastic or paper item
containing not more than sixteen (16) milligrams of explosive composition
that is friction sensitive.  A string protruding from the device is pulled
to ignite it, expelling paper streamers and producing a small report.



         (b)   Booby trap.  Small tube with string protruding
from both ends, similar to a party popper in design.  The ends of the string
are pulled to ignite the friction sensitive composition, producing a small
report.



         (c)   Snapper.  Small, paper-wrapped item containing a
minute quantity of explosive composition coated on small bits of sand.  When
dropped, the device explodes producing a small report.



         (d)   Trick match.  Kitchen or book match that has been
coated with a small quantity of explosive or pyrotechnic composition.  Upon
ignition of the match a small report or a shower of sparks is produced.



         (e)   Cigarette load.  Small wooden peg that has been
coated with a small quantity of explosive composition.  Upon ignition of a
cigarette containing one of the pegs, a small report is produced.



         (f)   Auto burglar alarm.  Tube which contains
pyrotechnic composition that produces a loud whistle or smoke, or both, when
ignited.  A small quantity of explosive, not exceeding fifty (50)
milligrams, may also be used to produce a small report.  A squib is used to
ignite the device.



(KRS 227.704)



   (D)   As used in KRS 227.700 through 227.750, DISPLAY FIREWORKS
means pyrotechnic devices or large fireworks designed primarily to produce
visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration or detonation.  This
term includes, but is not limited to, firecrackers containing more than two
(2) grains (one hundred thirty (130) milligrams) of explosive composition,
aerial shells containing more than forty (40) grams of pyrotechnic
composition, and other display pieces which exceed the limits for
classification as consumer fireworks.  Display fireworks are defined by the
Consumer Product Safety Commission in CPSC, 16 CFR Pts. 1500 and 1507, and
are classified as Class B explosives by the U.S. Department of Transportation.



(KRS 227.706)



   (E)   Legality of items.



      (1)    Items described in division (B) above are legal for
retail sale provided all applicable federal and state requirements with
respect thereto are met.



      (2)   Items described in division (D) are not legal for retail
sale but are legal under permits granted pursuant to this chapter for the
purposes specified in this chapter for public displays and may be sold at
wholesale as provided in this chapter.



      (3)   Items described in division (C) are legal for retail
sale provided all applicable federal and state requirements with respect
thereto are met.



(KRS 227.708)



   (F)   Age requirement.  No person or business shall give, offer for
sale, or sell any consumer fireworks listed in KRS 227.702 to any person
under eighteen (18) years of age.



(KRS227.715)



§ 93.02  SALE OR USE PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION FOR PUBLIC DISPLAY.



   No person, firm, co-partnership or corporation shall offer for sale,
expose for sale, sell at retail, keep with intent to sell, possess, use, or
explode, any display fireworks, except as follows:



   (A)   (1)   The Chief of the Fire Department or other authorized
city official may grant permits for supervised public displays of fireworks
by the city, fair associations, amusement parks, and other organizations or
groups of individuals. 



      (2)   Every display shall be handled by a competent display
operator to be approved by the public official by whom the permit is granted,
and shall be of such character, and so located, discharged or fired as in the
opinion of the official, after proper inspection, to not be hazardous to
property or endanger any person. 



      (3)   COMPETENT DISPLAY OPERATOR shall be defined as the
person with overall responsibility for the operation and safety of a
fireworks display.  The competent display operator shall have a Bureau of
Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives (ATF) license and have
participated as an assistant in firing at least five (5) public displays.  A
COMPETENT DISPLAY OPERATOR is also an employee possessor.  A permit under
division (A)(1) shall be issued only to a competent display operator holding
an ATF license.



      (4)   At least one competent display operator shall be on site
during display set-up and firing.  This complement display operator shall
maintain a copy of the permit application, as signed by the local authority
having jurisdiction as identified in this section, on site and at all times
the display is in place, and shall be presented on demand of the State Fire
Marshal or local Fire Chief.  All public displays that require issuance of a
permit shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of National Fire
Protection Association (NFPA) 1123 Code for Fireworks Display (adopted
edition).



      (5)   Permits shall be filed with the office of the State Fire
Marshal at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the date of the display. 
After this privilege shall have been granted, sales, possession, use and
distribution of fireworks for the display shall be lawful for that purpose
only.  No permit granted under this division shall be transferable.  For
the purpose of this section, PUBLIC DISPLAY OF FIREWORKS shall include the
use of pyrotechnic devices or pyrotechnic materials before a proximate
audience, whether indoors or outdoors.



      (6)   Any person remaining within the display area shall be
identified as licensed by the ATF, or an employee thereof, or be an assistant
in training to become a competent display operator.  All persons remaining
within the display area shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age.



      (7)   The Commissioner of the Department of Housing, Buildings
and Construction with recommendation from the State Fire Marshal shall
promulgate administrative regulations in accordance with KRS Chapter 13A to
administer the provisions of this division. The regulations shall address the
process by which permits are issued and any other procedures that are
reasonably necessary to effectuate this division.



   (B)   The sale, at wholesale, of any display fireworks for permitted
displays by any resident manufacturer, wholesaler, dealer, or jobber, in
accordance with regulations of the U.S. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and
Firearms, and Explosives if the sale is to a person holding a display permit
as outlined in division (A) of this section.  The permit holder shall
present the permit along with other verifiable identification at the time of
sale.



   (C)   The sale of display fireworks in accordance with a license
issued by the U.S. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives.



   (D)   The sale, and use in emergency situations, of pyrotechnic
signaling devices and distress signals for marine, aviation, and highway use.



   (E)   The use of fuses and railway torpedoes by railroads.



   (F)   The sale and use of blank cartridges for use in a show or
theater or for signal or ceremonial purpose in athletics or sports.



   (G)   The use of any pyrotechnic device by military organizations.



   (H)   The use of fireworks for agricultural purposes under the
direct supervision of the U.S. Department of the Interior or any equivalent
or local agency.



   (I)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit a person, firm,
co-partnership, non-profit, or corporation from offering for sale, exposing
for sale, selling at retail, keeping with intent to sell, possessing or using
consumer fireworks as defined in KRS 227.702 and as permitted pursuant to KRS
227.715.



(KRS 227.710)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.03  CONSUMER FIREWORKS; RESTRICTIONS ON SALE.



   (A)   Except as provided in § 93.02, the consumer fireworks
described in KRS 227.702 may be offered for sale, sold at retail, or kept
with the intent to sell, only if the requirements of this section are met.



   (B)   Any person, firm, co-partnership, non-profit, or business
intending to sell consumer fireworks described in KRS 227.702(1) shall
register annually with the State Fire Marshal's office in accordance with KRS
227.715, and display its registration certificate in a conspicuous location
at the site.



   (C)   Each site at which fireworks are offered for sale shall comply
with all applicable provisions of the International Building Code, with
Kentucky Amendments (adopted edition), and NFPA 1124 (National Fire
Protection Association) Code for the Manufacture, Transportation, Storage,
and Retail Sales of Fireworks and Pyrotechnic Articles (adopted addition).



   (D)   No person or business shall give, offer for sale, or sell any
consumer fireworks listed in § 93.01(B) to any person under eighteen (18)
years of age.



   (E)   No person under eighteen (18) years of age may be employed by
a fireworks distribution facility, or manufacturing facility.  No person
under eighteen (18) years of age shall sell consumer fireworks at a consumer
fireworks retail sales facility registered under KRS 227.715 unless the
individual is supervised by a parent or guardian.



(KRS 227.715(7) - (9))  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.04  BOND OR LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIREMENT.



   No permit shall be issued under § 93.02 unless the applicant shall
give bond or evidence of liability insurance deemed adequate by the official
to whom application for the permit is made, in a sum not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000).  However, the appropriate city official or the
State Fire Marshal may require a larger amount if in their judgment the
situation requires it, conditioned for the payment of all damages which may
be caused thereby either to a person or to property by reason of the
permitted display, and arising from any acts of the licensee, his agents,
employees or subcontractors.



(KRS 227.720)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.05  EXEMPTED SALES AND USES.



   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the retail sale and use of
explosives or signaling flares used in the course of ordinary business or
industry, or gold star producing sparklers, which contain no magnesium or
chlorate, toy snakes which contain no mercury, smoke novelties and party
novelties, which contain less than twenty-five hundredths of a grain of
explosive mixture, or shells or cartridges, used as ammunition in firearms,
or blank cartridges for a show or theater, or for signal or ceremonial
purposes in athletics or sports, or for use by military organizations, or the
sale of any kind of fireworks provided the same are to be shipped by the
seller directly out of the state.



(KRS 227.730)



§ 93.06  DESTRUCTION OF FIREWORKS.



   (A)   The State Fire Marshal, or any fire department having
jurisdiction which has been deputized to act on behalf of the State Fire
Marshal, shall cause to be removed at the expense of the owner all stocks of
fireworks which are stored and held in violation of this chapter. After a
period of sixty (60) days, the seized fireworks may be offered for sale by
closed bid to a properly certified fireworks wholesaler.



   (B)   After a period of sixty (60) days, the seized fireworks may be
offered for sale by closed bid to a properly certified manufacturer,
distributor, or wholesaler. All seized fireworks or explosives with a Class
1.3G or "display" designation shall require the notification of the U.S.
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives. The State Fire Marshal
shall provide the owner or possessor a receipt containing the complete
inventory of any fireworks seized within five (5) business days of the
seizure.



   (C)   Before any seized fireworks may be disposed of:



      (1)   If the owner of the seized fireworks is known to the
State Fire Marshal, the State Fire Marshal shall give notice by registered
mail or personal service to the owner of the State Fire Marshal's intention
to dispose of the fireworks. The notice shall inform the owner of the State
Fire Marshal's intent. The State Fire Marshal shall conduct an administrative
hearing in accordance with KRS Chapter 13B concerning the disposal of
fireworks; or



      (2)   If the identity of the owner of any seized fireworks is
not known to the State Fire Marshal, the State Fire Marshal shall cause to be
published, in a newspaper of general circulation in the county in which the
seizure was made, notice of the seizure, and of the State Fire Marshal's
intention to dispose of the fireworks. The notice shall be published once
each week for three (3) consecutive weeks. If no person claims ownership of
the fireworks within ten (10) days of the date of the last publication, the
State Fire Marshal may proceed with disposal of the fireworks. If the owner
does claim the fireworks within ten (10) days of the date of the last
publication, a hearing as set out in division (C)(1) shall be held.



   (D)   Nothing in KRS 227.700 to 227.750 shall restrict a local
government from enacting ordinances that affect the sale or use of fireworks
within its jurisdiction.



(KRS 227.750)



FIRE PREVENTION



§ 93.20  BLASTING PERMIT.



   No person shall cause a blast to occur within the city without making
application in writing beforehand, setting forth the exact nature of the
intended operation, and receiving a permit to blast from the authorized city
official.  The authorized city official, before granting such permit may
require the applicant to provide a bond to indemnify the city and all other
persons against injury or damages which might result from the proposed
blasting.



Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.21  STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE AND OTHER MATTER.



   (A)   All flammable or combustible materials shall be arranged and
stored in a manner which affords reasonable safety against the danger of fire.



   (B)   Waste paper, ashes, oil rags, waste rags, excelsior, or any
material of a similar hazardous nature shall not be accumulated in any cellar
or any other portion of any building of any kind.  Proper fireproof
receptacles shall be provided for such hazardous materials. 



   (C)   No matter shall be stored or arranged in a manner which
impedes or prevents access to or exit from any premises in case of fire.



Penalty, see § 93.99



SMOKE DETECTORS



§ 93.35  INSTALLATION OF APPROVED AUTOMATIC FIRE/SMOKE WARNING SYSTEM
REQUIRED.



   Each new dwelling unit shall be equipped with an approved automatic
household fire/smoke warning system.  Approved detectors shall be installed
to provide at least LEVEL 4 protection as described in NFPA No. 74, a copy of
which is adopted and made a part hereof by reference.



('81 Code, § 330.1, § 1)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.36  ALARM STANDARDS.



   (A)   Smoke detectors shall be sensitive to any of the products of
combustion; detectors sensitive to fire or heat only are not acceptable. 
Alarm signaling devices shall be clearly audible in all bedrooms within the
dwelling unit when all intervening doors are closed.



('81 Code, § 330.1, § 3)



   (B)   Only fire/smoke detector units approved under the latest
standard of Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. (UL) or Factory Mutual System
(FM) shall be acceptable.  Devices denoted as fire detectors are not
acceptable.



('81 Code, § 330.1, § 4)



   (C)   (1)   For the purpose of installation and maintenance only,
the applicable sections of NFPA No. 74, "Standard for the Installation,
Maintenance and Use of a Household Fire Warning System" shall be considered
accepted engineering practice.  Units shall be powered by AC electrical
house current (wired-in units) or by batteries as recommended by the
manufacturer.  Units must be operable for the final inspection of the
Building Inspector or inspection by the authorized representative of the City
Volunteer Fire Department.



      (2)   Instructions/maintenance booklets must be given by the
manufacturer to the owner as provided in NFPA No. 74, and said booklets
displayed to the Building Inspector during his final inspection of the
dwelling unit.



      (3)   Appendices to NFPA No. 74 shall be used as reference by
all parties involved.



('81 Code, § 330.1, § 5)



   (D)   All amendments to or changes in NFPA NO. 74 shall be adopted
and made a part hereof without further reference. 



('81 Code, § 330.1, § 6)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.37  PLACEMENT OF DETECTORS.



   Smoke detectors shall be placed on the ceilings of the dwelling unit as
follows:



   (A)   One unit at the head of each stairway within the dwelling unit;



   (B)   One unit in each hallway in each bedroom area within the
dwelling unit; and



   (C)   One unit in the same room as the furnace/heat pump and not
more than ten (10) feet away from same.



('81 Code, § 330.1, § 7)



§ 93.38  ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY OR BUILDING PERMITS
RESTRICTED UNTIL COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS.



   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any new dwelling unit
not properly equipped with smoke detectors.  No building permits for
remodeling or repair of a dwelling unit shall be issued for any dwelling unit
not properly equipped with the detectors.



('81 Code, § 330.1, § 8)



OUTDOOR WOOD FURNACES



§ 93.50  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CHIMNEY.  Flue or flues that carries off exhaust from an outdoor wood
furnace firebox or burn chamber.



   EPA OWHH PHASE 1 PROGRAM.   EPA OWHH (outdoor wood fired hydronic
heater program) Phase 1 program administered by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency.



   EPA OWHH PHASE 1 PROGRAM QUALIFIED MODEL.  An outdoor wood fired
hydronic heater that has been EPA OWHH Phase 1 program qualified. The model
has met the EPA OWHH Phase 1 emission level and has the proper qualifying
label and hang tag.



   EXISTING OUTDOOR WOOD FURNACE.  An outdoor wood furnace that was
purchased and installed prior to the effective date of this subchapter.



   NATURAL WOOD.  Wood, which has not been painted, varnished or coated
with a similar material, has not been pressure treated with preservatives and
does not contain resins of glue as in plywood or other composite wood
products.



   NEW OUTDOOR WOOD FURNACE.  An outdoor wood furnace was first
installed, established or constructed after the effective date of this
subchapter.



   OUTDOOR WOOD FURNACE. Any equipment, device, appliance or apparatus, or
any part thereof, which is installed, affixed or situated outdoors of the
primary purpose of combustion of fuel to produce heat or energy used as a
component of a heating system provided for any interior space or water
source.  An OUTDOOR WOOD FURNACE may also be referred to as an outdoor wood
boiler or outdoor wood fired hydronic heater.



(Ord. 17-2009, passed 11-17-09)



§ 93.51  REGULATIONS FOR OUTDOOR WOOD FURNACES.



   (A)   No person shall, from the effective date of this subchapter,
construct, install, establish, operate or maintain an outdoor wood furnace
other than in compliance with the applicable sections of this subchapter.



   (B)   No person shall, from the effective date of this subchapter
operate an outdoor wood furnace unless such operation conforms with the
manufacturer's instructions regarding such operation and the requirements of
this subchapter regarding fuels that may be burned in an outdoor furnace as
set forth in § 93.52(A) and (B) and chimney height as set for in § 93.52(D)
and whatever regulations required by the state and federal environmental
protection agencies or other state and/or federal regulations.



   (C)   All new outdoor wood furnaces shall be constructed,
established, installed, operated and maintained in conformance with the
manufacturer's instructions and the requirements of this subchapter. In the
event of a conflict, the requirements of this subchapter shall apply unless
the manufacturer's instructions are stricter, in which case the
manufacturer's instructions shall apply.



   (D)   The owner of any outdoor wood furnace shall produce the
manufacturer's owners manual or installation instructions to the city's Code
Enforcement Officer, Zoning Administrator, police officer, or any other city
official designated to enforce this subchapter by the Mayor, to review prior
to installation.



   (E)   All new outdoor wood furnaces shall be laboratory tested and
listed to appropriate safety standards such as UL, CCAA/CSA, ANSI or other
applicable safety standards.



   (F)   If an existing outdoor wood furnace is, through the course of
a proper investigation by the city, creating a verifiable nuisance, as
defined by this subchapter, or any other ordinance defining nuisance within
the city or any state law definition of a nuisance, the following steps may
be taken by the City of Highland Heights:



      (1)   Modifications made to the unit to eliminate the nuisance
such as extending the chimney, or relocating the outdoor wood furnace or both.



      (2)   Cease and desist operating the unit until reasonable
steps can be taken to insure that the outdoor wood furnace will not be a
nuisance.



(Ord. 17-2009, passed 11-17-09)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.52  REQUIREMENTS FOR OUTDOOR WOOD FURNACES.



   Outdoor wood furnaces shall be constructed, established, installed,
operated and maintained pursuant to the following conditions:



   (A)   Fuel burned in any new or existing outdoor wood furnace shall
only be natural untreated wood, wood pellets, corn products, biomass pellets
or other listed fuel specifically permitted by the manufacturer's
instructions such as fuel oil, natural gas or propane backup.



   (B)   The following fuels are strictly prohibited in new or existing
outdoor wood furnaces:



      (1)   Wood that has been painted varnished or coated with
similar material and/or has been pressure treated with preservatives and
contains resins or glues as in plywood or other composite wood products.



      (2)   Rubbish or garbage, including but not limited to food
waste, food packaging, food wraps.



      (3)   Any plastic materials including but not limited to
nylon, PVC, ABS polystyrene or urethane foam, and synthetic fabric, plastic
films and plastic containers.



      (4)   Rubber including tires, and other synthetic rubber-like
products.



      (5)   Newspaper, cardboard, or any paper with ink or dye
products.



      (6)   Any other items not specifically allowed by the
manufacturer or these provisions.



   (C)   Set backs for any new outdoor wood furnace:



      (1)   The outdoor wood furnace shall be located at least
twenty-five (25) feet from the property line.



      (2)   The outdoor wood furnace shall be located on the
property and in compliance with the manufacturer's recommendations and/or
testing or listing requirements for clearance to combustible materials.



      (3)   The outdoor wood furnace shall be located at least one
hundred (100) feet from any residence that is not served by the outdoor wood
furnace.



   (D)   Chimney heights for new and existing outdoor wood furnaces.



      (1)   The chimney of any new outdoor wood furnace shall extend
at least two (2) feet above the peak of any residence not served by the
outdoor wood furnace located within three hundred (300) feet of such outdoor
wood furnace.



      (2)   If there is an existing outdoor wood furnace already
installed and there is new construction of a residence not served by the
outdoor wood furnace within three hundred (300) feet of such outdoor wood
furnace then the owner of such outdoor wood furnace shall conform to the
stack height requirements of this regulation within thirty (30) days of the
date such construction is complete or upon written notice from the City of
Highland Heights whichever is sooner.



(Ord. 17-2009, passed 11-17-09)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for
which a penalty has not been provided shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).



   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of §§ 93.02 or 93.04,
the regulations issued thereunder or any order issued thereunder, or who
knowingly induces another, directly or indirectly, to violate the provisions
of those sections, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned for not more than
thirty (30) days or both. 



(KRS 227.990(4))



   (C)   There shall be assessed for violation of §§ 93.35 through
93.38 a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) for failure to install smoke
detectors.  However, the fifty dollars ($50.00) fine shall be abated and
suspended where the owner of the dwelling unit purchases and installs the
required detector or detectors within five (5) days of citation under  §§
93.35 through 93.38.



   (D)   (1)   Any person who shall violate any provision of  §§
93.50 through 93.52 shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor and shall upon
conviction be subject to a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00).  Each week's continued violation shall constitute a separate and
distinctive offense.



      (2)   Compliance with §§ 93.50 through 93.52 may be
compelled by the city either through a criminal prosecution or a civil
violation at the option of the city. If the city elects to enforce a
particular ordinance civilly then any person who it is determined by a court
of competent jurisdiction to have violated that ordinance shall be subject to
a civil penalty or not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) and each
week's continued violation shall be considered a separate and distinct
violation. In the event the city is required to take legal action to enforce
§§ 93.50 through 93.52, the violator shall be responsible for any and all
necessary cost relevant thereto, including but not limited to attorney fees
and such expenses charged to the property so affected. These fees once
awarded shall be attached to the property both as a property lien and added
to the property owners annual property tax levy.



(Ord. 17-2009, passed 11-17-09)



CHAPTER 94:  HAZARDOUS WASTE TRANSPORT



Section



   94.01   Definition



   94.02   Permits required; application



   94.03   Permit fees



   94.04   Certain vehicles and uses prohibited for transportation or
delivery of hazardous waste.



 



   94.99   Penalty



§ 94.01 DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   HAZARDOUS WASTES.  Defined in federal regulations at 49 CFR 172.101
under the "Federal Hazardous Materials Transportation Act"; and at 40 CFR 260
under the "Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act"; and as defined in
Kentucky regulations at 401 KAR 2:075, "Identification and Listing of
Hazardous Waste," pursuant to KRS Chapter 224.



('81 Code, § 520.3, § 1)  (Ord. 2-84, passed 1-12-84)



§ 94.02  PERMITS REQUIRED; APPLICATION.



   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall deliver for sale, use or
storage; or transport by truck, semi-trailer or tank truck, within the city
any hazardous wastes defined in § 94.01, in quantities exceeding those
outlined in § 94.01, without a permit from the Police Chief and Fire Chief
authorizing such transportation, following a determination that no practical
alternate route to passage through the city exists.



   (B)   Application for a permit shall be made on forms prescribed by
the city and shall contain such information as shall be required. 



   (C)   Unless otherwise provided, every permit and renewal thereof
shall be for a period to be determined by the Police Chief and Fire Chief,
but in no case shall exceed one year.



   (D)   The permit is revocable and not transferable to a new
ownership, and in the case of a change of ownership of the truck, the new
owner shall obtain a new permit. 



   (E)   The city permit card must be carried at all times in the cab
of the truck or tractor in a cardholder, and on demand of a representative of
the Fire or Police Department, shall be produced for inspection of the
vehicle.



   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give away or
deliver hazardous wastes in quantities requiring a city permit to another
person, unless the latter has secured from the Police Chief and Fire Chief a
permit issued pursuant to this chapter.



('81 Code, § 520.3, § 2)  (Ord. 2-84, passed 1-12-84)  Penalty, see §
94.99



§ 94.03  PERMIT FEES.



   An annual fee shall be charged for each permit issued pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00).



('81 Code, § 520.3, § 3)  (Ord. 2-84, passed 1-12-84)



§ 94.04  CERTAIN VEHICLES AND USES PROHIBITED FOR TRANSPORTATION OR
DELIVERY OF HAZARDOUS WASTE.



   (A)   Full-type trailers (any vehicle without its own motive power,
no part of which rests on the towing vehicle, but which is drawn by a motor
vehicle) shall be prohibited for the transportation or delivery of hazardous
wastes in the city.



   (B)   Interstate or intrastate transportation of hazardous wastes
through the city, with no pickup or delivery in the city, shall be only in
accordance with routes and times as prescribed by the Police Chief and Fire
Chief.  Said routes shall be those most direct and through areas least
inhabited and said times shall never be during the curfewed rush hours,
between 6:00 through 10:00 a.m. and 3:00 through 9:00 p.m.



   (C)   Interstate or intrastate transportation of hazardous wastes
are banned in the public interest unless the vendor can show that no
practical alternative route to passage through the city exists or that a
critical emergency requires delivery in the city.  Any truck shipment so
authorized shall conform to routes, times and safety conditions specified by
the Police Chief and Fire Chief, and all provisions of the Kentucky Revised
Statutes concerning vehicle equipment shall be complied with.



('81 Code, § 520.3, § 4)  (Ord. 2-84, passed 1-12-84)  Penalty, see §
94.99



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation in violation of any provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined in a sum not to
exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or thirty (30) days in jail.  Each
occurrence shall constitute a separate offense.



('81 Code, § 520.3, § 5)  (Ord. 2-84, passed 1-12-84)



CHAPTER 95:  HEALTH AND SAFETY



Section



Dangerous Conditions



   95.01   Definition



   95.02   Permitting dangerous conditions



   95.03   Below ground level vaults to be covered



   95.04   Above ground vault or container



   95.05   Exemption; restriction



   95.06   Notice to correct condition; procedure



   95.07   Inspections



   95.08   Responsibility for violations



 



   95.99   Penalty



DANGEROUS CONDITIONS



§ 95.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   OCCUPIER. Any person who has created a dangerous condition on the land
in question or any person who has authority to correct any such condition and
shall therefore include:  owners, renters, lessors, lessees, contractors,
subcontractors, their agents or assigns.



('81 Code, § 830.1, § 10)



§ 95.02  PERMITTING DANGEROUS CONDITIONS.



   No owner, renter, lessor or party in possession of land located within
the city shall create or permit to suffer a dangerous condition on land
located within the city. 



('81 Code, § 830.1, § 1)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.03  BELOW GROUND LEVEL VAULTS TO BE COVERED.



   (A)   Any owner or occupier of land located within the city shall
cause all sewers, septic tanks, catch basins, wells, cisterns, swimming pools
or other such below ground level vaults which are actively in use or intended
to be used as their nature and design accommodates to be securely safely
covered.



('81 Code, § 830.1, § 2)



   (B)   Any owner or occupier of land located within the city which
land contains any below ground level vault which is not actively in use nor
reasonably intended to be put to active use according to its nature and
design shall cause such vault to be fully and completely filled to ground
level with either sand, gravel, dirt or solid concrete.



('81 Code, § 830.1, § 3)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.04  ABOVE GROUND VAULT OR CONTAINER.



   (A)   Any owner or occupier of land located within the city shall
not permit or maintain nay above ground level vault, or other container to be
or remain open or accessible unless properly fenced according to the official
zoning ordinance Section 9.18, if applicable, and if not, unless such open
container is actively in use and presently and continuously supervised and
guarded by the owner, occupier or agent, or employee thereof.



('81 Code, § 830.1, § 4)



   (B)   Any other above ground vault or container not actively in use
but reasonably intended to be placed in use in the foreseeable future as in
division (A) of this section shall either be removed from the premises,
placed in a position or fully dismantled so as to assure that it is not
inherently dangerous to human life or health, or filled completely with a
solid substance, or caused to be securely and safely covered with a lid or
other covering.



('81 Code, § 830.1, § 5)



   (C)   Any above ground vault or container not actively in use and
not reasonably intended to be placed in use in the foreseeable future shall
either be removed from the premises, fully dismantled or filled completely
with a solid substance so as to cause such vault or container to be
reasonably safe and free of presenting a threat of danger to human life or
health.



('81 Code, § 830.1, § 6)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.05  EXEMPTION; RESTRICTION.



   Current building construction or excavation shall be exempt from the
prohibitions of §§ 95.01 through 95.04 of this chapter so long as such
construction site is reasonably marked with signage and/or lighting to permit
fair and reasonable notice of the existence of the dangerous condition which
may otherwise be in existence at such site.  However, the exemption as
afforded by this section shall not be available if in the opinion of the
Chief of Police such dangerous condition could reasonably be corrected by
placing a cover over such dangerous condition, or if in the opinion of the
Chief of Police the dangerous condition presents such a dangerous and
hazardous condition to human life or health that no amount of signage or
lighting could reasonably assure the avoidance of imminent loss of life or
substantial physical harm should a person fall into such opening, or if the
construction project and the same dangerous condition as herein otherwise
exempted from §§ 95.01 through 95.04 persists beyond a period of nine (9)
months from the date such dangerous condition is created.



('81 Code, § 830.1, § 7)



§ 95.06  NOTICE TO CORRECT CONDITION; PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Upon the Chief of Police determining pursuant to § 95.05 that
the exemption from §§ 95.01 through 95.04 should not be permitted, he shall
immediately notify the owner and/or occupier of such land to immediately
correct such dangerous or hazardous condition.  The methods of correction of
any such dangerous or hazardous condition shall include but not necessarily
be limited to the following:



      (1)   Fencing of the area which includes the hazardous
condition;



      (2)   Bringing the condition into an acceptably (pursuant to
§ 95.05) less hazardous condition by partially or completely filling the
vault with dirt or other solid substance;



      (3)   Safely and securely covering the vault;



      (4)   Employing a watchman to guard the premises whereon the
hazard is located to protect persons from the unreasonable risks of the
hazardous condition. 



   (B)   Although notice which may be made by the Chief of Police
regarding the provisions of this section may initially be made orally,
official notice shall be directed by certified mail (return receipt
requested) to the owner of the land whereupon the hazardous  condition
exists and such type of notice shall also be directed to the person occupying
the land if different from the owner.  Such notice shall include:



      (1)   A brief description of the hazardous condition and its
location including both the address of the property and the general location
of the condition;



      (2)   A brief description stating that such condition is a
hazardous condition and why the condition as it exists is hazardous;



      (3)   A demand that the hazardous condition be corrected
immediately or within three (3) days from the date of the receipt of the
written notice; and



      (4)   An attached copy of this chapter.



('81 Code, § 830.1, § 8)



§ 95.07  INSPECTIONS.



   The Chief of Police shall cause frequent and periodic inspections to be
made to determine the existence of any such dangerous condition as this
chapter may prohibit.



('81 Code, § 830.1, § 9)



§ 95.08  RESPONSIBILITY FOR VIOLATIONS.



   Owners or occupiers may be charged jointly or severally responsible
under this chapter for the violation of any provision herein contained in
§§ 95.01 through 95.06.



('81 Code, § 830.1, § 11)



§ 95.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person or corporation named in violation of any provision
of §§ 95.01 through 95.08 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall pay a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor
more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or be confined in the county jail for
not more than sixty (60) days, or both. 



('81 Code, § 830.1, § 12)  (Am. Ord. 3-84, passed 1-26-84)



   (B)   Any owner or occupier of real estate within the city who has
been found guilty of violating any provision of §§ 95.01 through 95.08
shall, in addition to a fine, jail time, and court costs, be liable to
reimburse the city for its reasonable costs and attorney fees as caused to be
expended directly and incidental to correcting the dangerous and hazardous
conditions as found to have existed.



('81 Code, § 830.1, § 13)



CHAPTER 96:  LITTERING



Section



   96.01   Definitions



   96.02   Throwing, dropping or depositing litter upon public and
private places



   96.03   Overloaded receptacles



   96.04   Accumulation of litter



   96.05   Receptacle and cover



   96.06   Litter receptacle uses



   96.07   Removal of litter receptacle



   96.08   Destruction of receptacle



   96.09   Disposition of litter



   96.10   Throwing or depositing handbills upon public or private
places



   96.11   Transporting litter



   96.12   Burning within city limits prohibited



   96.13   Enforcement procedure



 



   96.99   Penalty



§ 96.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ASHES.  Are residue from materials consumed by fire.



   BLIGHT.  Tall (eight inches or above) unkept grasses, weeds, or
undergrowth, not cultivated in the course of farming.



   DUMPOUTS.  Any material emptied from a vehicle or building upon
streets, roadsides or public places other than that emptied in appropriate
litter receptacles.



   GARBAGE.  Is putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.



   HANDBILL.  Any printed or written material (excluding newspapers)
which advertises for sale any commodity, or thing, or which directs attention
to any business or other activity or event of any kind.



   LITTER BAG.  A bag, cask or container made of any material which is
large enough to serve as a receptacle for litter inside the vehicle or
watercraft of any person.



   LITTER RECEPTACLE.  Those containers meeting the requirements of the
Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Protection.



   LITTER, REFUSE or SOLID WASTE.  All putrescible and nonputrescible
solid wastes and semisolid wastes including, garbage, rubbish, ashes,
industrial wastes, swill, demolition and construction wastes, abandoned
vehicles or parts thereof, and discarded commodities.



   NEWSPAPER.  Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general
law.



   OVERLOADED LITTER RECEPTACLE.  Any litter receptacle which contains an
amount of litter that prevents the litter receptacle lid or cover from
properly resting or placed in its closed position against the respective
litter receptacle.



   PARK.  A reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any
other areas in the city, devoted to active or passive outdoor recreation.



   PERSON.  Any individual, industry, public or private corporation,
co-partnership, association, firm or other entity whatsoever.



   PRIVATE PROPERTY.  Any property not publicly owned or held out for use
by the public.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Any area that is used or held out for use by the public
whether owned or operated by the public or private interests.



   SOLID WASTE.  All putrescible and nonputrescible solid and semisolid
wastes including garbage, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, swill,
demolition and construction wastes, abandoned vehicles or parts thereof, and
discarded commodities.



   STREET.  Any highway, road, alley, collector, local, arterial or
freeway within the political subdivision.



   SWEEPOUTS.  Any collection of debris, resulting from clean-up
operations that is deposited in or around a public place.



   VEHICLE.  Every device capable of being moved upon a public street and
in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or
drawn upon a public street, excepting devices moved by human or animal power
or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.



   WATERCRAFT.  Any boat, ship, vessel, barge or other floating craft.



('81 Code, § 810.1, § 1)



§ 96.02  THROWING, DROPPING OR DEPOSITING LITTER UPON PUBLIC AND PRIVATE
PLACES.



   No person shall throw, drop, deposit, discard or otherwise dispose of
litter upon any public place in the city or upon any private place not owned
by him, nor in any waters within the jurisdiction of this city whether from a
vehicle or otherwise, except:



   (A)   When such property is designated by the state or one of its
agencies for disposal of garbage and refuse and such person is authorized by
the proper authority to use such property;



   (B)   Into a litter receptacle or other container in such manner
than the litter will be prevented from being carried away or deposited by the
elements upon any public or private property.



   (C)   When such person is the owner or has the control or custody of
the property, or has prior consent of the owner in lawful possession of the
property, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner
or tenant, and provided the litter will not cause a public nuisance or be in
violation of any state or local law, rule, regulation or ordinance.



('81 Code, § 810.1, § 2)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.03  OVERLOADED RECEPTACLES.



   (A)   Either person owning or maintaining any real property located
within the city zoned either as Residential Two Zone (R-2), Residential Three
Zone (R-3), Residential Mobile Home Park Zone (RMHP), Planned Unit
Development Overlay Zone (PUD), Residential Cluster Development Overlay Zone
(RCD), Shopping Center Zone (SC), Neighborhood Shopping Center Zone (NSC),
General Commercial Zone (GC), Professional Office Zone (PO) or Limited
Service Commercial Zone (LSC) as defined in the City's Official Zoning
Ordinance in Article X, Sections 10.10 through 10.19 shall be jointly or
severally responsible for litter spreading from any overloaded litter
receptacle.



   (B)   The imposition of this section upon any person owning or
maintaining any real property located within the city zoned as herein related
shall not preclude any person empowered to enforce this chapter from
charging, serving or citing any other person under other appropriate sections
of this chapter.



   (C)   This section shall be construed with § 96.02(C), so as to
more narrowly restrict the exceptions as therein provided to owners, tenants,
parties in control, custody or with consent.



('81 Code, § 810.1, § 3)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.04  ACCUMULATION OF LITTER.



   (A)   The owner or person in control of any private property shall
at all times maintain the premises free of litter, rubbish, refuse, garbage,
and blight; however this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter,
rubbish, refuse or garbage in authorized private receptacle for collection.



   (B)   Oil cans, drums, tires, discarded automobile parts or other
miscellaneous items of junk shall not be permitted to accumulate or if kept
or maintained, shall be so located within a primary dwelling garage or
outbuilding so as not to be visible to the public view.



   (C)   No accumulation of waste paper, hay, grass, straw, litter,
combustible or flammable waste or rubbish of any kind shall be permitted to
remain in any courtyard, vacant lot, or open space longer than thirty (30)
days, and such accumulations must be in bales or containers awaiting
collection and located at least ten (10) feet from any combustible wall, or
window, or door opening of any building or structure.  All free growing
nondomesticated weeds, grass, vines or other growth which may be fired and
thereby endanger any property, shall be cut down and removed (other than by
burning) by the owner or occupant of the property. 



   (D)   At the close of each day, or more often if necessary, any
accumulated shavings, excelsior, rubbish, sacks, bags, litter, hay, straw or
combustible trash, waste or fragments shall be removed from the premises or
shall be completely baled and stacked in an orderly manner pending removal.



   (E)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit depositing of rubbish
and waste materials on municipal or licensed dumps; nor shall the regulations
of this section apply to waster paper or rag handling, or reclaiming plants,
or similar establishments, provided the best housekeeping consistent with the
nature of the operations is maintained in such plants.



('81 Code, § 810.1, § 4)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.05  RECEPTACLE AND COVER.



   (A)   Litter receptacles shall be made of metal, plastic or plastic
bags equipped with suitable handles and tight-fitting covers and shall be
watertight and said receptacles shall be kept in a clean, neat and sanitary
condition at all times.



   (B)   All litter receptacles used within the city shall be equipped
with a lid or cover at all times so as to prevent the contents of the
receptacle from being freely removed therefrom by the wind, or straying or
wild animals.



   (C)   No person shall fail to replace any litter receptacle lid or
cover to its closed position after having removed said receptacle cover.



('81 Code, § 810.1, § 5) Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.06  LITTER RECEPTACLE USES.



   Litter receptacles placed on sidewalks and other public places shall be
used only for such litter material as persons may have for disposal while
passing, and in no event shall be used for the disposal of other solid waste
accumulated in residences or places of business.



('81 Code, § 810.1, § 6) Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.07  REMOVAL OF LITTER RECEPTACLE.



   (A)   The person owning or maintaining any park, beach, campground
or other place open and available to the public shall be responsible for the
removal of litter from litter receptacles.



   (B)   The owner or resident shall not maintain or keep litter
receptacles forward of the front wall of the dwelling or building and the
same shall be screened or covered so that no part thereof is visible from the
street.  Said screening or cover shall be water-resistant and maintained by
the owner or resident in good, serviceable condition so as to maintain the
same in keeping with the intent of this chapter.



('81 Code, § 810.1, § 7) Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.08  DESTRUCTION OF RECEPTACLE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully damage, deface,
destroy or otherwise injure any litter receptacle.



('81 Code, § 810.1, § 8) Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.09  DISPOSITION OF LITTER.



   No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, alley or
other public place any accumulation of litter. Persons owning or occupying
property shall keep the sidewalks in front of the premises free of litter.



('81 Code, § 810.1, § 9) Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.10  THROWING OR DEPOSITING HANDBILLS UPON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PLACES.



   No person shall throw or deposit any handbill upon any public place
within the city. No person shall throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any
uninhabited or vacant private property.



('81 Code, § 810.1, § 10) Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.11  TRANSPORTING LITTER.



   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any public street unless such
vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its load from
dropping, shifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand
or gravel and like substances, may be dropped for the purpose of securing
traction, or water or other substance may be sprinkled on a road surface for
the cleaning or maintaining of same by public authority or by persons under
contract or other authorization by such public authority.



('81 Code, § 810.1, § 11) Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.12  BURNING WITHIN CITY LIMITS PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for any person to burn any form of litter, refuse or
solid waste (including leaves or other brush or vegetation) within the city
limits.



('81 Code, § 810.1, § 12) Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.13  ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE.



   (A)   The Chief of Police and the City Administrative Officer is
hereby authorized and empowered to notify the owner, lessee, tenant or person
in control of any open or vacant property within the city to properly dispose
of any litter or blight located on such owner's property which constitutes a
violation of any provisions of this chapter, and, accordingly, is dangerous
to the public health, safety or welfare by notice by registered mail, or hand
delivery, addressed to said owner, lessee, tenant or person in charge thereof
at his last known address.



   (B)   Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner, lessee,
tenant or person in charge so notified to properly dispose of litter or
blight dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare within three (3)
days after the date of such notice in the event the same is returned to the
City Post Office Department because of its inability to make delivery
thereof, provided the same was properly addressed to the last known address
of such owner, lessee, tenant or person in charge thereof, the city is hereby
empowered and authorized to pay for the disposing of such litter or blight or
to order its disposal by the city.



   (C)   When the city has effected the removal of such dangerous
litter or blight or has paid for its removal, the actual cost thereof plus
accrued interest at the rate of eight percent (8%) per annum from the date of
the completion of the work, if not paid by such owner prior thereto, shall be
charged to the owner of such property on the next regular tax bill forwarded
to such owner by the city, and said charge shall be due and payable by said
owner at the time of payment of such bill.



('81 Code, § 810.1, § 13)  (Am. Ord. 15-90, passed 6-14-90)



§ 96.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter
upon conviction shall be guilty of a violation and shall be fined in a sum
not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00).  Each violation shall
constitute a separate offense.



('81 Code, § 810.1, § 14)



CHAPTER 97: PARKS AND RECREATION



Section



General Provisions



   97.01   Location of parks



Park and Playground Regulations



   97.15   Compliance



   97.16   Authority to supervise operation and maintenance



   97.17   Hours open to public



   97.18   Amusements for gain; consent required



   97.19   Assemblages for certain activities; permit



   97.20   Picnics, parties or theatrical or entertainment performances



   97.21   Keeping areas and grounds in neat and sanitary condition



   97.22   Disorderly conduct prohibited



   97.23   Certain acts prohibited



   97.24   Certain activities restricted



   97.25   Winter ice skating program



 



   97.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Parks, Playground, and Recreation Commission, see §§ 31.25 through
31.31



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 97.01  LOCATION OF PARKS.



   The location of recreation parks owned or operated under the direction
and control of the Parks, Playground, and Recreation Commission is as follows:



   (A)   Carmack Park, Knollwood Subdivision, city-owned.



   (B)   University Park, Marshall Lane, behind Thriftway, leased from
Northern Kentucky University.



   (C)   Veterans Memorial Park, U.S. 27 and Veterans Avenue, leased
from the Kentucky Highway Department.



   (D)   Nature Trail, Pooles Creek Road # 1, leased from Campbell
County Fiscal Court.



   (E)    Highland Heights Elementary Ballfield, owned by Campbell
County Board of Education.



   (F)   Lakeside Ballfields, owned by Campbell County Fiscal Court.



   (G)   Lot Number 45 of Block A of the Hay Subdivision as recorded in
Plat Book No. 10, page 32A of the Campbell County Clerk's records, Newport,
Kentucky, city-owned.



('81 Code, § 710.2)



PARK AND PLAYGROUND REGULATIONS



§ 97.15  COMPLIANCE.



   All public parks and playgrounds in the city shall be operated in
accordance with the provisions set forth in this subchapter.



('81 Code, § 710.3, § I)  (Ord. 24-83, passed 10-27-83)



§ 97.16  AUTHORITY TO SUPERVISE OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   All public parks and playgrounds in the city shall be operated
and maintained under the supervision of the Mayor.



   (B)   The Mayor shall see to the operation and maintenance of the
city parks and playgrounds, and shall perform these duties in consultation
with the Parks, Playground and Recreation Commission.



   (C)   The Mayor shall have supervision over all employees concerned
in the maintenance of such public parks and playgrounds and they shall
perform their duties under his supervision.



   (D)   The Mayor shall see to the enforcement of all ordinances
relating to the parks.



('81 Code, § 710.3, § I(a) - (d))  (Ord. 24-83, passed 10-27-83; Am. Ord.
15-94, passed 5-19-94)



§ 97.17  HOURS OPEN TO PUBLIC.



   (A)   The parks and playgrounds shall be open daily to the public
from 9:00 a.m. to 9:30 p.m. of any one day, except the Tom Noonan Tot Lot
located on Bon Jan which shall open at 9:00 a.m. and close at 8:00 p.m. of
any one day; and it shall be unlawful for any person, or persons (other than
city personnel conducting city business therein), to occupy or be present in
a park during any hours in which the park is not open to the public.



   (B)   Any section, or part of the park, may be declared closed to
the public by the Mayor at any time and for any interval of time, either
temporarily or at regular intervals.



('81 Code, § 710.3, § IV(b)) (Ord. 24-83, passed 10-27-83; Am. Ord. 15-94,
passed 5-19-94)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.18  AMUSEMENTS FOR GAIN; CONSENT REQUIRED.



   No amusement for gain or for which a charge is made can be conducted in
a park without the consent of the governing body of the park, and such
amusement must be conducted in accordance with any ordinance pertaining
thereto.



('81 Code, § 710.3, § I(f))  (Ord. 24-83, passed 10-27-83) Penalty, see §
97.99



§ 97.19  ASSEMBLAGES FOR CERTAIN ACTIVITIES; PERMIT.



   (A)   No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form, or
organize any assembly or group of people or make any speeches, or conduct any
musical program or festivals, in any park, unless a permit has been obtained
from the Mayor, and unless such permit is carried by the person heading or
leading such activity; however, the provisions hereof shall not apply to
student's work when constituting a part of their educational activities and
under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school
authorities, nor to any governmental agency within the scope of its functions.



   (B)   Applications for a park permit shall be filed with the Mayor
not less than five (5) days nor more than ninety (90) days before the date on
which it is proposed to conduct any such activity. Such application shall be
sworn to and shall state:



      (1)   The name of the person or organization wishing to
conduct such activity;



      (2)   If the activity is proposed to be conducted for, on
behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of
the headquarters or the organization, and of the authorized and responsible
head of such organization;



      (3)   The name, address and telephone number of the person who
will be chairperson of such activity and who will be responsible for its
conduct;



      (4)   The name, address and telephone number of the person
who, or organization to whom the permit is desired to be issued;



      (5)   The date when such activity is to be conducted;



      (6)   The park or portion thereof for which such permit is
desired;



      (7)   An estimate of the anticipated attendance; and



      (8)   The hour when such activity will start and terminate.



('81 Code, § 710.3, § II)



   (C)   The Mayor shall grant and issue such park permit if:



      (1)   The proposed activity or use of the park will not
unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of
the park;



      (2)   The proposed activity and use will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the promotion or public health, welfare,
safety and recreation;



      (3)   The facilities desired have not been reserved for other
use at the day and hour required in the application;



      (4)   The conduct of such activity will not require the
diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly
police such activity and the areas contiguous thereto, as to prevent normal
police protection to the city;



      (5)   The conduct of such activity will not substantially
interrupt the safe and orderly movement of traffic;



      (6)   The conduct of such activity is not reasonably likely to
cause injury to persons or property, incite violence, crime or disorderly
conduct; and



      (7)   Such activity is not to be held for the sole purpose of
advertising any product, goods or event, and is not designed to be held
purely for private profit.



   (D)   Each park permit shall state the following:



      (1)   Date of such activity;



      (2)   Park or portion thereof to be used; and



      (3)   Hour when such activity will start and terminate.



   (E)   The Mayor shall act upon the application for a park permit
within thirteen (13) days after the filing of same.



('81 Code, § 710.3, § III)  (Ord. 24-83, passed 10-27-83; Am. Ord. 15-94,
passed 5-19-94)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.20 PICNICS, PARTIES OR THEATRICAL OR ENTERTAINMENT PERFORMANCES.



   (A)   Whenever any group, association or organization desires to use
park facilities for a particular purpose, such as, picnics, parties or
theatrical or entertainment performances, a representative of the group,
association or organization shall first obtain a permit from the Mayor for
such purposes. The City Council shall adopt an application form to be used by
the Mayor for such situations.



   (B)   The Mayor shall grant the application if it appears that the
group, association or organization will not interfere with the general use of
the park by the individual members of the public and if the group,
association or organization meets all other conditions contained in the
application. The application may contain a requirement for an indemnity bond
to protect the city from any liability of any kind or character and to
protect city property from damage.



('81 Code, § 710.3, § IV(c))



   (C)   No person in a park shall picnic or lunch in a place other
than those designated for that purpose. Attendants shall have the authority
to regulate the activities in such areas when necessary to prevent congestion
and to secure the maximum use for the comfort and convenience of all.
Visitors shall comply with any directions given to achieve this end.



   (D)   No person in a park shall use any portion of the public areas
or of any of the buildings or structures therein for the purpose of holding
picnics to the exclusion of other persons, nor shall any person use such area
and facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded.



('81 Code, § 710.3, § IV(d)) (Ord. 24-83, passed 10-27-83; Am. Ord. 15-94,
passed 5-19-94) Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.21  KEEPING AREAS AND GROUNDS IN NEAT AND SANITARY CONDITION.



   Each person, firm or corporation using the public parks and grounds
shall clean up all debris, extinguish all fires when such fires are
permitted, and leave the premises in good order, and the facilities in a neat
and sanitary condition.



('81 Code, § 710.3, § IV)  (Ord. 24-83, passed 10-27-83)  Penalty, see §
97.99



§ 97.22  DISORDERLY CONDUCT PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any regulation governing
conduct in the city parks which has been approved by the City Council.



('81 Code, § 710.3, § I(e))  (Ord. 24-83, passed 10-27-83)  Penalty, see
§ 97.99



§ 97.23 CERTAIN ACTS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation using such
parks to either perform or permit to be performed, any of the following acts:



   (A)   Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper  with, or
displace or remove, any buildings, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces,
railings, paving or paving material; water lines or other public utilities or
parts or appurtenances thereof; signs, notices or placards whether temporary
or permanent; monuments, stakes, posts, or other boundary markings; or other
structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances
whatsoever, either real or personal;



   (B)   Throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in
the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or other body of water in
or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain
flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid,
which will or may result in the pollution of said waters;



   (C)   Bring in or dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass,
ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage or refuse or other
trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous
to any park, or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in
the proper receptacles. Where these are not so provided, all such rubbish or
waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its
presence, and properly disposed of elsewhere;



   (D)   Disturb the peace, or use any profane, obscene or blasphemous
language;



   (E)   Endanger the safety of any person by any conduct or act;



   (F)   Commit any assault, battery, or engage in fighting;



   (G)   Be under the influence of alcoholic liquor in any park;



   (H)   Violate any rule for the use of the park, made or approved by
the Recreation Commissioners;



   (I)   Prevent any person from using any park, or any of its
facilities, or interfere with such use in compliance with this chapter and
the rules applicable to such use; or



   (J)   Swim, bathe or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent
to any park, except in such waters and in compliance with such regulations as
are herein set forth or may be hereafter adopted.



('81 Code, § 710.3, § IV(a))  (Ord. 24-83, passed 10-27-83) Penalty, see§
97.99



§ 97.24  CERTAIN ACTIVITIES RESTRICTED.



   The following activities shall be restricted as set forth:



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to engage in special activities including
flying model airplanes, golf practice, ice skating, games and picnics except
at locations specifically designated for such activities by the Recreation
Commissioners. Specific areas may be reserved for use (for above stated
prohibited activities) by groups at specified times.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to drive or park any automobile except on
a street, driveway or parking lot in any park; or to park or leave any such
vehicle in any place other than one established for public parking.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful to bring any dangerous animal into any
park, and it shall be unlawful to permit any dog to be in any park unless
such dog is on a leash not more than six (6) feet long.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person other than employees and
officials of this park district acting on behalf of this district, to vend,
sell, peddle or offer for sale any commodity or article within any park.



   (E)   It shall be unlawful for anyone to paste, glue, tack or
otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement or inscription whatsoever,
nor shall any person erect or cause to be erected any sign whatsoever on any
public lands or highways or roads adjacent to a park. These provisions shall
not apply to any properly authorized government official in pursuit of any
official duty.



('81 Code, § 710.3, § IV(e))  (Ord. 24-83, passed 10-27-83) Penalty, see
§ 97.99



§ 97.25  WINTER ICE SKATING PROGRAM.



   The Mayor or the Parks, Playground and Recreation Commission may
conduct or permit a winter ice skating program in or on the area generally
used for basketball.



('81 Code, § 710.3, § V) (Ord. 15-94, passed 5-19-94)



§ 97.99  PENALTY.



   Any person found guilty of violating this chapter shall be fined in an
amount of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00), nor more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for each such offense.



(Ord. 15-94, passed 5-19-94)



CHAPTER 98:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section



Excavations and Construction



   98.01   Opening permit required



   98.02   Application and cash deposit



   98.03   Restoration of pavement



   98.04   Barriers around excavations



   98.05   Warning lights



   98.06   Sidewalk construction



Road and Bridge Projects



   98.15   Public hearing required



   98.16   Notice requirements



   98.17   Public may testify; effect of testimony



   98.18   Hearing to be held prior to construction



   98.19   Separate hearing for each project not required



   98.20   Exemptions from hearing requirement



Obstructions



   98.30   Unloading on street or sidewalk



   98.31   Street and sidewalk obstruction



   98.32   Materials on street or sidewalk



   98.33   Removal of ice and snow



   98.34   Sweepings and debris on sidewalks



 



   98.99   Penalty



EXCAVATIONS AND CONSTRUCTION



§ 98.01  OPENING PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than an authorized city
official to make any opening in any street, alley, sidewalk, or public way of
the city unless a permit to make the opening has been obtained prior to
commencement of the work.



Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.02  APPLICATION AND CASH DEPOSIT.



   Each permit for making an opening shall be confined to a single project
and shall be issued by the authorized city official.  Application shall be
made on a form prescribed by the legislative body, giving the exact location
of the proposed opening, the kind of paving, the area and depth to be
excavated, and such other facts as may be provided for.  The permit shall be
issued only after a cash deposit sufficient to cover the cost of restoration
has been posted with the authorized city official, conditioned upon prompt
and satisfactory refilling of excavations and restoration of all surfaces
disturbed.



§ 98.03  RESTORATION OF PAVEMENT.



   (A)   The opening and restoration of a pavement or other surface
shall be performed under the direction and to the satisfaction of the
authorized city official, and in accordance with rules, regulations, and
specifications approved by the legislative body.



   (B)   Upon failure or refusal of the permittee satisfactorily to
fill the excavation, restore the surface and remove all excess materials
within the time specified in the permit or where not specified therein,
within a reasonable time after commencement of the work, the city may proceed
without notice to make such fill and restoration and the deposit referred to
in § 98.02 shall be forfeited.  Thereupon the deposit shall be paid into
the appropriate city fund, except such part demanded and paid to the
permittee as the difference between the deposit and the charges of the city
for restoration services performed by it.  If the amount of such services
performed by the city should exceed the amount of the deposit, the City
Clerk-Treasurer or other proper administrative officer shall proceed to
collect the remainder due from the permittee.



§ 98.04  BARRIERS AROUND EXCAVATIONS.



   Any person engaged in or employing other in excavating or opening any
street, sidewalk, alley, or other public way shall have the excavation or
opening fully barricaded at all times to prevent injury to persons or animals.



Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.05  WARNING LIGHTS.



   Any person engaged in or employing others in excavating or otherwise in
any manner obstructing a portion or all of any street, sidewalk, alley, or
other public way, at all times during the night season shall install and
maintain at least two illuminated red lamps which shall be securely and
conspicuously posted on, at, or near each end of the obstruction or
excavation, and if the space involved exceeds fifty (50) feet in extent, at
least one additional lamp for each added fifty (50) feet or portion thereof
excavated or obstructed.



Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.06  SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION.



   It shall be the duty of the authorized city official to supervise
construction or repair of sidewalks within the city.  He shall cause
specifications to be prepared for the construction of the various kinds of
pavements and transmit the specifications to the legislative body for
approval. When the specifications are approved, the legislative body shall
advertise for proposals to do all the work which may be ordered by the city
in construction and repair of sidewalks, and shall authorize the Mayor to
contract therefore, for a period not exceeding one year, with the lowest
responsible bidder, who shall for the faithful performance of the work.  The
Mayor, if authorized by City Council, may make separate contracts for the
different kinds of work with different parties.



ROAD AND BRIDGE PROJECTS



§ 98.15  PUBLIC HEARING REQUIRED.



   Before the city expends state derived tax revenues on a municipal
highway, road, street, or bridge it shall hold a hearing in accordance with
the provisions of this subchapter to take the sense of the public with regard
to the project and to priorities for use of tax moneys for road and bridge
purposes.



(KRS 174.100)



§ 98.16  NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.



   Prior to the contemplated date of expenditure of state derived tax
revenues on a road or bridge by the city, the city shall hold a public
hearing for the purpose of taking the sense of the public with regard to road
and bridge matters within the city.  Notice of the hearing shall be given
not less than seven (7) days nor more than twenty-one (21) days before the
scheduled date of the public hearing and before beginning work on any project
covered by this subchapter.



(KRS 174.100(1))



§ 98.17  PUBLIC MAY TESTIFY; EFFECT OF TESTIMONY.



   (A)   At the hearing any person may speak with regard to any
proposed project, any project which he feels should be built or done which
has not been proposed, priorities for completion of projects, and any other
matter related to road or bridge projects. 



   (B)   The city shall not be bound by the testimony heard at the
hearing but shall give due consideration to it.



(KRS 174.100(2),(3))



§ 98.18  HEARING TO BE HELD PRIOR TO CONSTRUCTION.



   The city shall not begin construction on a road or bridge project
wherein state derived tax revenues are involved until the hearing as provided
herein has been held.



(KRS 174.100(4))



§ 98.19  SEPARATE HEARING FOR EACH PROJECT NOT REQUIRED.



   This subchapter shall not be construed to require a separate hearing
for each project.  A single hearing encompassing the entire road and bridge
program, provided all projects subsequently undertaken have been identified
at the hearing, shall meet the requirements of this subchapter.



(KRS 174.100(5))



§ 98.20  EXEMPTIONS FROM HEARING REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to emergency
repair or replacement of roads or bridges necessitated by natural or
man-caused disasters nor to street cleaning or snow removal operations.



   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to projects
which are under construction as of the effective date of this subchapter
unless the construction is suspended after the effective date of this
subchapter and the city desires to reactivate the project.



(KRS 174.100 (6),(7))



OBSTRUCTIONS



§ 98.30  UNLOADING ON STREET OR SIDEWALK.



   No person shall unload any heavy material in the streets of the city by
throwing or letting the material fall upon the pavement of any street, alley,
sidewalk, or other public way, without first placing some sufficient
protection over the pavement.



Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.31  STREET AND SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTION.



   No person shall obstruct any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public
way within the city by erecting thereon any fence or building or permitting
any fence or building to remain thereon.  Each day that any fence or
building is permitted to remain upon the public way shall constitute a
separate offense.



Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.32  MATERIALS ON STREET OR SIDEWALK.



   No person shall encumber any street or sidewalk.  No owner, occupant,
or person having the care of any building or lot of land, bordering on any
street or sidewalk, shall permit it to be encumbered with barrels, boxes,
cans, articles, or substances of any kind, so as to interfere with the free
and unobstructed use thereof. 



Penalty, see § 98.99



Cross-reference:



   Littering on streets or sidewalks, see Ch. 94



§ 98.33  REMOVAL OF ICE AND SNOW.



   It shall be the duty of the owner or of the occupant of each and every
parcel of real estate in the city abutting upon any sidewalk to keep the
sidewalk abutting his premises free and clear of snow and ice to the extent
feasible under the prevailing weather conditions, and to remove therefrom all
snow and ice, to the extent feasible under the prevailing weather conditions,
a reasonable time which will ordinarily not exceed twelve (12) hours after
the abatement of any storm during which the snow and ice may have
accumulated. 



Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.34  SWEEPINGS AND DEBRIS ON SIDEWALKS.



   No person shall sweep, rake, throw, or otherwise deposit any leaves,
grass, or other debris onto any sidewalk, street, or other public way of the
city, except when such debris is placed in a bag or other container for the
purpose of a regularly scheduled collection, pickup, or city-authorized leaf
removal.



(Ord. 02-2016, passed 6-7-16)



§ 98.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00).



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



Chapter



      110.   OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAX



      111.   ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS



      112.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL



      113.   AMUSEMENTS



      114.   INSURANCE COMPANIES



      115.   PAWNBROKERS



      116.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS



      117.   SECURITY ALARM SYSTEMS



      118.   FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS FRANCHISE AND LOCAL DEPOSIT TAX



      119.   CHARITABLE GAMING



      120.   PAYROLL TAX



      121.   LICENSE REVOCATION



CHAPTER 110:  OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAX



Section



   110.01   Definitions



   110.02   License application required



   110.03   Occupational license tax payment required



   110.04   Apportionment



   110.05   Employers to withhold



   110.06   Returns required



   110.07   Extensions



   110.08   Refunds



   110.09   Federal audit provisions



   110.10   Administrative provisions



   110.11   Information to remain confidential



   110.12   Use of occupational license tax



 



   110.99   Penalty



Cross reference:



   Payroll taxes, see Ch. 120



§ 110.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUSINESS ENTITY.  Each separate corporation, limited liability
company, business development corporation, partnership, limited partnership,
registered limited liability partnership, sole proprietorship, association,
joint stock company, receivership, trust, professional service organization,
or other legal entity through which business is conducted.



   BUSINESS.  Any enterprise, activity, trade, occupation, profession or
undertaking of any nature conducted for gain or profit.  BUSINESS shall not
include the usual activities of board of trade, chambers of commerce, trade
associations, or unions, or other associations performing services usually
performed by trade associations or unions as recognized by the Internal
Revenue Service.  BUSINESS shall not include funds, foundations,
corporations, or associations organized and operated for the exclusive and
sole purpose of religious, charitable, scientific, literary, educational,
civic or fraternal purposes, where no part of the earnings, incomes or
receipts of such unit, group, or association, inures to the benefit of any
private shareholder or other person.



   CITY. The City of Highland Heights, Kentucky.



   COMPENSATION.  Wages, salaries, commissions, or any other form of
remuneration paid or payable by an employer for services performed by an
employee, which are required to be reported for federal income tax purposes
and adjusted as follows:



      (1)   Include any amounts contributed by an employee to any
retirement, profit sharing, or deferred compensation plan, which are deferred
for federal income tax purposes under a salary reduction agreement or similar
arrangement, including but not limited to salary reduction arrangements under
Section 401(a), 401(k), 402(e), 403(a), 403(b), 408, 414(h), or 457 of the
Internal Revenue Code; and



      (2)   Include any amounts contributed by an employee to any
welfare benefit, fringe benefit, or other benefit plan made by salary
reduction or other payment method which permits employees to elect to reduce
federal taxable compensation under the Internal Revenue Code, including but
not limited to Sections 125 and 132 of the Internal Revenue Code.



   CONCLUSION OF THE FEDERAL AUDIT.  The date that the adjustments made
by the Internal Revenue Service to net income as reported on the business
entity's federal income tax return become final and unappealable.



   FINAL DETERMINATION OF THE FEDERAL AUDIT.  The revenue agent's report
or other documents reflecting the final and unappealable adjustments made by
the Internal Revenue Service.



   FISCAL YEAR. An accounting period of twelve (12) months ending on the
last day of any month other than December.



   EMPLOYEE. Any person who renders services to another person or any
business entity for compensation, including an officer of a corporation and
any officer, employee, or elected official of the United States, a state, or
any political subdivision of a state, or any agency of instrumentality of any
one (1) or more of the above. A person classified as an independent
contractor under the Internal Revenue Code shall not be considered an
employee.



   EMPLOYER. The person for whom an individual performs or performed any
service, of whatever nature, as the employee of such person, except that:



      (1)   If the person for whom the individual performs or
performed the services does not nave control of the payment of the wages for
such services, the term EMPLOYER means the person having control of the
payment of such wages, and



      (2)   In the case of a person paying wages on behalf of a
nonresident alien individual, foreign partnership, or foreign corporation,
not engaged in trade or business within the United States, the term EMPLOYER
means such person.



   GROSS RECEIPTS.  All revenues or proceeds derived from the sale,
lease, or rental of goods or services, or property by a business entity
reduced by the following:



      (1)   Sales and excise taxes paid; and



      (2)   Returns and allowances.



   INTERNAL REVENUE CODE.  The Internal Revenue Code in effect on
December 31, of the year in which the tax is due, exclusive of any amendments
made subsequent to that date, other than amendments that extend provisions in
effect on December 31, of the year in which the tax is due, that would
otherwise terminate.



   LICENSEE. Any person required to file a return or to apply for and
obtain an occupational license under this chapter.



   PERSON.  Every natural person, whether a resident or non-resident of
the city; co-partnership; fiduciary; association; or corporation. Whenever
the word PERSON is used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty in
the nature of a fine or imprisonment, the word, as applied to a partnership
or other form of unincorporated enterprise, shall mean the partners or
members thereof, and as applied to corporations, shall mean the officers and
directors thereof.



   RETURN or REPORT.  Any properly completed and, if required, signed
form, statement, certification, declaration, or any other document permitted
or required to be submitted or filed with the city.



   SALES REVENUE.  Receipts from the sale, lease, or rental of goods,
services, or property.



   TAX DISTRICT. Any city of the first to fifth class with the authority
to levy gross receipts, or occupational license taxes.



   TAXABLE GROSS RECEIPTS.



      (1)   In case of a business entity having payroll or sales
revenues both within and without the city means gross receipts as defined in
this section, and as apportioned under § 110.04 of this chapter;



      (2)   In case of a business entity having payroll or sales
revenues only within the city means gross receipts as defined in this section;



   TAXABLE YEAR.  The calendar year or fiscal year ending during the
calendar year, upon the basis of which gross receipts is computed.



(Ord. 11-2004, passed 12-21-04; Am. Ord. 14-2005, passed 12-6-05)



§ 110.02  LICENSE APPLICATION REQUIRED.



   Every person and business entity engaged in any business and every
employer in the city shall be required to apply for and obtain an
occupational license before the commencement of business or in the event of a
change of business status. Licensees are required to notify the city of any
changes in address, the cessation of business, or any other changes that
render the information supplied to the city in the license application
inaccurate.



(Ord. 11-2004, passed 12-21-04)



§ 110.03  OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAX PAYMENT REQUIRED.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, every
person or business entity engaged in any business for profit and any person
or business entity that makes a filing with the Internal Revenue Service or
the Kentucky Revenue Cabinet shall be required to file and pay to the city an
annual occupational license tax for the privilege of engaging in such
activities within the city.



      (1)   The occupational license tax shall be measured by one
percent (1%) of all wages and compensation paid or payable in the city for
work done or services performed or rendered in the city by every resident and
nonresident who is an employee;



      (2)   The occupational license tax shall be measured by three
and one-half tenths of one percent (.35%) of the gross receipts (or from
schedule) from business conducted in the city by a resident or nonresident
business entity, or a minimum tax of seventy-five dollars ($75.00), whichever
is greater.



   (B)   The maximum tax liability under this chapter shall be assessed
as follows:



      (1)   For each employee one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).



      (2)   For each business entity, there shall be a ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00) maximum liability for the portion of the occupational
license tax that is measured by taxable gross receipts.



   (C)   The occupational license tax imposed in this section shall not
apply to the following persons or business entities:



      (1)   Any bank, trust company, combined bank and trust
company, or trust, banking and title insurance company organized and doing
business in this state, any savings and loan association whether state or
federally chartered;



      (2)   Any compensation received by members of the Kentucky
National Guard for active duty training, unit training assemblies and annual
field training;



      (3)   Any compensation received by precinct workers for
election training or work at election booths in state, county, and local
primary, regular, or special elections;



      (4)   Public Service Corporations that pay an ad valorem tax
on property valued and assessed by the Kentucky Department of Revenue
pursuant to the provisions of KRS 136.120. Licensees whose businesses are
predominantly non-public service who are also engaged in public service
activity are required to pay a license fee on their gross receipts derived
from the non-public service activities apportioned to the city;



      (5)   Persons or business entities that have been issued a
license under KRS Chapter 243 to engage in manufacturing or trafficking in
alcoholic beverages. Persons engaged in the business of manufacturing or
trafficking in alcoholic beverages are required to file a return, but may
exclude the portion of their gross receipts derived from the manufacturing or
trafficking in alcoholic beverages;



      (6)   Insurance companies incorporating under the laws of and
doing business in the Commonwealth of Kentucky.



      (7)   Persons or business entities that operate a two-dwelling
unit rental property, where the owner occupies one dwelling unit and rents
the other dwelling unit that is a part thereof.



(Ord. 11-2004, passed 12-21-04; Am. Ord. 03-2008, passed 2-5-08)



§ 110.04  APPORTIONMENT.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (D) of this section, gross
receipts shall be apportioned as follows:



      (1)   For business entities with both payroll and sales
revenue in more than one (1) tax district, by multiplying the gross receipts
by a fraction, the numerator of which is the payroll factor, described in
division (B) of this section, plus the sales factor, described in division
(C) of this section, and the denominator of which is two (2); and



      (2)   For business entities with sales revenue in more than
one (1) tax district, by multiplying the gross receipts by the sales factor
as set forth in division (C) of this section.



      (3)   For the purpose of divisions (A) through (E) of this
section, the business entity shall file an apportionment form provided by the
city.



   (B)   The payroll factor is a fraction, the numerator of which is
the total amount paid or payable in the city during the tax period by the
business entity for compensation, and the denominator of which is the total
compensation paid or payable by the business entity everywhere during the tax
period.  Compensation is paid or payable in the city based on the time the
individual's service is performed within the city.



   (C)   The sales factor is a fraction, the numerator of which is the
total sales revenue of the business entity in the city during the tax period,
and the denominator of which is the total sales revenue of the business
entity everywhere during the tax period.



      (1)   The sale, lease, or rental of tangible personal property
is in the city if:



         (a)   The property is delivered or shipped to a
purchaser, other than the United States government, or to the designee of the
purchaser within the city regardless of the f.o.b. point or other conditions
of the sale; or



         (b)   The property is shipped from an office, store,
warehouse, factory, or other place of storage in the city and the purchaser
is the United States government.



      (2)   Sales revenue, other than revenues from the sale, lease
or rental of tangible personal property or the lease or rental of real
property, are apportioned to the city based upon a fraction, the numerator of
which is the time spent in performing such income-producing activity within
the city and the denominator of which is the total time spent, performing
that income-producing activity.



      (3)   Sales revenue from the sale, lease, or rental of real
property is allocated to the tax district where the property is located.



   (D)   If the apportionment provisions of this section do not fairly
represent the extent of the business entity's activity in the city, the
business entity may petition the city or the city may require, in respect to
all or any part of the business entity's business activity, if reasonable:



      (1)   Separate accounting;



      (2)   The exclusion of any one (1) or more of the factors;



      (3)   The inclusion of one (1) or more additional factors
which will fairly represent the business entity's business activity in the
city; or



      (4)   The employment of any other method to effectuate an
equitable allocation and apportionment of gross receipts.



   (E)   When compensation is paid or payable for work done or services
performed or rendered by an employee, both within and without the city, the
license tax shall be measured by that part of the compensation paid or
payable as a result of work done or service performed or rendered within the
city. The license tax shall be computed by obtaining the percentage that the
compensation for work performed or services rendered within the city bears to
the total wages and compensation paid or payable. In order for the city to
verify the accuracy of a taxpayer's reported percentages under this
subsection, the taxpayer shall maintain adequate records.



   (F)   All partnerships, S corporations, and all other entities where
income is “passed through” to the owners are subject to this chapter. The
occupational license tax imposed in this chapter is assessed against income
before it is “passed through” these entities to the owners.



   (G)   If any business entity dissolves, ceases to operate, or
withdraws from the city during any taxable year, or if any business entity in
any manner surrenders or loses its charter during any taxable year, the
dissolution, cessation of business, withdrawal, or loss or surrender of
charter shall not defeat the filing of returns and the assessment and
collection of any occupational license tax for the period of that taxable
year during which the business entity had business activity in the city.



   (H)   If a business entity makes, or is required to make, a federal
income tax return, the occupational license tax shall be computed for the
purposes of this chapter on the basis of the same calendar or fiscal year
required by the federal government, and shall employ the same methods of
accounting required for federal income tax purposes.



(Ord. 11-2004, passed 12-21-04; Am. Ord. 14-2005, passed 12-6-05)



§ 110.05  EMPLOYERS TO WITHHOLD.



   (A)   Every employer making payment of compensation to an employee
shall deduct and withhold upon the payment of the compensation an
occupational license tax calculated under § 110.03 imposed against the
compensation by the city. Amounts withheld shall be paid to the city in
accordance with this chapter.



   (B)   Every employer required to deduct and withhold tax under this
section shall, for the quarter ending after January I and for each quarter
ending thereafter, on or before the end of the month following the close of
each quarter, make a return and report to the city, and pay to the city, the
tax required to be withheld under this section, unless the employer is
permitted or required to report within a reasonable time after some other
period as determined by the city.



   (C)   Every employer who fails to withhold or pay to the city any
sums required by this chapter to be withheld and paid shall be personally and
individually liable to the city for any sum or sums withheld or required to
be withheld in accordance with the provisions of this section.



   (D)   The city shall have a lien upon all the property of any
employer who fails to withhold or pay over to the city sums required to be
withheld under this section. If the employer withholds, but fails to pay the
amounts withheld to the city, the lien shall commence as of the date the
amounts withheld were required to be paid to the city. If the employer fails
to withhold, the lien shall commence at the time the liability of the
employer is assessed by the city.



   (E)   Every employer required to deduct and withhold tax under this
section shall annually on or before February 28 of each year complete and
file on a form furnished or approved by the city a reconciliation of the
occupational license tax withheld where compensation is paid or payable to
employees. Either copies of federal forms W-2 and W-3, transmittal of wage
and tax statements, or a detailed employee listing with the required
equivalent information, as determined by the city, shall be submitted.



   (F)   Every employer shall furnish each employee a statement on or
before January 31 of each year showing the amount of compensation and
occupational license tax deducted by the employer from the compensation paid
to the employee for payment to the city during the preceding calendar year.



   (G)   An employer shall be liable for the payment of the tax
required to be deducted and withheld under this section.



   (H)   The president, vice president, secretary, treasurer or any
other person holding an equivalent corporate office of any business entity
subject to this section shall be personally and individually liable, both
jointly and severally, for any tax required to be withheld from compensation
paid or payable to one or more employees of the business entity, and neither
the corporate dissolution or withdrawal of the business entity from the city,
nor the cessation of holding any corporate office, shall discharge that
liability; provided that the personal and individual liability shall apply to
each and every person holding the corporate office at the time the tax
becomes or became obligated. No person shall be personally and individually
liable under this section  unless such person had authority to collect,
truthfully account for, or pay over the tax imposed by this chapter at the
time that the taxes imposed by this chapter become or became due.



   (I)   Not withstanding divisions (G) and (H) of this section, every
employee receiving compensation in the city subject to the tax imposed under
§ 110.03 shall be personally liable for any amount due. In all cases where
the employer does not withhold the tax levied under this chapter from the
employee, such employee or employees shall be responsible for filing with the
city each quarter in the same manner as if they were the employer or as
otherwise required by the city.  If an employer fails to or is not required
to withhold, report, or pay the license tax it shall become the duty of the
employee to file with the city.  The only employer that is not required to
withhold, report and pay the occupational license tax is the federal
government including the United States Postal Service.  The payment required
to be made by an employee can be made quarterly, for the periods ending March
31, June 31, September 30 and December 31 of each year, or at any time the
employee wishes to make an estimated payment for the year in which wages are
earned.  All license fees must be received by February 28 for the preceding
calendar year, together with a copy of the employee’s W-2 form.  Employers
not required to withhold, report or pay the license tax must annually, during
the month of January of each year, make a return to the city, in which is set
forth the name and social security number of each employee of the employer
during the preceding calendar year, giving the amount of salaries, wages,
commissions or other compensation earned during such preceding year by each
such employee.  This list shall include all current full time employees,
part time employees, temporary employees, and terminated employees whether it
be voluntary or involuntary.



(Ord. 11-2004, passed 12-21-04; Am. Ord. 14-2005, passed 12-6-05)



§ 110.06  RETURNS REQUIRED.



   (A)   All business entity returns for the preceding taxable year
shall be made by April 15 of each year, except returns made on the basis of a
fiscal year, which shall be made by the fifteenth (15th) day of the fourth
(4th) month following the close of the fiscal year. Blank forms for returns
shall be supplied by the city.



   (B)   Every business entity shall submit a copy of its federal
income tax return and all supporting statements and schedules at the time of
filing its occupational license tax return with the city. Whenever, in the
opinion of the city, it is necessary to examine the federal income tax return
of any business entity in order to audit the return, the city may compel the
business entity to produce for inspection a copy of any statements and
schedules in support thereof that have not been previously filed. The city
may also require copies of reports of adjustments made by the federal
government.



   (C)   Every business entity subject to a occupational license tax
governed by the provisions of this chapter shall keep records, render under
oath statements, make returns, and comply with rules as the city from time to
time may prescribe. Whenever the city deems it necessary, the city may
require a business entity, by notice served to the business entity, to make a
return, render statements under oath, or keep records, as the city deems
sufficient to determine the tax liability of the business entity.



   (D)   The city may require, for the purpose of ascertaining the
correctness of any return or for the purposes of making an estimate of the
taxable income of any business entity, the attendance of a representative of
the business entity or of any other person having knowledge on the premises.



   (E)   The full amount of the unpaid tax payable by any business
entity, as appears from the face of the return, shall be paid to the city at
the time prescribed for filing the occupational license tax return,
determined without regard to any extension of time for filing the return.



   (F)   Every business entity making payments of six hundred dollars
($600) or more to persons other than employees for services performed within
the city is responsible for maintaining the records of those payments and for
completing IRS Form 1099 on or before February 28 of the year following the
close of the calendar year in which such compensation was paid and to remit
copies of the IRS Form 1099 or equivalent information to the city on or
before February 28 of each year.



(Ord. 11-2004, passed 12-21-04)



§ 110.07  EXTENSIONS.



   (A)   The city may grant any business entity an extension of not
more than six (6) months, unless a longer extension has been granted by the
Internal Revenue Service or is agreed to by the city and the business entity,
for filing its return, if the business entity, on or before the date
prescribed for payment of the occupational license tax, requests in writing
the extension and pays the amount properly estimated as its tax. Extension
request forms shall be supplied by the city.



   (B)   If the time for filing a return is extended, the business
entity shall pay, as part of the tax, an amount equal to twelve percent (12%)
per annum simple interest on the tax shown due on the return, but not been
previously paid, from the time the tax was due until the return is actually
filed and the tax paid to the city. A fraction of a month is counted as an
entire month.



(Ord. 11-2004, passed 12-21-04)



§ 110.08  REFUNDS.



   (A)   Where there has been an overpayment of tax under § 110.05, a
refund or credit shall be made to the employer only to the extent that the
amount of the overpayment was not deducted and withheld under § 110.05 by
the employer.  Unless a written application for refund or credit is received
by the city from the employer within two (2) years from the date the
overpayment was made no refund or credit shall be allowed.  Where there has
been an overpayment of the maximum tax due under § 110.05, a refund or
credit shall be made to the employee to the extent of overpayment only if a
written application for refund is received by the city from the employer or
the employee within two years from the date the overpayment was made.  All
written applications for refunds shall be submitted to the city on a form
furnished or approved by the city.  Refunds may be withheld from an employee
until the employer has filed all required forms and provided all required
information to the city.  Overpayments of less than $5 shall not be refunded.



   (B)   An employee who has compensation attributable to activities
performed outside the city, based on time spent outside the city, whose
employer has withheld and remitted to this city, the occupational license tax
on the compensation attributable to activities performed outside the city,
may file for a refund within two (2) years of the date prescribed by law for
the filing of a return. The employee shall provide a schedule and computation
sufficient to verify the refund claim and the city may confirm with the
employer the percentage of time spent outside the city and the amount of
compensation attributable to activities performed outside the city prior to
approval of the refund.



   (C)   Where there has been an overpayment of tax under § 110.03, a
refund or credit shall be made to any person or business entity to the extent
of overpayment only if a written application for refund or credit is received
by the city from the person or business entity within two (2) years from the
date the overpayment was made. No refund shall be made of any tax paid unless
a complete return is filed as required by § 110.03.



(Ord. 11-2004, passed 12-21-04; Am. Ord. 14-2005, passed 12-6-05)



§ 110.09  FEDERAL AUDIT PROVISIONS.



   (A)   As soon as practicable after each return is received, the city
may examine and audit the return. If the amount of tax computed by the city
is greater than the amount returned by the business entity, the additional
tax shall be assessed and a notice of assessment mailed to the business
entity by the city within five (5) years from the date the return was filed,
except as otherwise provided in this subsection.



      (1)   In the case of a failure to file a return or of a
fraudulent return the additional tax may be assessed at any time.



      (2)   In the case of a return where a business entity
understates gross receipts, or omits an amount properly includable in gross
receipts, or both, which understatement or omission, or both, is in excess of
twenty-five percent (25%) of the amount of gross receipts stated in the
return, the additional tax may be assessed at any time within six (6) years
after the return was filed.



      (3)   In the case of an assessment of additional tax relating
directly to adjustments resulting from a final determination of a federal
audit, the additional tax may be assessed before the expiration of the times
provided in this subsection, or six (6) months from the date the city
receives the final determination of the federal audit from the business
entity, whichever is later.



      (4)   The times provided in this subsection may be extended by
agreement between the business entity and the city. For the purposes of this
subsection, a return filed before the last day prescribed by law for filing
the return shall be considered as filed on the last day. Any extension
granted for filing the return shall also be considered as extending the last
day prescribed by law for filing the return.



   (B)   Every business entity shall submit a copy of the final
determination of the federal audit within thirty (30) days of the conclusion
of the federal audit.



   (C)   The city may initiate a civil action for the collection of any
additional tax within the times prescribed in division (A) of this section.



(Ord. 11-2004, passed 12-21-04)



§ 110.10  ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.



   (A)   No suit shall be maintained in any court to restrain or delay
the collection or payment of any tax levied by this chapter.



   (B)   Any tax collected pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
may be refunded or credited within two (2) years of the date prescribed by
law for the filing of a return or the date the money was paid to the city,
whichever is the later, except that:



      (1)   In any case where the assessment period contained in §
110.09 has been extended by an agreement between the business entity and the
city, the limitation contained in this subsection shall be extended
accordingly.



      (2)   If the claim for refund or credit relates directly to
adjustments resulting from a federal audit, the business entity shall file a
claim for refund or credit within the time provided for in this section or
six (6) months from the conclusion of the federal audit, whichever is later.



   (C)   For the purposes of this subsection and division ( D) of this
section, a return filed before the last day prescribed by law for filing the
return shall be considered as filed on the last day.



   (D)   The authority to refund or credit overpayments of taxes
collected pursuant to this chapter is vested exclusively in the city.



(Ord. 11-2004, passed 12-21-04)



§ 110.11  INFORMATION TO REMAIN CONFIDENTIAL.



   (A)   No present or former employee of any tax district shall
intentionally and without authorization inspect or divulge any information
acquired by him or her of the affairs of any person, or information regarding
the tax schedules, returns, or reports required to be filed with the tax
district or other proper officer, or any information produced by a hearing or
investigation, insofar as the information may have to do with the affairs of
the person's business. This prohibition does not extend to information
required in prosecutions for making false reports or returns for taxation, or
any other infraction of the tax laws, or in any way made a matter of public
record, nor does it preclude furnishing any taxpayer or the taxpayer's
properly authorized agent with information respecting his or her own return.
Further, this prohibition does not preclude any employee of the tax district
from testifying in any court, or from introducing as evidence returns or
reports filed with the tax district, in an action for violation of a tax
district tax laws or in any action challenging a tax district tax laws.



   (B)   The city reserves the right to disclose to the Commissioner of
Revenue of the state or his or her duly authorized agent all such information
and rights to inspect any of the books and records of the city if the
Commissioner of Revenue of the state grants to the city the reciprocal right
to obtain information form the files and records of the Kentucky Revenue
Cabinet and maintains the privileged character of the information so
furnished. Provided, further, that the city may publish statistics based on
such information in such a manner as not to reveal data respecting gross
receipts or compensation of any person or business entity.



   (C)   In addition, the city is empowered to execute similar
reciprocity agreements as described in division (B) of this section with any
other taxing entity, should there be a need for exchange of information in
order to effect diligent enforcement of this chapter.



   (D)   Any person violating the provisions of this section by
intentionally inspecting confidential taxpayer information without
authorization, shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
imprisoned for not longer than six (6) months, or both.



   (E)   Any person violating the provisions of this section by
divulging confidential taxpayer information shall be fined not more than one-
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned for not more than one (1) year, or
both.



(Ord. 11-2004, passed 12-21-04)



§ 110.12  USE OF OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAX.



   All money derived from license fees under the provisions of this
chapter shall be paid to the City Treasurer and placed to the credit of the
General Revenue Fund of the city and shall be used and expended in defraying
the:



   (A)   Current, general and incidental expenses of the city; and/or



   (B)   Capital improvements.



(Ord. 11-2004, passed 12-21-04)



§ 110.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   A business entity subject to tax on gross receipts may be
subject to a penalty equal to five percent (5%) of the tax due for each
calendar month or fraction thereof if the business entity:



      (1)   Fails to file any return or report on or before the due
date prescribed for filing or as extended by the city; or



      (2)   Fails to pay the tax computed on the return or report on
or before the due date prescribed for payment.



      (3)   The total penalty levied pursuant to this subsection
shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the total tax due; however, the
penalty shall not be less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00).



   (B)   Every employer who fails to file a return or pay the tax on or
before the time prescribed under § 110.05 may be subject to a penalty in
amount equal to five percent (5%) of the tax due for each calendar month or
fraction thereof. The total penalty levied pursuant to this section shall not
exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the total tax due; however, the penalty
shall not be less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00).



   (C)   In addition  to the penalties prescribed in this section, any
business entity or employer shall pay, as part of the tax, an amount equal to
twelve percent (12%) per annum simple interest on the tax shown due, but not
previously paid, from the time the tax was due until the tax is paid to the
city. A fraction off a month is counted as an entire month.



   (D)   Every tax imposed by this chapter, and all increases,
interest, and penalties thereon, shall become, from the time the tax is due
and payable, a personal debt of the taxpayer to the city.



   (E)   The city may enforce the collection of the occupational tax
due under § 110.03 and any fees, penalties, and interest as provided in
divisions (A), (B), (C), and (D) of this section by civil action in a court
of appropriate jurisdiction. To the extent authorized by law, the city shall
be entitled to recover all court costs and reasonable attorney fees incurred
by it in enforcing any provision of this chapter.



   (F)   In addition to the penalties prescribed in this section, any
business entity or employer who willfully fails to make a return or willfully
makes a false return, or who willfully fails to pay taxes owing or collected,
with the intent to evade payment of the tax or amount collected, or any part
thereof, shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.



   (G)   Any person who willfully aids or assists in, or procures,
counsels, or advises the preparation or presentation under, or in connection
with, any matter arising under this chapter of a return, affidavit, claim, or
other document, which is fraudulent or is false as to any material matter,
whether or not the falsity or fraud is with the knowledge or consent of the
person authorized or required to present the return, affidavit, claim, or
document, shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.



   (H)   A return for the purpose of this section shall mean and
include any return, declaration, or form prescribed by the city and required
to be filed with the city by the provisions of this chapter, or by the rules
of the city or by written request for information to the business entity by
the city.



(Ord. 11-2004, passed 12-21-04)



CHAPTER 111:  ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS



Section



   111.01   Definitions



   111.02   Certain conduct prohibited



   111.03   Adult establishments prohibited in certain licensed premises



   111.04   Location of establishment restricted



 



   111.99   Penalty



§ 111.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADULT ESTABLISHMENT.  Any business displaying, classifying or selling
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specific sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.



   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.  Defined as:



      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, pubic region, buttock and female breast below a point immediately
above the top of the areola; and



      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even
if completely and opaquely covered.



   SPECIFIC SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.  Defines as:



      (1)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or
arousal;



      (2)   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or
sodomy; and



      (3)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals,
pubic region, buttock or female breast.



('81 Code, § 410.4, § B.2)  (Ord. passed 3-13-86)



§ 111.02  CERTAIN CONDUCT PROHIBITED.



   (A)   The following types of conduct are hereby prohibited in
premises licensed under KRS Chapters 241, 242, 243 and 244:



      (1)   The performance of acts, or simulated acts, of sexual
intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation
or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law;



      (2)   The actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling
on the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals;



      (3)   The actual or simulated display of the pubic hair, anus,
vulva or genitals;



      (4)   The permitting by a licensee of any person to remain in
or upon the licensed premises who exposes to public view any portion of his
or her genitals or anus; and



      (5)   The displaying of films or pictures depicting acts a
live performance of which is prohibited by the regulations quoted above.



   (B)   Topless waitresses are prohibited from premises licensed under
KRS Chapters 241, 242, 243 and 244.



   (C)   Performances that partake more of the gross sexuality defined
in division (A)(1) through (5) of this section than they do of lawful
communication but which are still protected by the First Amendment to the
United States Constitution must be conducted upon a stage where the
performers may not be touched by the invitees of premises licensed under KRS
Chapters 241, 242, 243 and 244.



('81 Code, § 410.4, § A.1.)  (Ord. passed 3-13-86)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.03  ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN LICENSED PREMISES.



   Adult establishments shall be prohibited in premises licensed under KRS
Chapters 241, 242, 243 and 244.



('81 Code, § 410.4, § B.1.)  (Ord. passed 3-13-86)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.04  LOCATION OF ESTABLISHMENT RESTRICTED.



   The conduct or establishments regulated in §§ 111.01 and 111.03 shall
be prohibited from being licensed for business unless they are located at
least one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet from existing residential uses,
schools, churches, halls available for private rental or premises licensed
under KRS Chapters 241, 242, 243 and 244.



('81 Code, § 410.4, § C.)  (Ord. passed 3-13-86)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.99  PENALTY.



   Violation of this chapter shall subject those convicted to a
misdemeanor and a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days or both.
Each act prohibited by this chapter shall be deemed a separate offense and
each day of operation of a business in violation of this chapter shall
constitute a separate offense.



('81 Code, § 410.4, § E.)  (Ord. passed 3-13-86)



CHAPTER 112:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL



Section



   112.01      Definitions



   112.02      Alcoholic beverage control administrator



   112.03      City alcoholic beverage licenses



   112.04      Qualifications for license



   112.05      Application for license



   112.06      Denial of license application



   112.07      License suspension or revocation



   112.08      Term of license



   112.09      License fee



   112.10      Times when retail sales are prohibited



 



   112.99      Penalty



§ 112.01  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ADMINISTRATOR.  The office of city alcoholic beverage control
administrator as required by KRS 241.160 and assigned to the City Clerk
pursuant to § 112.02.



      PERSON.  Any natural person, corporation, partnership, joint
venture, or unincorporated association of persons or any combination thereof,
and the shareholders, officers, agents, servants, and employees thereof.



   (B)   Many additional words and phrases used in this chapter are
also used and defined in KRS chapters 241, 242, 243, and 244. The meanings of
these words and phrases as defined by Kentucky Revised Statute have the same
meaning in this chapter.



(Ord. 02-2014, passed 6-17-14)



§ 112.02  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL ADMINISTRATOR.



   Pursuant to KRS 241.160, the office of city alcoholic beverage control
administrator is hereby created and the duties required thereby are assigned
to the office of the City Clerk.



(Ord. 02-2014, passed 6-17-14)



§ 112.03  CITY ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE LICENSES.



   (A)   For the privilege of causing, permitting, and engaging in the
actions, business and transactions regarding alcoholic beverages in Highland
Heights and pursuant to KRS 243.070, all of the alcoholic beverage licenses
authorized for cities are hereby established and required by the city. The
business authorized by each license shall be the same as the business
authorized by the corresponding state license.



   (B)   No person shall by either act or omission, cause, permit,
allow, aid, assist, encourage, or engage in any business authorized by such
license in the city without a valid license to engage in such business.



(Ord. 02-2014, passed 6-17-14)



§ 112.04  QUALIFICATIONS FOR LICENSE.



   The qualifications and disqualifications of persons and places for a
city alcoholic beverage license(s) shall be the same as those for the
corresponding alcoholic beverage licenses issued by the state.



(Ord. 02-2014, passed 6-17-14)



§ 112.05  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   Applications for city alcoholic beverage license(s) required
by this chapter shall be on a form provided by the Administrator, which shall
include all of the information required in the application for a
corresponding alcoholic beverage license issued by the state. In addition,
applications shall include any other information required by the
Administrator. The application shall be signed by the applicant on a line
immediately following a declaration that false statements in the application
shall constitute the crime of perjury, and the signature of the applicant
shall be notarized according to law.



   (B)   The application shall be submitted to the Administrator along
with the fee established in accordance with § 112.09 for the alcoholic
beverage license that is requested in the application. The fee shall be paid
to the city by cash, cashier check or credit card.



(Ord. 02-2014, passed 6-17-14)



§ 112.06  DENIAL OF LICENSE APPLICATION.



   Provided that the applicant has been afforded a due process hearing,
the alcoholic beverage license that is requested in the application shall be
denied for any of the reasons authorized for refusing a state license under
KRS 243.450. In addition, a license may be denied for any non-arbitrary
reasons which the Administrator deems sufficient in the exercise of sound
discretion.



(Ord. 02-2014, passed 6-17-14)



§ 112.07  LICENSE SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   (A)   Provided that the licensee has been afforded a due process
hearing, any alcoholic beverage license that has been issued by the
Administrator may be suspended or revoked by the Administrator for any reason
for which the corresponding state license may be suspended or revoked by the
state under KRS 243.490 or KRS 243.500,



   (B)   The Administrator may, in its sole discretion, provide the
licensee of a suspended license with the alternative of paying in lieu of
part or all of the days of any suspension the same sums that may be provided
to a state licensee in lieu of the suspension of a corresponding state
license in accordance with KRS 243.480.



(Ord. 02-2014, passed 6-17-14)



§ 112.08  TERM OF LICENSE.



   All city alcoholic beverage license(s) that have been issued by the
Administrator pursuant to this chapter and has not previously been suspended
or revoked shall expire at the same time as the corresponding state license.



(Ord. 02-2014, passed 6-17-14)



§ 112.09  LICENSE FEE.



   (A)   An annual fee is hereby imposed for each of the alcoholic
beverage licenses hereby established and required. The amount of the fee for
each license(s) is listed in the table below.



 

LICENSE TYPE
 
FEE




Distiller's License
 

$  500.00



Rectifier's License
 

3,000.00



Wholesaler's distilled spirits & wine license
 

3,000.00



Quota Retail Package License (Liquor Stores)
 

52.50



Quota Retail Drink License (Bars/Taverns)
 

210.00



Special Temporary License
 

52.50



NQ1 Retail Drink License (includes distilled spirits, wine and malt beverages)
 

2,000.00



NQ2 Retail Drink License (includes distilled spirits, wine and malt beverages)
 

210.00



NQ3 Retail Drink License (includes distilled spirits, wine and malt beverages)
 

300.00



Special Temporary Auction License (distilled spirits and wine)
 

200.00



Special Sunday Retail Drink License
 

157.50



Extended Hours Supplemental License
 

2,000.00



Caterer's License
 

800.00



Bottling House or Bottling House Storage License
 

1,000.00



Brewer's License
 

500.00



Microbrewery License
 

500.00



Malt Beverage Distributor's License
 

400.00



NQ Retail Malt Beverage Package License*
 

52.50



NQ4 Retail Malt Beverage Drink License*
 

26.25



Malt Beverage Brew-On-Premises License
 

100.00



Limited Restaurant License (includes distilled spirits, wine and malt
beverages)
 

1,200.00



Limited Golf Course license
 

1,200.00



* Pursuant to KRS 243.070 (19), the holder of a Non-Quota Retail Malt
Beverage Package License may obtain a Non-Quota Type 4 Malt Beverage Drink
License for a fee of fifty dollars ($50). The holder of a Non-Quota Type 4
Malt Beverage Drink License may obtain a Non-Quota Retail Malt Beverage
Package License for a fee of fifty dollars ($50).




 



   (B)   The fee for each of the first five (5) supplemental bar
licenses shall be the same as the fee for the primary drink license. There
shall be no charge for each supplemental license issued in excess of five (5)
to the same licensee at the same premises.



   (C)   The amount of the fee shall not exceed the maximum allowed by
KRS 243.070, unless the application for license is within six (6) months of
the license’s expiration date. In the event this occurs, the amount of the
fee shall be one-half of the maximum allowed by state law.



(Ord. 02-2014, passed 6-17-14)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.10  TIMES WHEN RETAIL SALES ARE PROHIBITED.



   No person, with or without an alcoholic beverage license shall by act
or omission cause, permit, allow, aid, assist, encourage or engage in the
retail sale of any distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages in the city
during the period of time:



   (A)   On any Sunday after 2:30 a.m. and before 11:00 a.m.; or



   (B)   On any other day after 2:30 a.m. and before 6:00 a.m.



(Ord. 02-2014, passed 6-17-14)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.99  PENALTY.



   Each and every violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor for
which a person convicted thereof in a court of competent jurisdiction shall
be sentenced to pay a criminal fine not to exceed the maximum amount of five
hundred dollars ($500.00) as set forth in KRS 534.050(2)(a) or a term of
imprisonment not to exceed the maximum period of twelve (12) months as set
forth in KRS 532.090(1), or both. The penalties provided in this section
shall be in addition to any suspension or revocation of the offender's
license.



(Ord. 02-2014, passed 6-17-14)



CHAPTER 113:  AMUSEMENTS



Section



Game Rooms



   113.01   Title



   113.02   Definitions



   113.03   Hours of operation



   113.04   Annual license fee



   113.05   Application for license certificate



   113.06   Placement of electronic amusement games and devices on
business premises



   113.10   Existing business



   113.11   Permit required of proprietor



   113.12   Application for permit; requirements



   113.13   Responsibilities of proprietor



   113.14   Obligation of proprietor restricting operation by minors



   113.15   Intoxicated persons prohibited on premises



   113.16   Substitution of coin-operated machine



   113.17   Delinquent payment; penalty



   113.18   Disposition of fees



 



   113.98   Conviction does not exempt



   113.99   Penalty



GAME ROOMS



§ 113.01  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and cited as the City Game Room Regulations.



('81 Code, § 320.5, § 1)



§ 113.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COIN-OPERATED MACHINES or MACHINES.  Any machine or similar device
which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc, may be
operated by the public generally for use for entertainment or amusement,
whether or not registering a score.  This definition shall not include juke
boxes telephone devices or machines that sell merchandise.



   GAME ROOM.  A business establishment containing more than two
coin-operated machines.



   PERSON.  A human being, and where appropriate, a public or private
corporation, an unincorporated association, a partnership, a government or a
governmental authority.



   PREMISES.  The land and building of the business establishment in and
upon which the operation of coin-operated machines is carried on.



   PROPRIETOR.  Any person, firm, corporation, or partnership who, as
owner, lessor, lessee, tenant, servant agent, officer, employee, operation or
manager has under his or its control or possession in or on any business
establishment being conducted as a GAME ROOM , any coin-operated machines for
use by the general public.



   SCHOOL.  Any educational institution, public, private, secular or
parochial which offers instruction of high school grade or below.



('81 Code, § 320.5, § 1)



§ 113.03  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   Any business establishment being conducted as a game room in which
there are contained coin-operated machines shall not lawfully remain open
after the hour of 12:00 midnight.



('81 Code, § 320.5, § 3)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.04  ANNUAL LICENSE FEE.



   There is hereby levied and established an annual license fee, in the
amount of ten dollars ($10.00) per electronic amusement game or device
located on any business premises.



('81 Code, § 320.5, § 5)



§ 113.05  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE CERTIFICATE.



   Any person desiring to place an electronic amusement game or device on
their business premises in the city shall make application to the City
Clerk-Treasurer.  Upon payment of the appropriate fee, the City
Clerk-Treasurer shall thereupon issue to such applicant a license certificate
authorizing him to place such amusement device on his business premises;
provided that the regulations hereafter promulgated are strictly complied
with. All license certificates issued hereunder shall be in a form approved
by the City Clerk-Treasurer.



('81 Code, § 320.5, § 7)



§ 113.06  PLACEMENT OF ELECTRONIC AMUSEMENT GAMES AND DEVICES ON BUSINESS
PREMISES.



   (A)   All electronic amusement games or devices located on business
premises within the city shall be placed at least fifteen (15) feet from the
main entrance or exit of said premises to insure safe, clear exit in case of
emergency evacuation.



   (B)   All electronic amusement games or devices located on business
premises within the city shall be placed so as to have at least four (4) feet
clearance on all sides; except where such game or device is located against a
wall, in which case four (4) feet clearance on three (3) sides will be
sufficient.



   (C)   There shall be a maximum of three (3) such games or devices
permitted upon each business premise, each of which shall be separately
licensed.



   (D)   All electronic amusement games and devices located on business
premises within the city shall be separately licensed and the license
certificate shall be attached or affixed thereon, which license shall not be
removed nor transferred except upon application to the City Clerk-Treasurer
upon a form prescribed by the City Clerk-Treasurer.



   (E)   All businesses within the city which have electronic amusement
games and devices located on their premises shall comply with these
regulations and all other regulations which may be established from time to
time by ordinance of City Council.



§ 113.10  EXISTING BUSINESS.



   Any proprietor owning or operating a game room lawfully in existence
upon the effective date of this subchapter shall be deemed to have been
issued a permit hereunder, provided that such proprietor within thirty (30)
days after said effective date submits on a prescribed form a record of
information on such existing business, as if required herein.  No filing fee
or permit fee shall be payable therefor, but shall be payable at time of
renewal.



('81 Code, § 320.5, § 13)



§ 113.11  PERMIT REQUIRED OF PROPRIETOR.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any proprietor to install, operate or
maintain to be operated, any coin operated machines without first having
obtained a permit from the City Clerk-Treasurer in accordance with this
subchapter.  The permit shall be valid only for the number of machines
therein specified.  The use of additional machines shall require a new
permit.  The Chief of Police shall be the investigating official for the
purpose of this chapter.



   (B)   No coin-operated machines shall be installed in any
proprietor's place of business unless such a permit has been issued.



('81 Code, § 320.5, § 14)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.12  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Application for a permit.



      (1)   The application for a permit required hereunder shall be
on a form prescribed by the City Clerk-Treasurer.  Fingerprinting of all
applicants is required for purposes of enabling the investigating official to
conduct his or her investigation.



      (2)   The permit shall be permanently and conspicuously posted
at the location of the machines in the premises wherein said machines are to
be operated or maintained to be operated, and shall not be removed from said
location during the period for which said license was issued.



      (3)   No permit issued under this subchapter shall be
transferable nor apply to any premises other than originally specified as the
location of the thing permitted, except with permission of the City
Clerk-Treasurer upon written application by the transferee, made in the same
manner as may be required in the instance of the original application for
such permit.



      (4)   Violation of any provision of this subchapter shall be
grounds for revocation or suspension of the permit issued hereunder.  Each
permit is effective for a single place of business only.



      (5)   The issuance of such permit does not vest any property
right in the proprietor except to permit the use of coin-operated machines in
accordance with the terms and conditions of this subchapter.



('81 Code, § 320.5, § 15)



   (B)   Application requirements.  An initial applicant for a permit
under the provisions of this subchapter shall file with the City
Clerk-Treasurer a written application on a form provided for that purpose
which shall be signed and verified by the applicant, who shall be the
proprietor of the business sought to be licensed.  A separate application
must be filed for each location sought to be permitted.  The following
information is required in the application.



      (1)   The name, age, address, telephone number and residence
of each applicant and if there be more than one and they are partners, the
partnership name, address, or, if doing business under an assumed name, the
name under which such business is intended to be conducted.



      (2)   The name and address of each person interested or to
become interested in the business for which the permit is sought, together
with the nature of that interest, and if the applicant is a corporation, the
names, addresses and ages of each officer, director and managerial employee,
and the state under the laws of which the corporate applicant is
incorporated.  The City Clerk-Treasurer may, at his discretion, require also
the names of all stockholders.



      (3)   The premises for which a permit is sought, stating the
street and number, if the premises has a street number, and otherwise such a
description as will reasonably indicate the location of the premises.  The
applicant shall also state the nature of the interest in the premises and the
name, or the associate, who is interested with the applicant either in the
premises or in the business to be licensed.



      (4)   (a)   A statement that neither the applicant nor any
other person referred to in this subchapter has been convicted of any felony,
within two (2) years preceding his application; and that he has not had any
similar permit issued to him revoked for cause within two (2) years prior to
the date of his application.  It shall be the duty of the City Police
Department through its Chief of Police, to investigate the criminal record of
the applicant, if any, before affixing his signature of approval to the
application.  His signature shall constitute verification that to the best
of his knowledge at the time of initial application the applicant has not
violated any of the provisions of this subchapter.



         (b)   If the Chief of Police shall find such violation
of this subchapter to exist, he shall immediately notify the City
Clerk-Treasurer of the same and refuse to sign the application, such shall be
sufficient grounds for denial of the requested permit.



         (c)   In the event that the applicant shall, at any
time, be found to have made any false statement or material omission on the
application, the same shall constitute grounds for immediate revocation of
the license or permit issued hereunder.



      (5)   The name, address and phone number of the manager or
operator of the premises to be permitted if such person is not the proprietor.



      (6)   (a)   The signature of not less than ten (10)
owner/occupiers of real estate parcels, within a radius of two hundred (200)
feet of the place in which the game room shall be operated signifying their
consent or acquiescence to the operation of such business; provided, however,
that if there are less than ten (10) owner/occupiers of real estate parcels
located within such radius, then such application shall contain the
signatures of not less than two-thirds of all the owner/occupiers of real
estate parcels within such prescribed distance.



         (b)   An owner/occupier of real estate parcel under this
subchapter shall be construed as one individual person who is vested the
ownership or title or partial ownership or title to the real estate parcel
within the prescribed radius and who is also an actual occupier living within
the residence or structure location upon the real estate parcel within the
prescribed radius. Any owner of a real estate parcel within the prescribed
radius who does not actually reside upon the said parcel or any occupier of
the residence or structure upon the said parcel who does not own or partially
own the same shall not qualify as an appropriate signer on the application. 



         (c)   It is imperative that the conditions set forth
above shall be met. There shall only be one individual person
(owner/occupier) permitted to sign for each real estate parcel within the
prescribed radius.  A husband and wife or any joint owners of a parcel of
real estate shall be considered as one individual person under this section
and shall be permitted to sign only once as the owner/occupier for the entire
parcel of real estate located within the prescribed radius.



         (d)   Furthermore, any person or persons who may own
more than one parcel of real estate within the prescribed radius shall hereby
be expressly prohibited from signing more than once on any application
regardless of the total number of parcels of real estate he may own within
the prescribed radius.



         (e)   The measurement of the prescribed radius, that
being two hundred (200) feet, shall be taken in a straight line from and to
the nearest points of the respective properties.



      (7)   The signature of the owner/occupier of the premises
where the game room shall be operated. 



      (8)   If, after a permit has been issued, there is a change in
any of the facts required to be set forth in the application, a verified
supplemental statement in writing giving notice of the change shall be filed
with the City Clerk-Treasurer within ten (10) days after the change.  The
word "change" with reference to corporate licensees is construed to include
any change of directors or officers of the corporation, or a change in
ownership of stock whereby any person secures ten percent (10%) of the
outstanding stock or effects a transfer of said percentage of stock; transfer
of more than ten percent (10%) of the total stock shall require a new license.



      (9)   Such other information as the City Clerk-Treasurer may
require.  Any such information shall be conclusively presumed to be correct
and shall be deemed material in any subsequent prosecutions.



      (10)   Advertising and signature requirements under these
provisions shall be required of all initial permit applicants and for all
transfers but shall not apply to permit renewals. The City Clerk-Treasurer
may refuse to approve issuance or renewal of a permit for failure to comply
with any of the above stated provisions.



('81 Code, § 320.5, § 16)



§ 113.13  RESPONSIBILITIES OF PROPRIETOR.



   (A)   Floor plan.



      (1)   It shall be required that the proprietor of all business
establishments being operated as a game room submit to and file with the City
Clerk-Treasurer a complete floor plan of the premises which shall clearly
indicate all points of entrance and exit. Said floor plan shall be drawn on
the form to be submitted to each proprietor by the City Clerk-Treasurer.  It
shall be submitted by the proprietor to the City Clerk-Treasurer at the time
of his next permit renewal or at the time of initial application for such
permit.



      (2)   The proprietor shall be required to supplement or update
said floor plan from time to time and in the event that the business premises
shall undergo any change in the number of entrances and exits.  The addition
to or removal from any business premises of any entrance or exit shall be
clearly indicated on the supplemental or updated floor plan. 



      (3)   An entrance or exit shall be construed as a door,
opening or passageway that is or can be used as a point of ingress and egress
to the business premises.



   (B)   Visibility.



      (1)   All coin-operated machines and any person operating the
same must be visible from the entrance to the business establishment being
conducted as a game room and the entrance must be unlocked during all times
that the premises in question are open for business.



      (2)   All law enforcement personnel of the city shall have the
right to enter into said premises, which shall include the right to enter
into any adjoining or adjacent room or rooms to the licensed premises, at any
time during normal business hours for the purpose of enforcement of terms of
this subchapter.



      (3)   The lighting in the business establishment being
conducted as a game room



must be sufficient enough that all coin-operated machines and any person
operating the same are clearly visible from the entrance.  Lighting emitted
solely from the coin-operated machine itself shall not be sufficient.



      (4)   Failure to comply with this provision shall be grounds
for revocation or suspension of the permit issued under this subchapter.



   (C)   Indebtedness to city.  The City Clerk-Treasurer shall not
issue or renew a permit under this subchapter and shall suspend or cancel a
permit if it is determined that the applicant or permittee is indebted to the
city for any fee, costs, penalties or delinquent taxes.



   (D)   Proximity to schools, churches, libraries and residential
zones.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any proprietor of a business
establishment being conducted as a game room to cause, permit or allow the
same to be located, operated or maintained within two hundred (200) feet of a
building used primarily as a church or for classrooms of a school or from the
nearest street entrance to any school playground, or within two hundred (200)
feet of any other existing game room; nor within two hundred (200) feet of
any public library.



      (2)   The distance is to be measured in a straight line from
and to the nearest points of the respective properties.  The restrictions by
division (B) of this section shall not apply to game rooms lawfully in
existence and operating upon the effective date of this subchapter.



('81 Code, § 320.5, § 17) Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.14  OBLIGATION OF PROPRIETOR RESTRICTING OPERATION BY MINORS.



   It shall be unlawful and contrary to public policy for any proprietor
of coin-operated machines to permit any person not having attained his
eighteenth birthday to play, operate, assist, manage or attempt thereto, any
coin-operated machine or device of similar contrivance, regardless of label
or name there affixed, within the confines of the city, during hours when the
minor's particular school is actually in session.  This section shall not
apply to minors no longer in school.



('81 Code, § 320.5, § 4)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.15  INTOXICATED PERSONS PROHIBITED ON PREMISES.



   No proprietor shall permit intoxicated persons to loiter on the
premises.



('81 Code, § 320.5, § 19)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.16  SUBSTITUTION OF COIN-OPERATED MACHINE.



   The licensee may substitute one coin-operated machine for a similar
coin-operated machine without paying any additional licensing fee, provided
that he first applies to the City Clerk-Treasurer for permission to make the
exchange and supplies all the information required for the original license.



('81 Code, § 320.5, § 18)



§ 113.17  DELINQUENT PAYMENT; PENALTY.



   Any fee unpaid when due, and remaining unpaid for thirty (30) days
thereafter, shall have added thereto a penalty of ten percent (10%) and
interest on the principal sum at a rate of eighteen percent (18%) per annum
from the due date until paid.



('81 Code, § 320.5, § 6)



§ 113.18  DISPOSITION OF FEES.



   The license fees levied by this subchapter shall be used together with
the other funds to defray the cost of inspection of coin-operated machines to
insure compliance with regulations, and the general expense of maintaining
the city government.  The fees collected pursuant hereto shall be placed in
the General Fund for the aforesaid purposes.



('81 Code, § 320.5, § 6)



§ 113.98  CONVICTION DOES NOT EXEMPT.



   Any conviction pursuant to § 113.99 and the imposition of a penalty,
shall not excuse any person from payment of the established fee or tax due
and unpaid at the time of such conviction, nor shall it act as a bar in any
civil action brought to effect recovery of such fee, penalty and interest.



('81 Code, § 320.5, § 12)



§ 113.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, including placing
an electronic amusement game or device on his business premises without
having first obtained a license therefor shall be deemed guilty of a
violation as set forth in § 10.99 and upon conviction thereof in a court of
competent jurisdiction, shall be fined.  Upon conviction of any violation,
in addition to the penalties aforesaid, the City Clerk-Treasurer or the
Police Chief may, and each are hereby authorized to revoke said license which
can only be reinstated by the City Council.



('81 Code, § 320.5, § 11)



CHAPTER 114:  INSURANCE COMPANIES



Section



   114.01   Imposition of license fee



   114.02   Amount of fee for companies issuing policies other than
life insurance



   114.03   Due date; interest



   114.04   Written breakdown of collections



   114.05   Exemptions



   114.06   Classifications



§ 114.01  IMPOSITION OF LICENSE FEE.



   There is hereby imposed on each insurance company a license fee for the
privilege of engaging in the business of insurance within the corporate
limits of the city on a fiscal year basis. 



(Ord. 5-86, passed 4-10-86; Am. Ord. 01-2004, passed 3-9-04)



§ 114.02  AMOUNT OF FEE FOR COMPANIES ISSUING POLICIES OTHER THAN LIFE
INSURANCE.



   The license fee imposed on each insurance company which issues any
insurance policy which is not a life insurance or health insurance policy
shall be ten percent (10%) of the premiums actually collected within each
calendar quarter by reason of the issuance of such policies on risks located
within the corporate limits of the city on those classes of business which
such company is authorized to transact, less all premiums returned to the
policyholders; however, any license fee or tax imposed upon premium receipts
shall not include premiums received for insuring employers against liability
for personal injuries to their employees or death caused thereby under the
provisions of the Workers' Compensation Act.



(Ord. 5-86, passed 4-10-86; Am. Ord. 01-2004, passed 3-9-04)



§ 114.03  DUE DATE; INTEREST.



   The license fee imposed by this chapter shall be due no later than
thirty (30) days after the end of each calendar quarter.  Any license fee
not paid on or before the due date shall bear interest on the license fee at
a rate as defined in KRS 131.183.



(Ord. 5-86, passed 4-10-86; Am. Ord. 01-2004, passed 3-9-04)



§ 114.04  WRITTEN BREAKDOWN OF COLLECTIONS.



   Every insurance company subject to the license fee imposed by this
chapter shall annually, by March 31, furnish the city with a written
breakdown of all collections in the preceding calendar year for the following
categories of insurance:



   (A)   Casualty;



   (B)   Automobile;



   (C)   Inland marine;



   (D)   Fire and allied perils;



   (E)   Life.



(Ord. 5-86, passed 4-10-86; Am. Ord. 01-2004, passed 3-9-04)



§ 114.05  EXEMPTION.



   Health insurance polices shall be exempt from the license fee imposed
in this chapter, as are any license fees specifically exempted by state
statute.



(Ord. 5-86, passed 4-10-86; Am. Ord. 01-2004, passed 3-9-04)



§ 114.06  CLASSIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of
insuring persons' lives, shall, for the purpose of this chapter be classified
as life insurance companies and shall not engage in business in the city
except as herein provided.



   (B)   All burial associations shall be considered, for the purpose
of this chapter, as being engaged in the business of insuring persons.



(Ord. 01-2004, passed 3-9-04)



CHAPTER 115:  PAWNBROKERS



Section



   115.01   Definitions



   115.02   Bond



   115.03   Register to be kept; daily reports



   115.04   Receipt to be given for each article; sale of article



   115.05   Maximum interest resale price



   115.06   Receipt to be given for payment of loan



   115.07   Prohibited activities



   115.08   Enforcement



 



   115.99   Penalty



§ 115.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PAWNBROKER.  Any person who loans money on deposit of personal
property; deals in the purchase of personal property on condition of selling
the property back again at a stipulated price; makes a public display at his
place of business of the sign generally used by pawnbrokers to denote their
business; or who publicly exhibits a sign advertising money to loan on
personal property or deposit.



(KRS 226.010)



§ 115.02  BOND.



   Every person to whom a city license is granted to carry on the business
of a pawnbroker shall annually enter into bond to the city, with good and
sufficient surety to be approved by City Council, in the penal sum of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00).  This bond shall be conditioned that he will
observe the provisions of this chapter and all ordinances and laws in force
in the city not inconsistent with this chapter.



(KRS 226.020) 



§ 115.03  REGISTER TO BE KEPT; DAILY REPORTS.



   (A)   (1)   Every pawnbroker shall keep a register of all loans
and purchases of all articles by the pawnbroker from the general public. The
register shall:



         (a)   Be reported to an online, internet-based
transaction recording service accessible to law enforcement agencies;



         (b)   Show the dates and the amounts of all loans or
purchases by the pawnbroker from the general public, and the names of all
persons who have left any property that has been pawned or sold and:



            1.   A driver’s license number;



            2.   Another state or federally issued picture
identification card number; or



            3.   If the identification specified in divisions
(A)(1)(b)1. or (A)(1)(b)2. is not available, a social security number may be
accepted;



         (c)   At all times be available to the inspection of any
law enforcement officer of this state when in the discharge of his or her
official duty; and



         (d)   Contain a full description of all property
purchased by the pawnbroker from the general public or received on deposit as
collateral or security. When requested by law enforcement and pertaining to
an investigation, a photograph of the merchandise shall be made available to
law enforcement if the property is still in the possession of the pawnbroker.
For purposes of this division, FULL DESCRIPTION includes, but is not limited
to:



            1.   Make;



            2.   Model;



            3.   Color;



            4.   Size;



            5.   Manufacturer;



            6.   Vintage; and



            7.   Distinguishing marks or characteristics.



      (2)   When secondhand merchandise is sold to a pawnbroker, the
merchandise shall be held for a minimum of twelve (12) days before being
resold.



      (3)   Prior to the release of property to a representative of
law enforcement, the law enforcement representative shall provide to the
pawnbroker a case report or other documentation that the item has been
reported as stolen.



(KRS 226.040)



   (B)   Every pawnbroker shall, by 11:00 a.m. each day, make available
to the Chief of Police a true and correct written report of all goods
received by him, whether by pawn or purchase, during the twenty-four (24)
hours preceding each report.  The report shall describe the goods as
accurately as practicable.  The Chief of Police shall furnish blanks for
these reports.



(KRS 226.070)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.04  RECEIPT TO BE GIVEN FOR EACH ARTICLE; SALE OF ARTICLE.



   (A)   Every pawnbroker shall give a plain written or printed ticket
for the loan to the person negotiating or selling, and a plain written or
printed receipt of the articles that have been purchased or upon which money
is loaned, having on each a copy of the entries required by § 115.03(A) to
be kept in his register.  He shall not make any charge for the ticket or
receipt.



   (B)   A pawnbroker may sell any article pawned after the expiration
of sixty (60) days from the maturity of the loan.  However, not less than
ten (10) days before making the sale, the pawnbroker shall give notice to the
person by whom the article was pawned by mail addressed to the post office
address of that person as shown on the pawnbroker's register, notifying such
person that, unless he redeems the article within ten (10) days from the date
of mailing of the notice, the article will be sold.



(KRS 226.050)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.05  MAXIMUM INTEREST, RESALE PRICE.



   Any pawnbroker as defined in § 115.01, may, in loaning money on
deposit of personal property, charge, contract for, or receive interest at a
rate not exceeding two percent (2%) per month on the unpaid principal balance
of the loan, and may charge, contract for, and receive a reasonable fee, not
to exceed one-fifth of the value of the loan per month, for investigating the
title, storing and insuring the property, closing the loan, making daily
reports to local law enforcement officers if required by § 115.03, and for
other expenses, losses, and incidental costs associated with servicing such
loans.  Further, this fee, when made and collected, shall not be deemed as
interest for any purpose of law.  No pawnbroker shall directly or indirectly
charge, receive, or contract for any interest or consideration greater than
that allowed by this section.



(KRS 226.080)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.06  RECEIPT TO BE GIVEN FOR PAYMENT OF LOAN.



   Every pawnbroker, upon receiving any payment of money from a borrower,
shall give to that person a plain and complete receipt for such payment,
specifying separately the amount applied to principal and the amount applied
to interest.  In a case where the pawnbroker has purchased personal property
under an agreement to sell it back at a stipulated price, the pawnbroker
shall, on receiving any payment of money from the person from whom he
purchased, give that person a receipt stating the original purchase price,
the stipulated resale price, and the amount received.



(KRS 226.090)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.07  PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.



   No pawnbroker shall receive, by way of either pledge or pawn, any
article whatever from a minor at any time nor from any person between 8:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m.



(KRS 226.030)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.08  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Police Department shall enforce the provisions of this chapter
unless otherwise provided by KRS 226.100.  However, county police, for the
purpose of locating stolen goods, may carry out the provisions of KRS 226.060
within the city.



(KRS 226.100)



§ 115.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any pawnbroker or pawnbroker's clerk who violates any of the
provisions of this chapter for which no penalty is otherwise provided shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than
fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and his
license may be forfeited to the city. 



(KRS 226.990(1))



   (B)   Any pawnbroker who violates any of the provisions of §
115.03(B) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than
twenty dollars ($20.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00).



(KRS 226.990(3))



CHAPTER 116:  PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS



Section



   116.01   Written application for permit



   116.02   Fee; issuance of solicitor's permit



   116.03   When fee for permit not required



   116.04   Display of permit; additional information to be relayed
orally



   116.05   Contracts



   116.06   False or misleading statement prohibited



   116.07   Sales or contracts in violation may be voided



   116.08   Exception



 



   116.99   Penalty



§ 116.01  WRITTEN APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   Any person, firm or corporation desiring to engage in soliciting the
sale of goods or services of any description at any residence in the city
shall first make an application in writing, setting out the names and
addresses of the applicant, and of the proprietors and owners of an applicant
other than a natural person, and shall also file with the Chief of Police the
signature, address and fingerprints of each and every person proposing to
engage in such solicitation.



('81 Code, § 420.1, § 1) (Ord. 08-2003, passed 4-15-03)



§ 116.02  FEE; ISSUANCE OF SOLICITOR'S PERMIT.



   Upon favorable investigation of said applicant and of the persons
desiring to engage in such solicitation and upon payment of a fee of
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per person, per week, the Chief of Police shall
issue a solicitor's permit to said applicant, for each such person, upon
which permit there shall appear, in addition to any other language prescribed
in the discretion of the Chief of Police, the following language:



     (Name of salesperson)  has been granted permission to solicit the
sale of   (Brief Description of Product or Service)  to residences in the
City of Highland Heights, Kentucky on behalf of _____________, his employer
or principal, for a period of one (1) week from the date of this permit.



ISSUANCE OF THIS PERMIT DOES NOT CONSTITUTE AN ENDORSEMENT BY THE CITY OF
HIGHLAND HEIGHTS OF THE PRODUCT OR SERVICE FOR WHICH SALES ARE SOLICITED.



('81 Code, § 420.1, § 2) (Ord. 08-2003, passed 4-15-03)



§ 116.03  WHEN FEE FOR PERMIT NOT REQUIRED.



   If any applicant for the permit provided for in § 116.02 has already
paid to the city a fee for a license permitting him to engage in business in
the city, and the solicitation with respect to which the application for a
permit is made is to be conducted in connection with such business, then, the
fee provided for in § 116.02 shall not be required, although the application
for an issuance of the permit therein provided for shall nonetheless be
required.



('81 Code, § 420.1, § 9) (Ord. 08-2003, passed 4-15-03)



§ 116.04  DISPLAY OF PERMIT; ADDITIONAL INFORMATION TO BE RELAYED ORALLY. 



   Immediately upon entering into conversation for the purpose of
soliciting the sale of goods or services with any person at any residence in
the city, the solicitor shall, before making any other statement or
declaration of any kind, display the permit provided or in § 116.02 to such
person, and shall, in addition, inform said person orally of his (the
solicitor's) name, the person or firm he represents and the general nature of
the product or service he is selling.



('81 Code, § 420.1, § 3)    (Ord. 08-2003, passed 4-15-03)  Penalty, see
§ 116.99



§ 116.05  CONTRACTS.



   If such solicitor enters into a contract of the sale of any product or
service at any residence in the city, he shall inform the purchaser in
writing at the time the contract is executed:



   (A)   That the contract or any obligation signed in connection
therewith will be negotiated or discounted to some other person than the
contracting parties, if such is the fact; and



   (B)   If the contract provides for installment payments of the
purchase price of the true interest rate charged on the unpaid balance
thereof and the true amount of all service or carrying charges to be paid in
connection with such contract.



('81 Code, § 420.1, § 4)  (Ord. 08-2003, passed 4-15-03)



§ 116.06  FALSE OR MISLEADING STATEMENT PROHIBITED.



   No such solicitor shall make any false or misleading statement in
connection with any solicitation of sale of any product or service at a
residence in the city.



('81 Code, § 420.1, § 5)  (Ord. 08-2003, passed 4-15-03)  Penalty, see §
116.99



§ 116.07  SALES OR CONTRACTS IN VIOLATION MAY BE VOIDED.



   All sales or contracts of sale made in violation of this chapter shall
be voidable at the option of the purchaser.



('81 Code, § 420.1, § 6)  (Ord. 08-2003, passed 4-15-03)



§ 116.08  EXCEPTION.



   This chapter shall not be construed to apply to persons soliciting the
sale of products or services exclusively to businesses.



('81 Code, § 420.1, § 8)  (Ord. 08-2003, passed 4-15-03)



§ 116.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation violating this chapter shall be guilty
of a Class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be guilty of a
violation and shall be fined in an amount of not less than twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), or imprisoned
for not more than ninety (90) days, or both.  Each residence at which
solicitations or sales are made in violation of this chapter shall be the
basis of a separate offense.  If this chapter is violated by an agent or
employee acting in the course and scope of his agency or employment, then
both the agent or employee and the principal or employer shall be deemed to
have committed a separate offense.



('81 Code, § 420.1, § 7)  (Ord. 08-2003, passed 4-15-03)



CHAPTER 117:  SECURITY ALARM SYSTEMS



Section



General Provisions



   117.01   Erroneous activation of security alarms, fee; disconnection



Burglar Alarms and Alarm Systems Regulations



   117.15   Policy



   117.16   Definitions



   117.17   Permit required; fee; exemptions



   117.18   Permit application; issuance and appeal



   117.19   Permits to be in possession of alarm agents



   117.20   Suspension and revocation of permits; suspension of police
response



   117.21   Alarm system standards



   117.22   Rules and regulations



   117.23   Certain acts prohibited



 



   117.99   Penalty



Cross reference:



   False fire alarm, see § 130.04



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 117.01  ERRONEOUS ACTIVATION OF SECURITY ALARMS, FEE; DISCONNECTION.



   (A)   No person or company that owns or controls a premises location
within the city shall permit a security alarm system or fire alarm system to
be erroneously activated on or at said premises.



   (B)   For each erroneous activation of security alarm systems or
fire alarm systems located within the city, except for the first three (3)
erroneous activations in each calendar year, the person or company that owns
or controls a premises upon which is located a security alarm system or fire
alarm system, shall be charged and assessed a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00)
for each erroneous activation of the security alarm system or fire alarm
system.



   (C)   The Chiefs of Police and Fire Departments shall maintain a
record of all erroneous activations or false alarms and certify copies
thereof to the City Clerk-Treasurer each month.  The City Clerk-Treasurer
shall thereupon send a bill for the appropriate charges to the person or
company who controls the premises upon which the security alarm system or
fire alarm system is located.  Upon nonpayment of the bill for a period of
thirty (30) days, the respective security alarm system or fire alarm system
shall be removed forthwith from the police dispatcher's office, if so
connected, and the person or company shall be cited to district court for
violation of this section.



(Ord. 22-88, passed 9-22-88, Am. Ord. 11-90, passed 4-26-90)  Penalty, see
§ 117.99



BURGLAR ALARMS AND ALARM SYSTEMS REGULATIONS



§ 117.15  POLICY.



   The City Council hereby finds that the regulation of the sale and
installation of alarm systems and the control of false alarms is necessary to
promote the health, welfare and safety of the people in that the sale and
installation of substandard alarm equipment and false alarms arising
therefrom constitute a hazard to the safety of peace officers and the public
in general.  False burglary and robbery alarms enhance the dangers of
automobile collisions en route to burglary or robbery alarms, substantially
increase peace officer man-hours costs and divert police resources from
regularly assigned duties.



('81 Code, § 330.2, § 1)



§ 117.16  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 



   ALARM AGENT.  Any person who is employed, either directly or
indirectly, by an alarm business whose duties include any of the following:
selling, maintaining, leasing, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing,
removing or installing on any building, place or premises, any alarm system.



   ALARM BUSINESS.  Any person engaged in selling, leasing, maintaining,
servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, removing, or installing any alarm
system or causing to be sold, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered,
replaced, removed or installed an alarm system in or on any building, place
or premises.



   ALARM SYSTEM.  Any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical,
arranged to signal the occurrence of an illegal entry or other activity
requiring urgent attention and to which the Police Department or Fire
Department is expected to respond.



   AUDIBLE ALARM.  A device designed for the detection of unauthorized
entry on premises and when actuated, generates an audible sound on the
premises.



   EXCESSIVE FALSE ALARMS.  Shall be defined as follows:



      (1)   Two or more alarms in any thirty (30) day period;



      (2)   Trouble status alarms shall not be counted in
determining excessive false alarms.



   FALSE ALARM.  An alarm signal necessitating response by the Police
Department where an emergency situation does not exist.



   PERSON.  Any individual, partnership, corporation or other entity.



   PROPRIETOR ALARM.  An alarm which is not serviced by an alarm business.



   SUBSCRIBER.  A person contracting with an alarm business for the
leasing, servicing, or maintaining of an alarm system.



   TROUBLE STATUS ALARM.  An alarm signal arising from the interruption
of a telephone at a point between the protected location and the police or
central receiving station.



('81 Code, § 330.2, § 2)



§ 117.17  PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE; EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Permit required.  A permit shall be required for each alarm
business and alarm agent.



   (B)   Exemptions.  The provisions of this subchapter are not
applicable to audible alarms affixed to automobiles, boats, boat trailers,
house trailers and recreational vehicles.



   (C)   Permit fee.  A permit fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) shall
be paid to the Chief of Police and transferred to the City Clerk-Treasurer to
be placed in the General Fund. 



('81 Code, § 330.2, § 3)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.18  PERMIT APPLICATION; ISSUANCE AND APPEAL.



   (A)   The issuing authority shall be the Chief of Police.



   (B)   Applications for all permits required under this chapter shall
be filed with the Chief of Police.  The Chief of Police shall prescribe the
form of the application and request such information as is necessary to
evaluate and act upon the permit application.



   (C)   All applications for an alarm business and alarm agents shall
require fingerprints of the applicants. The Chief of Police shall conduct an
investigation of the applicant to determine his character, reputation and
moral integrity; provided further, the Chief of Police, at his discretion,
may dispense with the investigation upon being furnished with an
authenticated copy of a current permit issued by another governmental
agency.  The permit shall be denied if the character, reputation, or moral
integrity of the applicant is determined to be inimical to the safety or
general welfare of the community, or if the applicant falsifies any
information in the permit application.



   (D)   Any person required by this subchapter to have a permit who
has been denied such a permit by the Chief of Police shall have a right to
appeal that decision to the City Council.  The procedure for this appeal
shall be the same as set forth in § 117.20. 



('81 Code, § 330.2, § 6)



§ 117.19  PERMITS TO BE IN POSSESSION OF ALARM AGENTS.



   Every person engaged in the business of selling, repairing, servicing,
altering, replacing, removing or installing a burglar alarm system shall
carry on his person at all times while so engaged, a valid alarm agent permit
issued pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter and shall display such
permit to any police officer upon request.



('81 Code, § 330.2, § 4(B))  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.20  SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF PERMITS; SUSPENSION OF POLICE
RESPONSE.



   (A)   Hearing.  Before a permit issued pursuant to this subchapter
may be suspended or revoked, or a police alarm response suspended or revoked,
a hearing must be held before the Chief of Police.  Notice setting forth the
time, place and nature of the hearing shall be sent by mail to the permittee
at the address shown on the permit application seven (7) days prior to said
hearing.



   (B)   Grounds for suspension or revocation; suspension of police
responses.  The Chief of Police may suspend or revoke a permit on the
following grounds:



      (1)   The violation of any of the provisions of this
subchapter or failure to comply with same;



      (2)   Where the character, reputation or moral integrity of
the permit holder or his employees is determined to be inimical to the public
safety or general welfare of the community, such a determination shall
include consideration of any conviction of, or release from a penal
institution after serving a sentence for a felony or misdemeanor involving
robbery, burglary, theft, embezzlement, dishonesty, fraud or the buying or
receiving of stolen property within the past five (5) years, or if any
information in the permit application has been falsified;



      (3)   Selling or installing any alarm system or component that
is not approved equipment as defined in §§ 117.19, 117.21 and 117.22;



      (4)   Violation of any rules and regulations adopted pursuant
to §§ 117.19, 117.21 and 117.22;



      (5)   Representing any burglar alarm equipment, component,
system or device as Underwriters Laboratory, Inc. listed as approved
equipment as defined in §§ 117.19, 117.21 and 117.22 when such is not the
case at the time of representation;



      (6)   Suspension of police alarm response.  Police response
to any alarm may be suspended or revoked in the event that excessive false
alarms occur as defined in § 117.16, or in the event that it is determined
that an armed robbery alarm was intentionally activated by the subscriber
when, in fact, an armed robbery was not taking place, or in the event that
the burglary or robbery alarms fail to meet the alarm standards of §§
117.19, 117.21 and 117.22.



   (C)   Appeals.



      (1)   Any decision taken by the Chief of Police pursuant to
this section may be appealed by filing a written notice of appeal with the
City Clerk-Treasurer within five (5) days after the decision.



      (2)   Such appeal shall be heard by the City Council within
thirty (30) days after the filing of the appeal and that body may affirm,
amend or reverse the decision, or take other action deemed appropriate
subject to the same limitations as placed on the Chief of Police, as
contained in division (B) of this section.



      (3)   The City Clerk-Treasurer shall give written notice of
the time and place of the hearing to the appellant.



      (4)   In conducting the hearing, the City Council shall not be
limited by the technical rules of evidence.



('81 Code, § 330.2, § 7)



§ 117.21  ALARM SYSTEM STANDARDS.



   (A)   All alarm systems, devices or components thereof, installed
within the city shall be listed on the Burglary Protection Equipment List of
Underwriters Laboratory, Inc.



(UL listed).



   (B)   The Chief of Police may grant an exception to the above
requirement wherein non-Underwriters Laboratory, Inc. listed alarm systems,
devices or components thereof, are determined by the Chief of Police to be
substantially equivalent to, or exceed the applicable Underwriters
Laboratory, Inc. alarm testing standards.



   (C)   The applicant shall have the burden of establishing that the
non-Underwriters Laboratory, Inc. alarm system, device or component is
substantially equivalent to, or exceeds, the applicable Underwriters
Laboratory, Inc. alarm testing standard.



   (D)   The Chief of Police may require the applicant to present
documentation and certification from a qualified authority to make the above
exception determination.



('81 Code, § 330.2, § 4(A))



§ 117.22  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Chief of Police is authorized to establish such rules and
regulations which are deemed necessary to insure conformance with the
provisions of this subchapter.



('81 Code, § 330.2, § 4(C))



§ 117.23  CERTAIN ACTS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Alarm business.  No person shall engage in, conduct, or carry
on an alarm business without first applying for and receiving a permit
therefor in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter. 



   (B)   Alarm agent.  No person shall engage in, represent himself to
be, or operate as an alarm agent without first applying for and receiving a
permit therefor in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.



   (C)   Audible alarms.  No audible alarm may sound for a period of
more than fifteen (15) minutes each time the alarm is activated.



   (D)   Automatic alarm.  No person shall use or cause to be used any
telephone device or telephone attachment that automatically selects a public
telephone trunk line of the city and then reproduces any prerecorded message
to report any burglary or other emergency without the prior written consent
of the Chief of Police.



   (E)   Police station alarm board.  No person, alarm company, or
alarm agent may install, connect, or modify any alarm system terminating with
the police station of the City Police Department without prior written
permission from the Chief of Police.  Such permission must be retained by
the alarm subscriber, and may be terminated by the Chief of Police if any of
the conditions for suspension of the permit described in § 117.20 are found
to exist.



('81 Code, § 330.2, § 5)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter, for which
another penalty has not been provided, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).



   (B)   Failure of any person or company to pay the fee imposed by §
117.01, and otherwise abide by all other provisions of § 117.01, shall
constitute a violation and any person or company found guilty of a violation
shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for each violation. 



(Ord. 22-88, passed 9-22-88; Am. Ord. 11-90, passed 4-26-90)



CHAPTER 118:  FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FRANCHISE AND LOCAL DEPOSIT TAX



Section



   118.01   Imposition of tax



   118.02   Tax rate



   118.03   Lien



   118.04   Use of tax



 



   118.99   Penalty



§ 118.01  IMPOSITION OF TAX.



   There is hereby imposed on all "financial institutions", as defined in
KRS Chapter 136 located within the corporate limits of the city, for the 1996
tax year and all subsequent years, a franchise tax at the rate of 0.025% on
all deposits, as defined in KRS Chapter 136, maintained by such financial
institutions.



(Ord. 7-96, passed 7-16-96)



§ 118.02  TAX RATE.



   (A)   For transition purposes, the 1996 tax year will be treated
differently in terms of collection of taxes than for all subsequent years. 
For the 1996 tax year, the following timetable is hereby established:



   The city will issue tax bills to financial institutions no later than
May 1, 1997.  Payment of the tax shall be due with a two percent (2%)
discount by May 31, 1997, or without the discount by June 30, 1997.



   (B)   For all tax years subsequent to the 1996 tax year, the
following timetable is hereby established:



   The city will issue tax bills to financial institutions no later than
December 1 of each year.  Payment of the tax shall be due with a two percent
(2%) discount by December 31 of each year, or without the discount by January
31 of each year.



(Ord. 7-96, passed 7-16-96)



§ 118.03  LIEN.



   The City of Highland Heights, Kentucky, shall have a lien for taxes
upon any and all property subject to the tax imposed by these sections, which
lien shall be superior to all encumbrances prior or subsequent.



(Ord. 7-96, passed 7-16-96)



§ 118.04  USE OF TAX.



   All moneys collected pursuant to these sections shall be paid in to the
General Fund of the city to be used for the payment of proper expenditures as
determined by the City Council.



(Ord. 7-96, passed 7-16-96)



§ 118.99  PENALTY.



   All taxes due in accordance with these sections which are not paid
before June 30, 1997, for tax year 1996, or which are not paid before January
31, for all subsequent years tax years shall be deemed delinquent and shall
be subject to a penalty of ten percent (10%) and shall bear interest at the
rate of twelve percent (12%) per annum.



(Ord. 7-96, passed 7-16-96)



CHAPTER 119:  CHARITABLE GAMING



Section



   119.01   Registration required



   119.02   Affidavit



   119.03   Activities limited



   119.04   Location of activities



   119.05   Applicability



 



   119.99   Penalty



§ 119.01  REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   (A)   All individuals or organizations that are conducting
charitable gaming activities as defined in Kentucky Revised Statutes Chapter
528 are required to register its organization with the Highland Heights
Police Department.  The person responsible for registration shall be the
same person maintaining the Federal Internal Revenue Code charitable or
religious tax exemption.



   (B)   The organization registered shall provide:



      (1)   The name and address of the religious or charitable
organization or institution.



      (2)   Proof of a charitable or religious tax exemption
according to the Federal Internal Revenue Code for the last (five) 5 years.



      (3)   The location or premises in which the gaming activity is
conducted.



      (4)   The names of the personnel working the gaming
activities, their home addresses, dates of birth and social security
numbers.  In the event of a change, the organization shall so notify the
police at least one week in advance before the new individual begins work.



      (5)   An affidavit from each worker to the effect that he or
she is receiving no remuneration or compensation whatsoever for his or her
services.



      (6)   In the event the gaming is conducted off the religious
or charitable organization's premises, an affidavit to the effect that no
compensation is being paid, either for services or personnel to assist in
operation of the gaming activity.



      (7)   The date or dates and time scheduled for said activities.



      (8)   A weekly accounting of all money received, paid out
and/or retained for charitable use.  This accounting is to be furnished on
Wednesdays during normal working hours to the Highland Heights Police
Department.



   (C)   This chapter shall require registration by March 30, 1997 of
all existing charitable or religious organizations conducting charitable
gaming activities and after said date, any new organization shall register
prior to conducting any charitable gaming activity.



   (D)   Registration required by this chapter shall be with the
Highland Heights Police Department at 175 Johns Hill Road, between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. at least one week prior to the first event, on
forms and affidavits provided by said department.  Proof of charitable or
religious tax exemption shall be provided by the applicants.



(Ord. 04-97, passed 3-18-97)



§ 119.02  AFFIDAVIT.



   Each worker at the charitable gaming activity shall also be responsible
for completion of the affidavit required in § 119.01 (B)(5) and seeing that
it is filed with the Highland Heights Police Department at least seven (7)
days prior to working.



§ 119.03  ACTIVITIES LIMITED.



   Charitable gaming activities of any one charitable organization shall
be limited to two (2) days in any week for a period not to exceed six (6)
hours in any one day; provided however, that no charitable organization shall
have charitable gaming activities for more than two (2) consecutive days.



(Ord. 04-97, passed 3-18-97)



§ 119.04  LOCATION OF ACTIVITIES.



   Charitable gaming activities shall only be located within the confines
of the charities' principal location and/or principal place of operation
within the city provided however, that charitable gaming activities shall not
occur at any location where the charities' principal operation within the
city is the charitable gaming activity.



(Ord. 04-97, passed 3-18-97)



§ 119.05  APPLICABILITY.



   This chapter shall not apply to any city sponsored activities.



(Ord. 04-97, passed 3-18-97)



§ 119.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any organization or person failing to so register as required
by this chapter shall be guilty of a violation and subject to a fine of up to
one hundred dollars ($100.00) and each day shall be considered a separate
offense.



   (B)   Any person engaged in conducting or working at a charitable or
religious gaming activity in violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a
violation and subject to a fine of up to one hundred dollars ($100.00) and
each day shall be considered a separate offense.



CHAPTER 120:  PAYROLL TAX



Section



   120.01   Definitions



   120.02   License fee required



   120.03   Compensation earned within and without the city



   120.04   Employers to obtain license and to withhold license fees
and file returns



   120.05   Returns to be filed by employees



   120.06   Duties of City Clerk-Treasurer



   120.07   Investigative powers of City Clerk-Treasurer



   120.08   Regulations may be promulgated



   120.09   Information to be confidential



   120.10   Use of license fees



   120.11   Exemption for religious leaders



 



   120.99   Penalty



Cross reference:



   Occupational license tax, see Ch. 110



§ 120.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUSINESS, TRADE, OCCUPATION and PROFESSION.



      (1)   The doing of any kind of work, the rendering of any kind
of personal services, or the holding of any kind of position or job, within
the city, by any clerk, laborer, tradesman, manager, official or other
employee, including any  non-resident of the city, who is employed by any
employer as defined in this section, where the relationship between the
individual performing the services and the person for whom such services are
rendered is, as to those services, the legal relationship of employer and
employee, including also a partner, of a firm or an officer of a firm or a
corporation if such partner or officer receives a salary for such personal
services rendered in the business of such firm or corporation, except as
otherwise exempted herein.



      (2)   The holding of any kind of office or position, either by
election or appointment, by any federal, state, county or city officers or
employee, or employee of any governmental body of unit or administration or
agency or other entity, where the services of such official or employee are
rendered within the city.



   CITY.   The city of Highland Heights, Kentucky.



   DAILY INTEREST RATE.   The tax interest rate divided by 365.



   EMPLOYEE.  Includes any person engaging in or following any trade,
occupation or profession defined herein and/or any person who renders
services to another for a financial consideration or its equivalent, under an
express or implied contract and who is under the control and direction of the
latter, and shall include temporary, provisional, casual or part-time
employment.



   EMPLOYER.   Includes any person, business, firm, corporation,
partnership, association, governmental body or unit or administration or
agency or other entity, or any other kind of organization, who or that
employs one or more persons in any trade, occupation or profession in the
city defined herein including a self-employed person.



   FRAUD. Willful intent to evade license fees.



   GROSS RECEIPTS and COMPENSATION.   Includes the total gross amount of
all salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses, or other money payments of any
kind, or any other consideration having monetary value, which a persons
receives from or is entitled to receive from or be given credit for by his
employer for any work, done or personal services rendered in any trade,
occupation or profession, including any kind of deductions before "take home"
pay is received, but the words "gross receipts" and "compensation" shall not
mean or include amounts paid to traveling salesmen or other workers as
allowances or reimbursements for traveling or other expenses incurred in the
business of the employer, except to the extent of the excess of such amounts
over such expenses actually incurred and accounted for by the employee to his
employer.



   LICENSEE.   Includes any person required to file a return or to pay a
license fee under this chapter.



   NEGLIGENCE.   The intentional disregard of this chapter and timely
filing of return deadline.



   PERSON.   Every natural person, co-partnership, fiduciary, association
or corporation or self-employed person, firm, corporation or other business
entity without employees.  Whenever the word PERSON is used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty in the nature of a fine or imprisonment
the word, as applied to a partnership or other form of unincorporated
enterprise shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to
corporations shall mean the officers and directors thereof.



   TAX INTEREST RATE.   The interest rate as determined by the Kentucky
Commissioner of Revenue pursuant to KRS 131.183 said tax interest rate shall
be changed by regulations promulgated by the City Clerk-Treasurer on an
annual basis no later than December 31 of each year to become effective for
the following year.



   UNDERPAYMENT.   The total amount of all deficiencies: if a return was
filed on or before the last date prescribed for filing such return or the
amount of license fee imposed by this chapter, prescribed for filing such
return or the amount of license fee imposed by this chapter, if a return was
not filed on or before the last date prescribed for filing such return.



(Ord. 38-92, passed 10-22-92; Am. Ord. 01-99, passed 7-20-99; Am. Ord.
16-2003, passed 6-17-03; Am. Ord. 25-2003, passed 11-18-03)



§ 120.02  LICENSE FEE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or follow any trade,
occupation or profession within the city on or after the first day of
January, 2000, without paying a license fee for the privilege of engaging in
or following such trade, occupation or profession which license fee shall be
measured by one percent (1%) of the gross receipts of such person. Effective
January 1, 2004, the license fee of one percent (1%) shall be assessed only
against the first fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) in gross receipts of
such person for the time period of July 1, 2003 through December 31, 2003.



(Ord. 01-99, passed 7-20-99; Am. Ord. 16-2003, passed 6-17-03; Am. Ord.
19-2003, passed 8-19-03; Am. Ord. 25-2003, passed 11-18-03)  Penalty, see §
120.99



§ 120.03  COMPENSATION EARNED WITHIN AND WITHOUT THE CITY.



   In such cases where compensation is earned as the result of work done
or services performed both within and without the city, the license fee
required under the provisions of this chapter shall be computed by
determining that percentage of the compensation earned from the proportion of
the work which was done or performed within the city.  For the purpose of
such determination the City Clerk-Treasurer may require the oath of the
employee or the employer as to such work done or services performed.



(Ord. 01-99, passed 7-20-99; Am. Ord. 16-2003, passed 6-17-03; Am. Ord.
25-2003, passed 11-18-03)



§ 120.04  EMPLOYERS TO OBTAIN LICENSE, WITHHOLD LICENSE FEES AND FILE
RETURNS.



   (A)   Every employer shall obtain a license from the City
Clerk-Treasurer before the commencement of business, the fee for which shall
be one hundred dollars ($100.00); provided, however, that in such cases where
the employer has a current license from the city for the conduct of such
business under this or any other ordinance, this provision shall not apply.



   (B)   Each employer who employs one or more persons within the city
shall deduct from the pay due any such employee the amount of license fee
measured by the salary, wage, commission or other compensation due each
employee and by the employer at the time of payment thereof of any such sums
earned, due and acquired after the date of January 1, 2000.  The payment
required to be made on account of such deductions by employers shall be made
quarterly to the City Clerk-Treasurer for the quarterly periods ending on
March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31 of each year, on or before
the last day of the month next following the end of each such quarterly
period, and each employer shall at the same time make a return on a form
furnished by the city which shall include the name of such employee, his
social security number, the gross amount due and paid such employee, the
amount withheld, or in lieu thereof a true and correct copy of the social
security return filed by the employer with the Federal government; provided,
however, the failure or omission by an employer to deduct such license fee
shall not relieve such employee from the payment of such license fee and
compliance with the requirements for making returns as provided in this
chapter or with any regulation.



   (C)   Each such employer shall file with the City Clerk-Treasurer on
forms to be furnished by the city on or before the 31st day of January, 2001,
a return which shall show the gross amount of salary, wage, commission or
other compensation of each employee, the amount of license fee deducted and
paid by the employer, for all or part of the period from the 1st day of
January, 2000 to the 1st day of January, 2001, and the last known address of
each such employee and on or before January 31st in each year thereafter a
return showing the gross amount of salary, wage, commission or other
compensation of each employee and the amount of the license fee deducted and
paid by the employer during all or any part of the preceding calendar year. 
The return shall also include such other pertinent information as the City
Clerk-Treasurer may require.



   (D)   The employer shall on or before January 31 of each year
furnish to each employee to whom a salary, wage, commission, or other
compensation is due in accordance herewith, a statement showing the gross
amount of any such wage, salary, commission, or other compensation, and the
amount deducted and paid by the employer during the previous year.



(Ord. 01-99, passed 7-20-99; Am. Ord. 16-2003, passed 6-17-03; Am. Ord.
25-2003, passed 11-18-03)  Penalty, see § 120.99



§ 120.05  RETURNS TO BE FILED BY EMPLOYEES.



   (A)   When a return in form and substance satisfactory to the City
Clerk-Treasurer is not filed by an employer and the license fees are not paid
to the city by the employer, the employee for whom no return has been filed
and no payment has been made shall file a return with the City
Clerk-Treasurer on or before January 31, 2001, showing in the return his
gross receipts subject to license fees for the period from January 1, 2000,
to January 31, 2001, and shall file a return with the City Clerk-Treasurer on
or before January 31st of each year thereafter, showing in the return his
gross receipts subject to license fees during the preceding calendar year. 



   (B)   The return may be made by completing the original copy of the
statement furnished by his employer if such statement shows all of the
compensation earned by him, wherever employed during the period for which
such return is made.



   (C)   If for any reason all license fees of a person subject to the
provisions of this chapter were not withheld by his employer from his gross
receipts, the person shall file the return required by this section on a form
obtainable at the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer.



   (D)   In addition to the gross receipts earned by him, the return
shall show such other pertinent information as may be required by the City
Clerk-Treasurer.



   (E)   Each person making a return required by this section shall at
the time of filing thereof, pay to the City Clerk-Treasurer the amount of
license fee due under this chapter; provided, however, that a portion of the
license fee deducted at the source shall be deducted on the return and only
the balance, if any, shall be due and payable at the time of filing the
return. 



   (F)   The amount of any license fees which were due on October 31,
January 31, April 30 and July 31, in each year as provided herein shall bear
interest from the date the same became due at the rate tax interest rate
until paid, and the employer failing to pay the same when due shall also pay
the penalty imposed under § 120.99.



(Ord. 01-99, passed 7-20-99; Am. Ord. 16-2003, passed 6-17-03; Am. Ord.
25-2003, passed 11-18-03)



§ 120.06  DUTIES OF CITY CLERK-TREASURER.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the City Clerk-Treasurer to collect
and receive all license fees imposed by this chapter and to keep records
showing the amounts received by her from each employer.



   (B)   The City Clerk-Treasurer shall, in his/her discretion, have
the authority to extend the time of filing and returns required by this
chapter. The extension shall be upon the written request of the licensee. 
Provided, however, that any balance unpaid when payment is due under the
terms of this chapter shall bear interest at the tax interest rate until paid.



(Ord. 01-99, passed 7-20-99; Am. Ord. 16-2003, passed 6-17-03; Am. Ord.
25-2003, passed 11-18-03)



§ 120.07  INVESTIGATIVE POWERS OF CITY CLERK-TREASURER.



   The City Clerk-Treasurer or any agent or employee designated by him/her
is hereby authorized to examine the books, papers and records of any
employers or supposed employer or of any licensee or supposed licensee in
order to determine the accuracy of any return was made to ascertain the
amount of license fee due under the terms of this chapter by such
examination. Each employer or supposed employer or licensee or supposed
licensee, shall give to the City Clerk-Treasurer or to his duly authorized
agent or employee, the means, facilities, and opportunities for the making of
such examination and investigation.  The City Clerk-Treasurer is hereby
authorized to examine any person under oath concerning any gross receipts
which were or should have been shown in a return and to this end he/she may
compel the production of books, paper, records, and the attendance of all
persons before him, whether as parties or as witnesses, whom he believes to
have knowledge of such gross receipts or compensation, to the extent that any
officer empowered to administer oaths in this Commonwealth is permitted to so
order.



(Ord. 01-99, passed 7-20-99; Am. Ord. 16-2003, passed 6-17-03; Am. Ord.
25-2003, passed 11-18-03)



§ 120.08  REGULATIONS MAY BE PROMULGATED.



   The City Clerk-Treasurer acting under the direction of the City Council
is hereby charged with the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter,
and, subject to the approval of the City Council, is hereby empowered to
prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce regulations relating to any matter
or thing pertaining to the administration and enforcement of the provisions
of this chapter including, but not limited to, provisions for the
re-examination and correction of returns as to which an overpayment or
underpayment is promulgated shall be binding upon all licenses and employers.



(Ord. 01-99, passed 7-20-99; Am. Ord. 16-2003, passed 6-17-03; Am. Ord.
25-2003, passed 11-18-03)



§ 120.09  INFORMATION TO BE CONFIDENTIAL.



   Any information gained by the City Clerk-Treasurer or any other
official or agent or employee of the city as a result of any returns,
investigations, hearings or verifications required or authorized by this
chapter shall be confidential, except for official purposes and except in
accordance with proper judicial order, or as otherwise provided by law, and
any persons or agent divulging such information shall upon conviction, be
subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) or to imprisonment of not exceeding thirty (30)
days, or to both such fine and imprisonment, at the discretion of the court
or jury.  Provided, however, the City Clerk-Treasurer may disclose to the
Commissioner of Revenue of the State of Kentucky or his duly authorized
agent, all such information and right to inspect any of the books and records
of the City Clerk-Treasurer if the Commissioner of Revenue of the State of
Kentucky or his duly authorized agent so requests, all such information and
right to inspect any of the books and records of the City Clerk-Treasurer if
the Commissioner of Revenue of the State of Kentucky grants to the City
Clerk-Treasurer the reciprocal right to obtain information from the files and
records of the Department of Revenue of the State of Kentucky and maintains
the privileged character of the information so furnished to him.  Provided,
further, that the city may publish statistics based on such information in
such a manner as not to reveal data respecting the gross receipts of any
person.



(Ord. 01-99, passed 7-20-99; Am. Ord. 16-2003, passed 6-17-03; Am. Ord.
25-2003, passed 11-18-03)



§ 120.10  USE OF LICENSE FEES.



   All money derived from license fees under the provisions of this
chapter shall be paid to the City Clerk-Treasurer and placed to the credit of
the General Revenue Fund of the city and shall be used and expended in
defraying the (a) current, general and incidental expenses of the city,
and/or (b) Capital improvements.



(Ord. 01-99, passed 7-20-99; Am. Ord. 16-2003, passed 6-17-03; Am. Ord.
25-2003, passed 11-18-03)



§ 120.11  EXCEPTION FOR RELIGIOUS LEADERS.



   (A)   No occupational license shall be imposed on a minister of
religion who has been ordained in accordance with the ceremonial ritual or
discipline of a recognized church, religious sect, or religious organization,
to teach and preach its public worship in the performance of one or more of
those duties. However, it is not intended to exempt such ordained ministers
of religion from the necessity of paying occupational license fees for work
done or services performed in the city in activities not connected with
his/her regular duties as a minister of religion.



   (B)   Nothing in division (A) of this section shall be construed to
mean that employees of churches, religious congregations, or religious
societies of all creeds (except duly ordained ministers) shall be relieved
from the payment of occupational license fees in compliance with all
regulations of the city.



(Ord. 25-2003, passed 11-18-03)



§ 120.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   All license fees imposed by this chapter which remain unpaid
after they become due shall bear interest at the tax interest rate and any
person who has failed to pay such license fees when the same became due shall
also be charged a penalty of five percent (5%) if the delay is not more than
one month, or fraction thereof, with an additional five percent (5%) for each
additional month or fraction thereof, by not over a total of twenty-five
percent (25%) of the amount of such unpaid license fees.  Any person or
employer who fails or refuses to withhold any license fee payable under this
chapter, or who fails to pay such fees, after withholding the same, to the
City Clerk-Treasurer at the time it is due as provided under the terms of §
120.04, shall become liable to the city for such fees, as well as for the
interest thereon  at the tax interest rate and for the aforesaid penalty;
provided, that interest shall be charged at the daily interest rate on a per
day basis for each day that said fees remain unpaid under § 120.04.



   (B)   Any person or employer who shall fail, neglect or refuse to
make any return required by this chapter or any licensee who fails to make
any return required by this chapter or any licensee who shall fail, neglect
or refuse to secure or pay a license fee, or any employer who shall fail to
withhold the license fees or to pay over to the city the license fees,
penalties or interest imposed by this chapter, or any employer who withholds
any such interest imposed by this chapter, or any employer who withholds any
such fee of any employee who shall not pay same to the City Clerk-Treasurer
or any agent person or employer who shall refuse to permit the City
Clerk-Treasurer or any agent or employee designated by him, in writing, to
examine his books, records and make any incomplete, false or fraudulent
return, or who shall attempt to do anything whatsoever to avoid the full
disclosure of the amount of gross receipts or compensation in order to avoid
the payment of the whole, or any part of a license fee shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine or penalty of not less than twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), or imprisonment
of not more than thirty (30) days, or to both such fine or imprisonment, for
each offense.  Such criminal penalties shall be in addition to the penalties
imposed under division (A) of this section.



   (C)   Negligence penalty.  If any part of any underpayment of any
tax imposed by this chapter is due to negligence or intentional disregard of
this chapter (but without intent to defraud) there shall be added to the tax
an amount equal to twenty-five percent (25%) of the tax.



   (D)   Fraud penalty.  If any part of any underpayments of tax
required to be shown on a return is due to fraud, there shall be added to the
tax an amount equal to fifty percent (50%) of the tax.



(Ord. 01-99, passed 7-20-99; Am. Ord. 16-2003, passed 6-17-03; Am. Ord.
25-2003, passed 11-18-03)



CHAPTER 121:  LICENSE REVOCATION



Section



   121.01   Hearings



   121.02   License denial



   121.03   Inspections



   121.04   Nuisance



   121.05   Administering regulations



 



   121.99   Penalty



§ 121.01  HEARINGS.



   Any license issued by the city may, with notice to the holder thereof,
and after a hearing as herein provided, be revoked or suspended by the City
Council for the following reasons:



   (A)   If any person or business properly licensed in the city is
convicted of a felony, a misdemeanor for which a jail sentence may be
imposed, any other crime in which moral turpitude is involved, or any other
crime which directly relates to the business, occupation, or profession for
which a license was issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter.  However,
in making the decision to revoke or suspend the license, the City Council
shall consider:



      (1)   The nature of the seriousness of the crime for which a
person was convicted,



      (2)   The relationship of the crime to the purposes of
regulating the business, occupation or profession for which the license was
issued;



      (3)   The relationship of the crime to the ability, capacity,
and fitness required to perform the duties and to discharge the
responsibilities of the operation of the business, occupation or profession
for which the license is issued; and



      (4)   The extent to which the person may have been
successfully rehabilitated.



   (B)   If there shall occur in, on, or at the premises covered by the
license, anything which constitutes a nuisance or is obnoxious to the morals
and general welfare of the public; or



   (C)   If any person is disorderly in, on, or at the premises covered
by the license and disturbs the good order of the community or the license
holder suffers or permits any disorderly conduct, in, on, or at the licensed
premises; or if the holder of the license shall misrepresent any material
facts as to the kind of business in his return or any other fact necessary or
proper to determine the amount of license tax to be paid.



   (D)   When the Mayor has probable cause to believe that a license
should be revoked for any of the causes enumerated herein, it shall be his
duty to prefer charges against the holder of the license with the City
Clerk/Treasurer. The charges shall be in writing and each charge shall be
clearly set out. Within fourteen (14) calendar days after the filing of the
charges, the time of the hearing thereon shall be mailed to the licensee at
the address shown on the license and a hearing before the City Council shall
be held within thirty (30) days after the filing of the charges with the
Council. The evidence shall be transcribed and the action and the decision of
the council on the charges shall be reduced to writing and recorded in the
minutes book.



(Ord. 12-2004, passed 12-21-04)



§ 121.02  LICENSE DENIAL.



   No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business and no
permit shall be issued for any thing, or act, if the premises and the
building to be used for the purposes do not fully comply with all applicable
state statutes and ordinances of the city. No license or permit shall be
issued for the conduct of any business or performance of any act which would
involve any violation of the zoning ordinance of the city.



(Ord. 12-2004, passed 12-21-04)



§ 121.03  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Whenever inspection of the premises used for, or in connection
with the operation of a licensed business or occupation are provided for or
required by ordinance, or are reasonably necessary to secure compliance with
any ordinance provision or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty
of the licensee, or the person in charge of the premises to be inspected, to
admit thereto for the purpose of making the inspection, any officer or
employee of the city who is authorized or directed to make such inspection at
any reasonable time that admission is requested.



   (B)   Whenever an analysis of any commodity of material is
reasonably necessary to secure conformance with any ordinance provision or to
detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee to give to
any authorized officer or employee of the city requesting the same sufficient
samples of such material or commodity for such analysis.



   (C)   In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the
Mayor may revoke the license of any licensed proprietor of any licensed
business in the city who refuses to permit any such officer or employee who
is authorized to make such inspection or take such sample to make the
inspection, or take an adequate sample of the commodity, or who interferes
with such officer or employee while in the performance of his duty in making
such inspection. No license shall be revoked for such cause unless written
demand is made upon the licensee or the person in charge of the premises, in
the name of the city, stating that such inspecting or sample is desired at
the time it is sought to make the inspection or obtain the sample.



(Ord. 12-2004, passed 12-21-04)



§ 121.04  NUISANCE.



   No business, licensed or not, shall be conducted or operated so as to
amount to a nuisance in fact.



(Ord. 12-2004, passed 12-21-04)



§ 121.05  ADMINISTERING REGULATIONS.



   (A)   This chapter shall be administered by the City
Clerk/Treasurer, under the direction of the Mayor. The City Clerk/ Treasurer,
with the approval of the Mayor shall have the authority to issue and
promulgate such regulations as he/she may consider necessary for the
administration of this chapter, provided such regulations are not
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter; and provided further that
such regulations when promulgated are approved by the City Council. No
license shall be issued for any unlawful activity, or for any business that
the City Clerk/Treasurer, with the approval of the Mayor, shall consider to
be detrimental to the public welfare, or contrary to the public interest, but
any such decision to refuse to issue a license may be appealed to the City
Council.



   (B)   The City Clerk/ Treasurer shall each year give notice to every
person, association, firm or corporation which is carrying on any trade,
profession, occupation or business in the city to take out the license and
pay the required license fee. If any person, association, firm or corporation
should fail to comply, the City Clerk/Treasurer shall after June 1 and
monthly thereafter, report in writing, the names, address, and nature of the
trade, profession, occupation or business being carried on by such
delinquencies to the Mayor. Notice shall be given to such persons,
associations, firms or corporations that they shall be subject to the penalty
provisions set forth in this chapter.



(Ord. 12-2004, passed 12-21-04)



§ 121.99  PENALTY. 



   Revocation of the license or permit pursuant to this chapter or other
termination or forfeiture provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
following penalty:



   (A)   Loss of license or permit and forfeiture of fees paid
therefore;



   (B)   Upon conviction of a violation of this ordinance be subject to
a fine or penalty of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00). Such criminal penalties shall be in addition to
any other penalties imposed under this chapter.



(Ord. 12-2004, passed 12-21-04)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



Chapter



      130.   OFFENSES AGAINST MUNICIPAL REGULATIONS



CHAPTER 130:  OFFENSES AGAINST MUNICIPAL REGULATIONS



Section



Offenses Against Public Order



   130.01   Interference with safety personnel and peace officers



   130.02   Curfew



   130.03   Discharge of firearms; hunting; dangerous missiles



   130.04   False fire alarm



Sale of Drug Paraphernalia



   130.20   License required for sale of drug paraphernalia



   130.21   Application for license



   130.22   License fee



   130.23   Prohibiting sale to underage persons



   130.24   Record of sales to be kept



   130.25   Items covered under regulatory provisions



Toxic Glues



   130.35   Definitions



   130.36   Possession, sale or transfer of toxic glue



   130.37   Inducing intoxicated condition



 



   130.99   Penalty



OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER



§ 130.01  INTERFERENCE WITH SAFETY PERSONNEL AND PEACE OFFICERS.



   (A)   No person shall willfully resist, obstruct or interfere with
any firefighter, paramedic or other life squad or health or safety official
employed by or acting for the city in their official capacity and the
discharge of their duty as such official.



('81 Code, § 310.2)



   (B)   No person shall willfully resist, obstruct or interfere with a
police officer of the city or any other peace officer in the discharge of his
or their official duties.



('81 Code, § 330.2)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.02  CURFEW.



   (A)   Curfew for minors.



      (1)   It is a curfew violation for a child 13, 14, 15, 16, or
17 years of age to be in a public place:



         (a)   After 1:00 a.m. and before 5:00 a.m. on Saturday
or Sunday;



         (b)   After midnight on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday, or Thursday; or



         (c)   Before 5:00 a.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday,
Thursday, or Friday.



      (2)   It is a curfew violation for a child under thirteen (13)
years of age to be in a public place after 11:00 p.m. or before 6:00 a.m. on
any day.



   (B)   Exemptions.  This section does not apply to a child who is:



      (1)   Accompanied by his parent, guardian, or custodian;



      (2)   Accompanied by an adult specified by his parent,
guardian, or custodian;



      (3)   Carrying out an errand or other lawful activity as
directed by his parent, guardian, or custodian; or



      (4)   Participating in, going to, or returning from:



         (a)   Lawful employment; or



         (b)   A lawful athletic, educational, entertainment,
religious, or social event. 



   (C)   Authority of police during curfew hours.



      (1)   Any police officer may stop and question any minor
suspected of violating this section's provisions and may take the minor into
custody when found violating provisions of this section.  The officer shall
take the minor to the city police headquarters where the name of the minor's
parent, guardian, or person having legal custody of him shall be
ascertained. 



      (2)   The parent, guardian, or person having legal custody
shall be notified of the child's detention as required by KRS 610.200 and
summoned by the investigating officer to appear at police headquarters to
assist in the completion of the investigation.  If the parent, guardian, or
person having legal custody fails to appear within two (2) hours from the
time the child was taken into custody, the investigating officer shall follow
the requirements set forth in KRS Chapter 610 and other applicable provisions
of the State Unified Juvenile Code, regarding detention or release of the
child.



      (3)   Unless the nature of the offense or other circumstances
are such as to indicate the necessity of keeping the child in secure custody,
the officer shall release the child to the custody of his parent, guardian,
person having legal custody, or other responsible adult.



      (4)   If the investigating or apprehending officer is
satisfied that a violation of division (A) of this section has occurred, he
shall cause formal charges to be filed requiring the child and his parent,
guardian, or person having legal custody to appear in the county court to
answer the charge of a violation of division (A).



      (5)   If formal charges are to be brought, before a child is
released to the custody of a parent, guardian, person with legal custody, or
other responsible adult, the investigating officer shall obtain a written
promise signed by such person that the person will bring the child to the
county court at the stated time or at such time as the court may order.  The
written promise, along with the written report of the investigating officer,
shall be submitted to the county court as required by KRS 610.200.



   (D)   Any child violating division (A) of this section shall be
subject to the procedures and penalties provided for by the State Unified
Juvenile Code.  Any parent, guardian, or person having legal custody of a
child who violates any provision of division (A) of this section may be
subject to the financial penalty provided for in KRS 610.180.



§ 130.03  DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS; HUNTING; DANGEROUS MISSILES.



   (A)   The discharge of firearms of any character within the city
limits is prohibited.  The hunting of any game or fowl within the city
limits is likewise prohibited.



   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent a property owner from
protecting his property, his crops, flowers or any accretions thereto from
destruction by said game or fowl, regardless of the property of others. 
Such protection to his property may be afforded by the property owner in
person, or by his duty authorized agent specially commissioned for this
service.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge from a
firearm, catapult, rugger sling, air rifle or other weapon or instrument a
projectile of any kind within the city limits.



('81 Code, § 1020.5)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.04  FALSE FIRE ALARM.



   (A)   Definition.  For the purpose of this section, SUMMON shall
mean the calling of the Fire Department by means of the regularly maintained
alarm or signal system, telephone or any method by which the Department or
part thereof will respond to call. 



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person purposely to summon all,
or any part or branch of the Fire Department, except in case of fire or other
emergency to cope with which the Fire Department is usually used.



   (C)   Any person aiding, abetting, assisting or encouraging another
in a violation of this section shall be deemed guilty as a principal.



('81 Code, § 1020.6)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Cross-reference:



   Securing alarm systems, see Chapter 117



SALE OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA



§ 130.20  LICENSE REQUIRED FOR SALE OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons as principal, clerk,
agent or servant to sell any items, effect, paraphernalia, accessory or other
thing which is designed or marketed for use with illegal cannabis or drugs,
as defined by Kentucky Revised Statutes, without obtaining a license
therefor.  Such license shall be in addition to any or all other licenses
held by the applicant. 



('81 Code, § 430.1 § 1)  (Ord. 25-83, passed 12-8-83)  Penalty, see §
130.99



§ 130.21  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   Application to sell any time, effect, paraphernalia, accessory or thing
which is designed or marketed for use with illegal cannabis or drugs shall be
accompanied by affidavits of the applicant and each and every employee
authorized to sell such items that such person has never been convicted of a
drug-related offense.



('81 Code, § 430.1 § 2)  (Ord. 25-83, passed 12-8-83)



§ 130.22  LICENSE FEE.



   The license fee for items designed or marketed for use with illegal
cannabis or drugs shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).



('81 Code, § 430.1 § 6)  (Ord. 25-83, passed 12-8-83)



§ 130.23  PROHIBITING SALE TO UNDERAGE PERSONS.



   It shall be unlawful to sell or give items described in § 130.20 in
any form to any male or female person under eighteen (18) years of age.



('81 Code, § 430.1 § 3)  (Ord. 25-83, passed 12-8-83)  Penalty, see §
130.99



§ 130.24  RECORD OF SALES TO BE KEPT.



   Every licensee must keep a record of every item, effect, paraphernalia,
accessory or other thing which is designed or marketed for use with illegal
cannabis or drugs which is sold and this record shall be open to the
inspection of any police officer at any time during the hours of business. 
Such record shall contain the name and address of the purchaser, the name and
quantity of the product, the date and time of the sale and the licensee's or
agent of the licensee's signature.  Such records shall be retained for not
less than two (2) years.



('81 Code, § 430.1 § 4)  (Ord. 25-83, passed 12-8-83)  Penalty, see §
130.99



§ 130.25  ITEMS COVERED UNDER REGULATORY PROVISIONS.



   The following items are deemed covered under this regulatory chapter as
items, effects, paraphernalia, accessories or things which are designed or
marketed for use with illegal cannabis or drugs:



   (A)   Cigarette papers.  White paper or tobacco oriented paper not
necessarily designed for use with illegal cannabis or drugs may be
displayed.  Other paper of colorful design, names oriented for use with
illegal cannabis or drugs and displayed are covered.



   (B)   Roach clips.  Designed for use with illegal cannabis or drugs
and therefore covered.



   (C)   Pipes.  If displayed away from the proximity of nonwhite
paper or tobacco oriented paper, and not displayed within proximity of roach
clips, or literature encouraging illegal use of cannabis or illegal drugs are
not covered; otherwise, covered.



   (D)   Paraphernalia.  If displayed with roach clips or literature
encouraging illegal use of cannabis or illegal drugs it is covered.



('81 Code, § 430.1 § 5)  (Ord. 25-83, passed 12-8-83)



TOXIC GLUES



§ 130.35  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 



   TOXIC GLUES.  Any glue, adhesive, cement, mucilage, plastic solvent or
other adhesive containing toluene, acetone, xylene, butyl alcohol, hexane,
tricresyl phosphate or other toxic ingredients.



('81 Code, § 1020.2 § 1)



§ 130.36  POSSESSION, SALE OR TRANSFER OF TOXIC GLUE.



   (A)   No person shall, for the purpose of violating or aiding
another to violate any provision of this section, possess, buy, sell,
transfer, possess or receive any toxic glue.



   (B)   No person shall sell or transfer possession of any toxic glue
to another person under twenty-one (21) years of age.  One tube of glue may
be sold at any one time to a person under twenty-one (21) years of age,
provided that the tube is included in a kit for the assembly of a model
airplane, automobile, boat or other unassembled model, or that a kit not
having glue packaged therein is sold in conjunction with the sale of one tube
of glue.



('81 Code, § 1020.2 § 2)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.37  INDUCING INTOXICATED CONDITION.



   No person shall inhale, drink, eat or otherwise introduce into his
respiratory or circulatory system any toxic glue with the intent of becoming
intoxicated, elated, paralyzed, irrational or in any manner changing,
distorting, or disturbing his eyesight, thinking process, judgment, balance
or coordination.  For the purpose of this subchapter, any such condition so
induced shall be deemed to be an intoxicated condition.



('81 Code, § 1020.2 § 3)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever shall violate any provision of this chapter for which
another penalty has not been provided shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).



   (B)   Whoever shall violate § 130.01 shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not more than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both.



('81 Code, § 310.2)



   (C)   Any person violating any provision of §§ 130.20 through
130.25 shall be guilty of a violation and shall be fined not less than ten
dollars ($10.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first
offense and succeeding offenses.  Each day that such violation shall
continued shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.



('81 Code, § 430.1 § 7)  (Ord. 25-83, passed 12-8-83)



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



Chapter



      150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS



      151.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



      152.   ZONING CODE



      153.   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN



      154.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION



CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   150.01   Adoption of Kentucky Building Code, Kentucky Residential
Code, Kentucky Plumbing Code, and Standards of Safety; enforcement agents;
building inspection program



   150.02   Application



   150.03   Building permit fees



   150.04   Fire Prevention Code



   150.05   Field Survey Required



   150.06   Carbon Monoxide detector required



Vacant Property and Buildings



   150.20   Definitions



   150.21   Acquisition of property by eminent domain; disposition of
property



   150.22   Determination of Commission that property is blighted or
deteriorated; written findings



   150.23   Written notification to owner; conditions to be corrected



   150.24   Institution of eminent domain proceedings



   150.25   Vacant Property Review Commission



   150.26   Procedures for abatement



Identifying House Numbers



   150.35   Display of identifying numbers of fronts of buildings;
standards



   150.36   Display of number on mailbox



   150.37   Display of permanent signs on buildings in complexes



   150.38   Removal or alteration of numbers prohibited



Regulation of Electricians



   150.50   Definitions



   150.51   Adoption of building code



   150.52   Northern Kentucky Electric Authority



   150.53   License required



   150.54   Agreement of reciprocity



   150.55   Electric permits



Maintenance of Vacant, Foreclosed Properties



   150.70   Definitions



   150.71   Registration of vacant foreclosed residential property



   150.72   Fees



   150.73   Maintenance obligations of mortgagees



   150.74   Point of sale inspections on vacant, foreclosed properties



   150.75   Joint and several liability



 



   150.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 150.01  ADOPTION OF KENTUCKY BUILDING CODE, KENTUCKY RESIDENTIAL CODE,
KENTUCKY PLUMBING CODE, AND STANDARDS OF SAFETY; ENFORCEMENT AGENTS; BUILDING
INSPECTION PROGRAM.



   (A)   The Kentucky Building Code, as contained in 815 KAR 7:120; the
Kentucky Residential Code, as contained in 815 KAR 7:125; the Kentucky
Plumbing Code, as contained in Chapter 20, Title 815 of the Kentucky
Administrative Regulations; the Kentucky Standards of Safety, as contained in
Chapter 10, Title 815 of the Kentucky Administrative Regulations, together
with any amendments, are hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth in
this code of ordinances.  Copies of the above codes and any amendments
thereto shall be placed on file in the Office of the Campbell County Clerk
where they shall be available for public inspection during normal business
hours.



   (B)   The Campbell County Fiscal Court Department of Building
Inspections shall be designated as the local enforcement agent/agency for the
Kentucky Building Code and Kentucky Residential Code. All building code
inspections shall be performed by persons certified by the Kentucky
Department of Housing, Buildings and Construction. All electrical inspections
shall be performed by persons certified by the Kentucky Department of
Housing, Buildings and Construction as an electrical inspector.



   (C)   The Volunteer Fire Department, a nonprofit organization,
organized under the laws of the Commonwealth of Kentucky, and all other
designated officers, agents, and employees of the city are hereby charged
with the enforcement of the provisions of the Standards of Safety.



(‘81 Code, § 930.2, § 2)



   (D)   The State Plumbing Inspector is charged with the enforcement
of the provisions of the Kentucky Plumbing Code.



   (E)   A certain document, copies of which are on file in the office
of the City Clerk of the City of Highland Heights, Kentucky, being marked and
designated as the 2006 International Property Maintenance Code and all other
updated editions as published by the International Code Council, Inc., be and
is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Highland
Heights, in the State of Kentucky; for the control of buildings and
structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said 2006 International
Property Maintenance Code and all other updated editions are hereby referred
to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully set forth in this section. 
Any references to the BOCA Code in the City of Highland Heights ordinances
are to be considered a reference to the 2006 International Property
Maintenance Code and any subsequent editions to said code.



   (F)   Building inspection program.



      (1)   Pursuant to KRS 198B.060(8), a building inspection
program is hereby established in the city for application to all buildings
subject to 815 KAR 7:120, the Kentucky Building Code.



      (2)   The building inspection program of the Campbell County
Fiscal Court Department of Building Inspection shall include plan review and
inspections of structures subject to 815 KAR 7:125, the Kentucky Residential
Code.



(Ord. 25-91,  passed  10-10-91;  Am.  Ord.  5-93,  passed  2-11-93;
Am. Ord. 02-2002, passed 4-16-02; Am. Ord. 05-2009, passed 4-7-09; Am. Ord.
07-2016, passed 8-2-16; Am. Ord. 09-2018, passed 1-15-19)  Penalty, see §
150.99



§ 150.02  APPLICATION.



   The application of the State Building Code may be extended to all
single-family dwellings in the city which are to be constructed or remodeled,
if so designated by the city by ordinance of  City Council.  This action is
authorized under KRS 198B.010(5).



('81 Code, § 930.1 § 2)



§ 150.03  BUILDING PERMIT FEES.



   The fees for permits and inspections shall be as provided for in the
Campbell County and Municipal Planning and Zoning Commission’s Building
Inspection Department, Planning, and Zoning Fee Schedule.



(Ord. 21-90, passed 9-27-90; Am. Ord. 01-97, passed 1-7-97; Am. Ord. 08-97,
passed  -  - ; Am. Ord. 07-2014, passed 8-5-14; Am. Ord. 09-2018, passed
1-15-19; Am. Ord. 03-2019, passed 3-5-19)



§ 150.04  FIRE PREVENTION CODE.



   (A)   The Kentucky Standards of Safety (Fire Prevention Code) as
promulgated in 815 KAR 10:040 by the Commissioner of the Department of
Housing, Buildings and Construction on the advice and recommendation of the
State Fire Marshal, is hereby adopted in full.  Copies of the code book are
available through the Department of Housing, Buildings and Construction, 1047
US 127 South, Frankfort, Kentucky 40601.



   (B)   The city Building Inspector shall be designated as the local
enforcement agent for the Standards of Safety as appointed by the city.



   (C)   The requirements for permits and required fees shall be as
provided for in a schedule located in the office of the City Clerk.



   (D)   All final decisions of the Fire Code official of the city
shall be applicable to a local appeals board as established by the Highland
Heights Fire Chief.



(Ord. 27-91, passed 11-14-91)



§ 150.05  FIELD SURVEY REQUIRED.



   (A)   Immediately prior to the pouring of the footings for the
foundation of any dwelling, building or building addition, including decks,
swimming pools and fences the builder shall have performed a field survey by
a registered professional land surveyor/engineer that clearly marks with
surveyor stakes the precise location of the planned dwelling, building or
building addition and a prepared site plan indicating field work submitted to
the Zoning Administrator.



   (B)   No construction on the planned dwelling or building or
building additions shall begin until the Zoning Administrator or the Building
Inspector has verified that the field survey required pursuant to this
section has been performed and that the proposed dwelling, building or
building addition is in compliance with all city ordinances and codes.



   (C)   No work shall be performed in placing the dwelling, building
or building addition in its final resting place until the field survey with
accompanying surveyor stakes has been completed and inspected by the Building
Inspector and Zoning Administrator.



   (D)   If the Building Inspector or Zoning Administrator in their
sole discretion determine that this section has not been complied with or is
not being complied with, then a stop-work order shall issue immediately
preventing any work from being conducted on the premises.



   (E)   The Building Inspector and/or Zoning Administrator shall at
their sole discretion require a field survey to be performed at any time
during construction to verify lot lines, building locations, and/or building
set back distances.



   (F)   This section is to be consistent with and in addition to the
Kentucky Building Code and is not meant to supplant any requirements of that
code.



   (G)   Any surveys required by this section shall be at the sole
expense of the builder and/or owner.



   (H)   If there is physical evidence of the property corners and/or
property lines that clearly defines the limits of the property, the Building
Inspector or Zoning Administrator may waive the requirements for a new survey
and allow a site plan to be prepared using the existing defined limits. 
Evidence can include survey markers, curb notches, monuments, railroad
spikes, iron pins, trees and fences without supporting survey be previous
survey drawings (trees and fences without supporting survey documents are not
acceptable as proof of location).  The submitted site plan shall accurately
show the property lines, existing buildings and construction to scale.



(Ord. 26-94, passed 8-18-94; Am. Ord. 03-2004, passed 5-4-04)



§ 150.06  CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTORS REQUIRED.



   (A)   All new residential and non-residential buildings constructed
within the city shall be equipped with a carbon monoxide detector approved
under the latest standard of Underwriter Laboratories or Factory Mutual
System.  Multi-family buildings shall have separate detectors in each unit.



   (B)   Owners of all existing multi-family apartment buildings,
condominium units and non-residential buildings shall be responsible for
installing carbon monoxide detectors in each unit within six (6) months of
the effective date of this section.



   (C)   All carbon monoxide detectors shall contain an alarm signaling
device capable of being audible in all bedrooms within the dwelling unit when
all interior doors are closed.



   (D)   Carbon monoxide detectors shall be installed and maintained in
accordance with manufacturer's instructions.



(Ord. 01-96, passed 5-16-96)



VACANT PROPERTY AND BUILDINGS



§ 150.20  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BLIGHTED or DETERIORATED PROPERTY.   Any vacant structure or vacant or
unimproved lot or parcel of ground in a predominantly built-up neighborhood:



      (1)   Which because of physical condition or use is regarded
as a public nuisance at common law or has been declared a public nuisance in
accordance with the city housing, building, plumbing, fire or related codes;



      (2)   Which because of physical condition, use or occupancy is
considered an attractive nuisance to children, including but not limited to
abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations, and unsafe fences or
structures;



      (3)   Which because it is dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe,
vermin-infested or lacking in the facilities and equipment required by the
housing code of the city, has been designated by the department responsible
for enforcement of the code unfit for human habitation;



      (4)   Which is a fire hazard, or is otherwise dangerous to the
safety of persons or property;



      (5)   From which the utilities, plumbing, heating, sewerage or
other facilities have been disconnected, destroyed, removed, or rendered
ineffective so that the property is unfit for its intended use;



      (6)   Which by reason of neglect or lack of maintenance has
become a place for accumulation of trash and debris, or a haven for rodents
or other vermin;



      (7)   Which has been tax delinquent for a period of at least
three (3) years; or



      (8)   Which has not been rehabilitated within the time
constraints placed upon the owner by the appropriate code enforcement agency.



   REDEVELOPMENT.   The planning or replanning, design or redesign,
acquisition, clearance, development and disposal of any combination of these,
of a property in the preparation of such property for residential, and
related uses as may be appropriate or necessary.



   RESIDENTIAL AND RELATED USE.   Residential property for sale or rental
and related uses; including, but not limited to, park and recreation areas,
neighborhood community service, and neighborhood parking lots.



   VACANT PROPERTY REVIEW COMMISSION.   A commission established by
ordinance to review vacant properties to make a written determination of
blight and deterioration.



('81 Code, § 830.4, § I)  (Ord. 830.4, passed 8-8-84)



§ 150.21  ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY BY EMINENT DOMAIN; DISPOSITION OF
PROPERTY.



   The city may acquire, by eminent domain pursuant to KRS Chapter 416,
any property determined to be blighted or deteriorated pursuant to this
subchapter, and shall have the power to hold, clear, manage or dispose of
property so acquired, for residential and related use pursuant to the
provisions of this subchapter.



('81 Code, § 830.4 § IV)  (Ord. 830.4, passed 8-8-84)



§ 150.22  DETERMINATION OF COMMISSION THAT PROPERTY IS BLIGHTED OR
DETERIORATED; WRITTEN FINDINGS.



   (A)   The City Council shall not institute eminent domain
proceedings pursuant to this subchapter unless the Vacant Property Review
Commission has certified that the property is blighted or deteriorated.  A
property which has been referred to the Commission by a city agency as 
blighted or deteriorated may only be certified to the City Council as
blighted or deteriorated after the Commission has determined:



      (1)   That the owner of the property or designated agent has
been sent an order by the appropriate city agency to eliminate the conditions
which are in violation of local codes or law;



      (2)   That the property is vacant;



      (3)   That the property is blighted and deteriorated;



      (4)   That the Commission has notified the property owner or
designated agent that the property has been determined to be blighted or
deteriorated and the time period for correction of such condition has expired
and the property owner or agent has failed to comply with the notice; and



      (5)   The Planning Commission has determined that the reuse of
the property for residential and related use is in keeping with the
Comprehensive Plan.



('81 Code, § 830.4, § V(1))



   (B)   The findings required by division (A) of this section shall be
in writing and included in the report to the City Council.



('81 Code, § 830.4, § V(2))  (Ord. 830.4, passed 8-8-84)



§ 150.23  WRITTEN NOTIFICATION TO OWNER; CONDITIONS TO BE CORRECTED.



   (A)   The Vacant Property Review Commission shall notify the owner
of the property or a designated agent that a determination of blight or
deterioration has been made and that failure to eliminate the conditions
causing the blight shall render the property subject to condemnation by the
city under this subchapter.  Notice shall be mailed to the owner or
designated agent by certified mail, return receipt requested.  However, if
the address of the owner or a designated agent is unknown and cannot be
ascertained by the Commission in the exercise of reasonable diligence, copies
of the notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the property
affected.  The written notice sent to the owner or his agent shall describe
the conditions that render the property blighted and deteriorated, and shall
demand abatement of the conditions within ninety (90) days of the receipt of
such notice.



('81 Code, § 830.4, § V(3))



   (B)   An extension of the 90-day time period may be granted by the
Commission if the owner or designated agent demonstrates that such period is
insufficient to correct the conditions cited in the notice.



('81 Code, § 830.4, § V(4))  (Ord. 830.4, passed 8-8-84)



§ 150.24  INSTITUTION OF EMINENT DOMAIN PROCEEDINGS.



   The City Council may institute eminent domain proceedings pursuant to
KRS Chapter 416 against any property which has been certified as blighted or
deteriorated by the Vacant Property Review Commission if it finds:



   (A)   That such property has deteriorated to such an extent as to
constitute a serious and growing menace to the public health, safety and
welfare;



   (B)   That such property is likely to continue to deteriorate unless
corrected;



   (C)   That the continued deterioration of such property may
contribute to the blighting or deterioration of the area immediately
surrounding the property; and



   (D)   That the owner of such property ha failed to correct the
deterioration of the property.



('81 Code, § 830.4, § VI)  (Ord. 830.4, passed 8-8-84)



§ 150.25  VACANT PROPERTY REVIEW COMMISSION.



   (A)   There is hereby created a Vacant Property Review Commission
composed of three (3) city residents which shall certify properties as
blighted or deteriorated to the City Council upon request of any
Councilmember, Chief Administrative Officer, any Building Inspector or
Planning and Zoning Commission member, the Police Chief or Fire Chief, or the
City Clerk-Treasurer.



('81 Code, § 830.4, § II)



   (B)   (1)   Members of the Vacant Property Review Commission
shall be appointed by the Mayor and approved by City Council.



      (2)   No officer or employee of the city whose duties include
enforcement of city housing, building, plumbing or fire related codes shall
be appointed to the Commission.



      (3)   No officer or employee of the city, or of the Vacant
Property Review Commission, who in the course of his duties is required to
participate in the determination of property blight or deterioration or the
issuance of notices on code violations which may lead to a determination of
blight or deterioration, shall acquire any interest in any property declared
to be blighted or deteriorated.  If such officer or employee owns or has
financial interest, direct or indirect, in any property certified to be
blighted or deteriorated, he shall immediately disclose, in writing, such
interest to the Commission and to the City Council and such disclosure shall
be entered in the minutes of the Commission and of the City Council. 
Failure to so disclose such interest shall constitute misconduct in office. 
No payment shall be made to any officer or employee for any property or
interest therein acquired by the city from such officer or employee unless
the amount of such payment is fixed by court order in eminent domain
proceedings, or unless payment is unanimously approved by the City Council. 



('81 Code, § 830.4, § III)  (Ord. 830.4, passed 8-8-84)



§ 150.26  PROCEDURES FOR ABATEMENT.



   (A)   Neglected vacant and/or abandoned real property is hereby
considered a public nuisance.



   (B)   Whenever a designee of the city observes a neglected vacant
and/or abandoned real property that is in violation of any section of the
currently enforced edition of the International Property Maintenance Code or
any applicable section of the Highland Heights Code of Ordinances or Highland
Heights zoning ordinance, such designee shall make reasonable attempts to
notify the property owner by regular mail, certified mail, or by posting
notices on the property/structure affected by such notice.  When these
reasonable attempts to notify the property owner of such violations have
failed the designee may direct the Public Works Department or other
designated agent to enter upon the neglected vacant and/or abandoned property
to abate the violations.



   (C)   This abatement may include, but is not limited to:  cutting
grass and weeds to discourage pest infestation, removing trash and rubbish,
securing principal and/or accessory structure against intrusion, and removing
dangerous structures or appurtenances.



   (D)   The Public Works Director or designated agent shall keep an
accurate account of expenses incurred for the abatement, which shall be
charged against and paid by the owner of record.  The owner of record shall
have thirty (30) days to make payment in full for services provided for the
abatement of such public nuisance.  Failure of the owner of record to make
payment in full within the specified time period may result in filing a lien
against the property, or filing a lawsuit, surcharging the property’s tax
bill, or instituting any action necessary to collect the debt.  The owner of
record shall pay any and all costs associated with the collection of the
debt, including but not limited to the cost of labor, materials, contract
fees, penalties, interest, attorney’s fees and court costs.



(Ord. 10-2008, passed 6-17-08; Am. Ord. 05-2009, passed 4-7-09)



IDENTIFYING HOUSE NUMBERS



§ 150.35  DISPLAY OF IDENTIFYING NUMBERS ON FRONTS OF BUILDINGS; STANDARDS.



   All property owners, or residents, users or occupiers of houses or
tenements within the city shall post on the front of the building or tenement
identifying numbers conforming to the street address and said numbers shall
be painted or affixed of some waterproof substance, contrasting in color to
the background where affixed, of a minimum size of three inches and
sufficient to be readily visible from the street fronting said house or
tenement.  The numbers shall be plain figures.



(Ord. 1-90, passed 3-8-90)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.36  DISPLAY OF NUMBER ON MAILBOX.



   An owner, resident, user or occupier of a house or tenement shall
satisfy the requirements of § 150.35 by displaying the identifying street
number on a mailbox so long as the number is readily visible from each
direction on the street fronting said house or tenement and the mailbox on
which the number is affixed is physically located and maintained on the same
property as the house or tenement referred to in § 150.35.



(Ord. 1-90, passed 3-8-60)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.37  DISPLAY OF PERMANENT SIGNS ON BUILDINGS IN COMPLEXES.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, APARTMENT COMPLEX shall
include two or more multi-family buildings under common ownership or
management.  A MULTI-FAMILY BUILDING is any building containing more than
two (2) living units.



   (B)   In addition to the identifying numbers required in § 150.35,
all owners of property used as an apartment complex shall prominently display
permanent signs on each building within the complex identifying all units in
the building.



   (C)   An owner may satisfy the requirements of this section by
erecting and maintaining a sign in the yard of each building in the complex
so long as said sign shall display the identifying number for each unit in
the building in a fashion so as to be readily visible from the street.



(Ord. 1-90, passed 3-8-90)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.38  REMOVAL OR ALTERATION OF NUMBERS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall remove, alter or deface any street identifying number
conforming to the terms of this subchapter.



(Ord. 1-90, passed 3-8-90)  Penalty, see § 150.99



REGULATION OF ELECTRICIANS



§ 150.50  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS.  Any individual, partnership or corporation
that engages in the business of or employs others for the construction,
alteration or repair of any electrical wiring used for the purpose of
furnishing heat, light or power.



   ELECTRICIANS.  Any person who is employed by an electrical contractor
and is engaged in the construction, alteration or repair of any electrical
wiring used for the purpose of furnishing heat, light or power.



   ELECTRICAL.  This pertains to the installation of wires and conduits
for the purposes of transmitting electricity, and the installation of
fixtures and equipment in connection therewith.



   ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR.  Any person certified by the Commissioner of
Housing, Buildings and Construction pursuant to KRS 227.849 who, for
compensation, inspects the construction and installation of electrical
conductors, fitting, devices and fixtures for light, heat or power service
equipment to ascertain the compliance with the national electrical code
incorporated in the uniform state building codes promulgated pursuant to KRS
198B.050 or the standards of safety of the Commonwealth of Kentucky .



(Ord. 13-91, passed 6-27-91)



§ 150.51  ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODE.



   The Uniform State Building Code as is established by the Board of
Housing, Buildings and Construction of the State of Kentucky, is hereby
adopted in full, which shall also be extended to include one (1) and two (2)
family dwellings, and the same shall have the effect as if it were written
fully herein, as a minimum standards for the construction, alteration and
repair of any electrical wiring done within the effective area of this
subchapter.  These standards shall also be used by the electrical inspector
in making his inspections.



(Ord. 13-91, passed 6-27-91)



§ 150.52  NORTHERN KENTUCKY ELECTRIC AUTHORITY.



   The formerly established Northern Kentucky Electric Authority, the
examining and appeal board consisting of seven (7) members as authorized in
KRS 227.450 and 227.500, shall:



   (A)   Administer electrical contractor's examinations which have
been selected and approved by the Department of Housing, Buildings and
Construction and administer electrician examination;



   (B)   Have the power to issue, renew, suspend and revoke electrical
contractor and electrical licenses;



   (C)   Have the power to require electrical contractors and
electricians to pay reasonable fees for examinations, initial licenses and
renewals;



   (D)   Accept an electrical contractor examination certificate issued
by the Department of Housing, Building and Construction as evidence that an
applicant has met the examination requirements.



   (E)   Have the power to require all electrical contractors and
electricians to conform to reasonable standards prior to engaging in their
occupations;



   (F)   Compile and submit to the Department of Housing, Building and
Construction all disciplinary actions taken against licensed electrical
contractors on a quarterly bases;



   (G)   Have all other powers authorized for a "local examining board"
by KRS 117.450 et seq.



(Ord. 13-91, passed 6-27-91)



§ 150.53  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
installing, altering or repairing, within the limits of the city, any
electrical wiring, devices or equipment unless such individual is the holder
of the electrical contractors license or employed by a licensed electrical
contractor and a holder of any electrician's license.  Application for such
license must be made in writing to the Board, stating the name, experience
and qualifications of applicant.  Upon said applicant's complying with the
requirements of this subchapter and passing an examination approved by the
Northern Kentucky Electric Authority, a license shall be granted to the
individual applying for the same.



(Ord. 13-91, passed 6-27-91)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.54  AGREEMENT OF RECIPROCITY.



   There is hereby established an agreement of reciprocity between the
city and any other city and county in which there exists, legislation
basically containing the provisions of this subchapter and the Mayor of the
city is hereby authorized to execute an interlocal Agreement(s) with any such
city or county.



(Ord. 13-91, passed 6-27-91)



§ 150.55  ELECTRIC PERMITS.



   The fees for permits and inspection shall be as provided for in the
Campbell County and Municipal Planning and Zoning Commission’s Building
Inspection Department, Planning, and Zoning Fee Schedule.



(Ord. 14-91, passed 6-27-91; Am. Ord. 09-2018, passed 1-15-19)  Penalty, see
§ 150.99



MAINTENANCE OF VACANT, FORECLOSED PROPERTIES



§ 150.70  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY ATTORNEY.  The City Attorney of the City of Highland Heights or
his or her designee.



   CODE OFFICIAL.  The Code Enforcement Officer of the City of Highland
Heights or his designee.



   FORECLOSED.  A property upon which a mortgagee has filed an action in
foreclosure in order to recover monies pursuant to a mortgage agreement which
has been secured by a lien on property.



   MORTGAGEE.  Any for-profit lender who is a party to a mortgage
agreement and whose interest in that agreement is secured by a lien on
residential property.



   PERSON IN CONTROL.  The person, persons, or entity holding title to
the freehold estate of the premises; a mortgagee or vendee in possession; a
receiver; an executor; a trustee; and any person, public or private entity,
lessee or holder of a lesser estate in the premises, and/or its duly
authorized agent(s), with the authority to bring a building or premises into
compliance with the provisions of this subchapter, including, but not limited
to any mortgagee that has filed an action in foreclosure on the particular
premises at issue, until title to the premises is transferred to a third
party.



   RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.  Parcel of land which contains a dwelling or
structure that provides living accommodations for persons.



   VACANT.  Unoccupied or without authorized human inhabitants.



   VACANT, FORECLOSED PROPERTY REGISTRATION FORM.  A form publicly
available from the City Clerk or Zoning Administrator that mortgagees subject
to the requirements of this subchapter must complete and submit as specified
in this section.



(Ord. 03-2013, passed 4-16-13)



§ 150.71  REGISTRATION OF VACANT FORECLOSED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.



   (A)   Initial filing.



      (1)   Within ten (10) business days of filing a foreclosure
action on residential property that is vacant at the time of filing, the
mortgagee shall submit a vacant, foreclosed property registration form for
the City Clerk or Zoning Administrator.



      (2)   A mortgagee is not required to submit the vacant,
foreclosed registration form if the residential property located within the
city is not vacant on the date of the filing of a foreclosure action on the
property. However, if the residential property becomes vacant at any point
during the foreclosure process, the mortgagee shall submit a vacant,
foreclosed property registration form regarding the property to the city’s
Zoning Administrator and City Clerk within ten (10) business days of the
vacancy.



      (3)   The vacant, foreclosed property registration form shall
contain the following information:



         (a)   Description of the residential property,
including, but not limited to, the street address and parcel identification
number;



         (b)   The name, street address, and telephone number of
a natural person, 18 years of age or older, or a business entity registered
with the Kentucky Secretary of State designated by the  mortgagee as an
authorized agent for receiving notices of code violations and for receiving
process in any court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding on
behalf of the Mortgagee in connection with enforcement of this subchapter,
and this person or entity must maintain an office in Kentucky or must
actually reside in Kentucky; and



         (c)   The mortgagee shall pay the initial registration
fee listed in § 150.72.



   (B)   Change of information. The mortgagee shall notify the city’s
Zoning Administrator and City Clerk within ten (10) business days of any
change of information on the foreclosed property registration form. The
vacant, foreclosed property registration form shall be maintained with
accurate information until the property is sold at a judicial sale,
transferred to a bona fide owner-occupant, or an unaffiliated third party.
The mortgagee shall notify the Zoning Administrator and City Clerk in writing
when the property is transferred to a bona fide owner-occupant or an
unaffiliated third party, the property is reoccupied, or the property is sold
at a judicial sale, so the property may be promptly removed from the registry.



   (C)   Annual requirements. On an annual basis, the mortgagee shall
pay the annual registration fee listed in § 150.72.



(Ord. 03-2013, passed 4-16-13)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.72  FEES.



   Mortgagees shall pay any required fees until the foreclosure is
dismissed or until the property is transferred to a third-party. The fees for
the various requirements under this chapter are as follows:



 


Subsection

 

Title of Fee

 

Fee Amount




(1)

 

Initial registration fee

 

$500




(2)

 

Annual registration fee

 

$500




 



(Ord. 03-2013, passed 4-16-13)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.73  MAINTENANCE OBLIGATIONS OF MORTGAGEES.



   During the period that the property is registered, the mortgagee shall
have the obligations set forth in this section.



   (A)   Obligations. Vacant, foreclosed property shall be maintained
free of all outward appearances of foreclosure and vacancy during the
registration period including:



      (1)   No signs or placards on the exterior of the building or
in the windows indicating that the property is vacant or foreclosed;



      (2)   Grass shall be no higher than 8 inches at any time and
all noxious weeds shall be removed;



      (3)   The premises shall be maintained free of debris and
litter;



      (4)   The premises shall remain secure and locked. Broken
windows and doors which are visible from the right-of-way may be covered with
plywood or similar boarding material on an emergency basis, but for no more
than ten (10) business days, while arrangements are being made to replace
broken glass or broken parts of the existing windows and doors. Broken
windows and doors on the rear or sides of the building may be boarded until
the windows and doors are repaired for re-occupancy provided that the boarded
openings are not visible from public right-of-way;



      (5)   Windows and doors which are visible from the
right-of-way may not be boarded and shall be maintained in good repair;



      (6)   Handbills, circulars, and advertisements shall be
removed from porches and yards in a timely manner; and



      (7)   Standing water on the premises, including but not
limited to standing water in swimming pools, shall be eliminated.



   (B)   Additional requirements. The maintenance requirements and
penalties in this subchapter related to vacant, foreclosed residential
properties are in addition to, and shall not be considered in conflict with,
any and all other property maintenance requirements of the Highland Heights
Code of Ordinances. Nothing within this subchapter shall be construed to
limit the responsibilities of persons in control to comply with and adhere to
any and all building, housing, health, and zoning ordinances established by
the city. Nothing within this subchapter shall be construed to limit or
conflict with the responsibilities of persons in control to comply with and
adhere to any and all state and federal laws.



(Ord. 03-2013, passed 4-16-13)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.74  POINT OF SALE INSPECTIONS ON VACANT, FORECLOSED PROPERTIES.



   (A)   Inspections. Point of sale inspections are hereby authorized
on all properties that are subject to the vacant, foreclosed property
registration. Mortgagees shall arrange to have all properties subject to the
requirements of this subchapter inspected by the Code Official within five
(5) business days of filing for the property to be sold at a judicial sale.
If the mortgagee fails to arrange an inspection, the property shall be
inspected by the Code Official pursuant to Kentucky Revised Statute prior to
the property being sold at a judicial sale or pursuant to a search warrant
issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.



   (B)   Failed inspections. If, as a result of the above inspection,
the Code Official determines that health code violations, housing code
violations, hazards, or structural defects exist on the property, the Code
Official shall notify the City Attorney of these conditions. The City
Attorney shall provide written notice via certified mail to the mortgagee or
the mortgagee’s agent, as designated on the foreclosed vacant property
registration form, the owner of record, and any equitable lien holders,
informing the parties of the following:



      (1)   The need to repair and correct the violations, hazards,
or structural defects prior to the judicial sale;



      (2)   If the property is not brought into compliance within
thirty (30) calendar days of the issuance of the notice of violation, the
Code Official may correct or repaired some or all of the violations;



      (3)   If the Code Official corrects or repairs some or all of
the violations, the City Attorney shall promptly place a priority lien on the
property for the total cost of abating the violations. The City Attorney
shall collect the priority lien from the proceeds of the judicial sale of the
property, or upon any subsequent sale of the property, or by the methods
provided in Kentucky Revised Code. When notice is given as provided for in
this section, the lien shall be a priority over liens of prior record and the
lien will be effective on the date the city incurs the costs of repairs as
provided in Kentucky Revised Code.



   (C)   Bond. The mortgagee may post a bond in an amount equal to the
cost of abatement of the code violations which may include repair or
demolition. The Mortgagee must submit to the Code Official written cost
estimates by contractors registered with the city of Highland Heights for
abating the violations. The Code Official will establish the bond amount
based upon the submitted cost estimates. The Code Official may extend the
compliance date up to 90 days if a bond is posted. An additional 90 days may
be extended in writing by the Code Official if good cause or diligence in
abating the violations is demonstrated. If the violations are not abated in
conformance with the terms of this section, the bond will be forfeited and
the Code Official shall cause the violations to be abated with the proceeds
of the forfeiture.



(Ord. 03-2013, passed 4-16-13)



§ 150.75  JOINT AND SEVERAL LIABILITY.



   Any owner of property, person in control of property, or subsequent
owner of property for which a notice of violation to correct health or
building code violations shall be jointly and severally liable for the costs
incurred by the city for the abatement of violations on the property. Joint
and several liability shall be attributed to each entity in the chain of
title from the date of issuance of orders forward.



(Ord. 03-2013, passed 4-16-13)



§ 150.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of the state codes
adopted in § 150.01 shall be subject to the following penalties:



      (1)   Violators of the Uniform State Building Code or the
Uniform State Residential Code shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine
of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each offense.



(KRS 198B.990(1))



      (2)   Violators of the State Standards of Safety shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of
not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), imprisonment for not more than 60 days, or both, for each
offense.



(KRS 227.990(1))



      (3)   Violators of the State Plumbing Code shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less
than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00),
imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or both, for each offense.



(KRS 318.990)



   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of § 150.06 shall be
guilty of a Class A misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or
confined in the county jail for up to one (1) year, or both fine and
imprisonment.



(Ord. 1-96, passed 5-16-96)



   (C)   Any owner, resident, user or occupier of a house or tenement
in the city failing to comply with the provisions of §§ 150.35 through
150.38 or any person removing, defacing or altering an identifying house
number as provided in § 150.38 shall be guilty of a violation and shall be
fined the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for violation of §§ 150.35
through 150.38.  Each and every day on which such violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 1-90, passed 3-8-90)



   (D)   Any person, firm or corporation, violating the provisions of
§§ 150.50 through 150.55 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction in any court of competent jurisdiction, shall be fined not less
than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) or imprisoned for not more than ninety (90) days, or both, so fined
and imprisoned in the discretion of the court for each offense, and each day
that said person, firm or corporation violates §§ 150.50 through 150.55 or
any provision thereof may be deemed a separate offense.



   (E)   (1)   Failure to register property. Failure to register a
vacant, foreclosed property shall constitute a violation and shall be fined
not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one hundred dollars
($100.00) for the first offense and succeeding offenses. Each day that such
violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.



      (2)   Failure to keep information accurate. Failure to
maintain accurate information once having registered shall constitute a
violation and shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than
one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense and succeeding offenses.
Each day that such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate and
distinct offense.



      (3)   Failure to maintain property. Failure to maintain the
property in accordance with the maintenance provisions of §§ 150.70 through
150.75 shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) the first day, and having once been notified, each
additional day that the property fails to meet the maintenance provisions
shall constitute a separate, subsequent misdemeanor.



(Ord. 13-91, passed 6-27-91; Am. Ord. 03-2013, passed 4-16-13)



CHAPTER 151:  SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



Section



   151.01   Adoption by reference



§ 151.01  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.



   The subdivision regulations with its appendix of amendments is hereby
incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth and shall be adopted
and known as the official subdivision regulations of the city.  A copy of
the subdivision regulations shall be maintained in the office of the City
Clerk-Treasurer and shall be available for public inspection during normal
office hours.



(Ord. 12-84, passed 5-24-84; Am. Ord. 11-93, passed 6-10-93; Am. Ord. 24-94,
passed 8-21-94; Am. Ord. 01-97, passed 1-7-97; Am. Ord. 08-97, passed  - 
-; Am. Ord. 10-2007, passed 12-18-07; Am. Ord. 07-2014, passed 8-5-14; Am.
Ord. 03-2019, passed 3-5-19)



CHAPTER 152:  ZONING CODE



Section



   152.01   Adoption by reference



§ 152.01  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.



   (A)   The zoning regulations adopted by Ord. 16-83, enacted on
6-23-83, and the goals and policies of the comprehensive plan, adopted by
Ord. 6-88, enacted 3-10-88 and Ord. 9-94, enacted 3-10-94, with appendices
and appendix of corrections is hereby incorporated by reference, and adopted
and approved.



   (B)   The zoning regulations in districts as set forth in the new
official zoning regulations have been prepared in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan of the city to promote the public health, safety, morals
and general welfare of the city, to facilitate orderly and harmonious
development and the visual or historical character of the city, and to
regulate the density of population and intensity of land used in order to
provide for adequate light and air.  In addition, the official zoning
regulations have been prepared to provide for vehicle off-street parking
and/or unloading space as well as to facilitate fire and police protection,
and to prevent the overcrowding of land, blight, danger and congestion in the
circulation of people and commodities and the loss of life, health or
property from fire, flood or other dangers.  The zoning regulations and
districts as set forth in the official zoning regulations are also employed
to protect highways and other transportation facilities, public facilities
including schools with public grounds, the central business district, natural
resources and other specific areas in the city which need special protection
by the city.



   (C)   The complete official zoning regulations shall be retained by
the City Clerk-Treasurer at the city building for record and inspection by
the public.



   (D)   The comprehensive plan can only be amended by formal action
taken by a majority of the Council members of the city.



(Ord. 16-83, passed 6-23-83; Ord. 6-88, passed 3-10-88; Am. Ord. 32-92,
passed 9-24-92; Am. Ord. 3-91, passed 2-14-91;  Am.  Ord. 6-93, passed
2-11-93; Am. Ord. 9-93, passed 3-25-93; Am. Ord. 12-93, passed 6-10-93; Am.
Ord. 20-93, passed 10-14-93; Am. Ord. 28-93, passed 12-9-93; Am. Ord. 1-94,
passed 1-13-94; Am. Ord. 9-94, passed 3-10-94; Am. Ord. 11-94, passed
4-21-94; Am. Ord. 19-94, passed 8-18-94; Am. Ord. 21-94, passed 8-18-94; Am.
Ord. 22-94, passed 8-18-94; Am. Ord. 23-94, passed 8-18-94; Am. Ord. 25-94,
passed 8-18-94; Am. Ord. 29-94, passed 9-15-94; Am. Ord. 01-95, passed
2-16-95; Am. Ord. 09-95, passed 4-20-95; Am. Ord. 3-96, passed 5-16-96; Am.
Ord. 12-96, passed 9-17-96; Am. Ord. 16-96, passed 11-5-96; Am Ord. 01-97,
passed 1-7-97; Am. Ord. 08-97, passed  -  -  ; Am. Ord. 09-97, passed
5-20-97; Am. Ord. 16-97, passed 12-2-97; Am. Ord. 15-98, passed 12-1-98; Am.
Ord. 07-99, passed 11-16-99; Am. Ord. 08-99, passed 12-21-99; Am. Ord. 09-99,
passed 12-21-99; Am. Ord. 10-99, passed 12-21-99; Am. Ord. 02-2000, passed
3-7-00; Am. Ord. 04-2001, passed 3-6-01; Am. Ord. 11-2001, passed 11-20-01;
Am. Ord. 12-2001, passed 11-20-01; Am. Ord. 10-2002, passed 11-19-02; Am.
Ord. 01-2003, passed 1-21-03; Am. Ord. 02-2003, passed 1-21-03; Am. Ord.
07-2003, passed 3-4-03; Am. Ord. 09-2003, passed 4-15-03; Am. Ord. 13- 2005,
passed 10-4-05; Am. Ord. 04-2008, passed 3-4-08; Am. Ord. 07-2008, passed
6-17-08; Am. Ord. 11-2008, passed 7-15-08; Am. Ord. 14-2008, passed 12-2-08;
Am. Ord. 15-2008, passed 12-2-08; Am. Ord. 06-2010, passed 8-17-10; Am. Ord.
09-2010, passed 10-5-10; Am. Ord. 03-2011, passed 6-7-11; Am. Ord. 04-2011,
passed 6-7-11; Am. Ord. 2011-10, passed 10-4-11; Am. Ord. 02-2012, passed
2-21-12; Am. Ord. 05-2012, passed 5-1-12; Am. Ord. 06-2012, passed 5-1-12;
Am. Ord. 07-2012, passed 5-1-12; Am. Ord. 14-2012, passed 9-4-12; Am. Ord.
02-2013, passed 4-2-13; Am. Ord. 07-2014, passed 8-5-14; Am. Ord. 04-2015,
passed 6-16-15; Am. Ord. 03-2019, passed 3-5-19)



CHAPTER 153:  COMPREHENSIVE PLAN



Section



   153.01   Comprehensive Plan adopted by reference



§ 153.01  COMPREHENSIVE PLAN ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The comprehensive plan of the city, as set forth in Ord. 31-95, passed
10-19-95, and all subsequent amendments thereto, is hereby adopted by
reference and made a part of this code as if set out at length herein.  A
copy of the plan shall be maintained in the office of the City
Clerk-Treasurer and shall be available for public inspection during normal
business hours.



(Ord. 31-95, passed 10-19-95; Am. Ord. 08-2013, passed 6-18-13)



CHAPTER 154:  FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION



Section



   154.01   Flood damage prevention regulations adopted by reference



§ 154.01  FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The flood damage prevention regulations of the city, as set forth in
Ord. 06-2018, and all subsequent amendments thereto, are hereby adopted by
reference and made a part of this code as if set out at length herein.  A
copy of the regulations shall be maintained in the office of the City
Clerk-Treasurer and shall be available for public inspection during normal
business hours.



(Ord. 06-2018, passed 6-19-18)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



Table



   I.   ANNEXATIONS/DEANNEXATIONS



   II.   CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS



   III.   REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS



   IV.   STREET NAME CHANGES



   V.   STREET CLOSINGS AND VACATIONS



   VI.   ZONING MAP CHANGES



   VII.   REPEALED OR SUPERSEDED ORDINANCES



   VIII.   FRANCHISES



TABLE I: ANNEXATIONS/DEANNEXATIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




1-83
 
2-10-83
 
Annexing the unincorporated territory adjacent to the city beginning at a
point on the existing corporation line of the city, said point also being on
the right-of-way line of Sinton Road (now known as Sunset Drive), at the
division line of Lots 581 and 582 of Section 4 of Highland Baby Farms.


2-83
 
2-10-83
 
Annexing the unincorporated territory adjacent to the city being the point of
intersection of the south right-of-way line of Paxton Avenue and the west
right-of-way of Gibson Road, produced.


9-83
 
3-24-83
 
Annexing the unincorporated territory adjacent to the city beginning at a
point on the existing corporation line of the city, said point being
witnessed by an iron pin set 115 feet right of centerline station 45 + 00 for
the Three Mile Road.


20-83
 
8-11-83
 
Annexing certain unincorporated territory adjacent to the city, known as 306
Sunset Avenue.


13-85
 
8-8-85
 
Annexing unincorporated territory adjacent to the city being a part of David
Leitsch's subdivision of 13,800 acres and being part of Lot 5 of the
subdivision of lands of K.L. Taylor and part of Lot 1, Hilltop subdivision.


3-88
 
2-11-88
 
Annexing to the city certain unincorporated territory lying adjacent to the
southeasterly city limits commencing at a stone in the county road and in the
line of the lands formerly owned by Joseph Goodfriend, 8 feet southeast of
said Goodfriend's stone fence.


27-89
 
6-22-89
 
Annexing to the city certain unincorporated territory lying adjacent and
contiguous to the southwesterly city limits of the city being the easterly
portion of the 27-acre tract of land inherited by Charles J. Herbst and
George P. Herbst.


27-92
 
8-27-92
 
Annexing to the city certain unincorporated territory beginning at the
present corporation line of the city, following the center line of Hilltop
Drive in a northerly direction 230 feet more or less to the westerly
right-of-way of Johns Hill Road


10-93
 
4-8-93
 
Annexing to the city certain unincorporated territory named as Johns Hill
Road more particularly being described as all the property within the
right-of-way limits of Johns Hill Road.


19-93
 
10-14-93
 
Annexing to the city certain unincorporated territory described as 518 Johns
Hill Road.


21-93
 
10-28-93
 
Annexing to the city certain unincorporated territory described as 402 Johns
Hill Road.


22-93
 
10-28-93
 
Annexing to the city certain unincorporated territory known as 406 Johns Hill
Road.


23-93
 
10-28-93
 
Annexing to the city certain unincorporated territory described as 430 Johns
Hill Road.


25-93
 
11-7-93
 
Annexing to the city certain unincorporated territory described as 550 Johns
Hill Road.


27-93
 
12-9-93
 
Annexing from the centerline of the divided highway I-275 to the limited
access right-of-way from the overpass bridge for Johns Hill Road east to the
existing city limits at US 27 at the southern limits of Fort Thomas and the
Johns Hill Road overpass bridge from the existing Wilder city limits on the
west side of the overpass bridge to the existing Highland Heights city limits
on the east side of the overpass bridge.


10-94
 
3-24-94
 
Annexing lot #8 of Section 1 of the University Estates Subdivision abutting
Knollwood Drive.


27-94
 
8-18-94
 
Annexing lot #9 of Section 1 of the University Estates Subdivision abutting
Knollwood Drive.


28-94
 
8-18-94
 
Annexing lot #10 of Section 1 of the University Estates Subdivision abutting
Knollwood Drive.


35-94
 
12-15-94
 
Agreement with the City of Fort Thomas, Kentucky transferring land from Fort
Thomas on the northwesterly side of highway I-275 to Highland Heights; and,
transferring land from Highland Heights on the northwesterly side of highway
I-275 to Fort Thomas.


2-95
 
3-9-95
 
Annexing to the city certain unincorporated territory described as 24 acres
in rear of 550 Johns Hill Road.


3-95
 
3-10-95
 
Annexing to the city 34.5 acres  described as 524A Johns Hill Road.


10-95
 
4-20-95
 
Annexing to the city approximately 35 acres  described as 621-A Blange Road
and certain unincorporated territory described at 531 Winters Lane.


11-95
 
4-24-95
 
Annexing to the city approximately 31 acres located along Blange Road and
parts of the Virginia Estates Subdivision.


12-95
 
4-27-95
 
Annexing to the city approximately 1.589 acres consisting of certain lots in
the Mary L. Hawthorn Subdivision.


13-95
 
5-22-95
 
Annexing to the city approximately 1.06 acres located along Winters Lane


14-95
 
5-22-95
 
Annexing to the city approximately 1.25 acres consisting of certain property
located on the corner of Blange Road and Route 8.


15-95
 
5-22-95
 
Annexing to the city approximately 1.4691 acres of land located at 531
Winters Lane.


16-95
 
6-13-95
 
Annexing to the city approximately 0.16 acres located in the William F.
Williamson Subdivision.


17-95
 
6-14-95
 
Annexing to the city approximately .49 acres located along River Road and
Detisch in the William F. Williamson Subdivision.


18-95
 
6-15-95
 
Annexing to the city approximately 0.19 acres of Lot 1 in the Williamson
Subdivision.


19-95
 
6-16-95
 
Annexing to the city approximately 0.15 acres of Lot 4 located in the
Williamson Subdivision.


20-95
 
6-17-95
 
Annexing to the city approximately 0.19 acres of Lot 3 in the Williamson
Subdivision.


21-95
 
6-19-95
 
Annexing to the city approximately 0.13 acres of Lot 4 in the Williamson
Subdivision.


24-95
 
6-24-95
 
Annexing to the city approximately 0.13 acres of Lot 5 in the Williamson
Subdivision.


25-95
 
7-3-95
 
Annexing to the city approximately 0.2 acres of Lot 6 in the Williamson
Subdivision.


26-95
 
7-3-95
 
Annexing to the city approximately 1.86 acres of Lot 6 in the Williamson
Subdivision.


29-95
 
8-17-95
 
Annexing to the city approximately 6.772 acres of Lot 3 of the Hawthorne
Subdivision.


02-97
 
2-4-97
 
Annexing to the city property on the westerly side of Ridge Hill Drive
approximately 500 feet southwest of the intersection of Ridge Hill Drive and
Squire Court.


11-98
 
8-4-98
 
Intending to deannex approximately 100 acres of property located in the
Blange Road/Winters Lane areas.


19-98
 
12-15-98
 
Deannexing approximately 100 acres of property located in the Blange
Road/Winters Lane areas.


12-2006
 
11-7-06
 
Annexing to the city approximately 27 acres of land located east of the
current city of Highland Heights’ boundaries adjacent to Blangey Road and
west of Route 8.


05-2008
 
5-20-08
 
Annexing to the city approximately 251 acres of land located north of Johns
Hill Road and west of US 27.


08-2018
 
12-4-18
 
Deannexing approximately 1.98 acres located along Johns Hill Road.


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE II:  CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




418
 
7-24-72
 
City authorized to enter into an intergovernmental cooperative agreement
creating a solid waste authority. ('81 code, § 140.1)


9-91
 
5-9-91
 
Authorizing the Mayor to execute an agreement with the cities of Cold Spring
and Wilder, to participate in the construction of a sanitary sewer trunk line
along the Licking River.


15-91
 
6-27-91
 
Authorizing the Mayor to execute an agreement with the Department of
Transportation providing for the maintenance of curbs where they exist on
roads, viaduct and bridges.


18-91
 
8-22-91
 
Authorizing the Mayor to execute a contract with the Volunteer Fire
Department for fiscal year 1991-1992.


21-91
 
8-12-91
 
Authorizing the Mayor to execute a contract with Thomer Excavating Company
for Phase I of the sewer trunk line project.


23-91
 
9-26-91
 
Authorizing the Mayor to execute a contract with David Whitacre of Cardinal
Engineering for engineering services.


3-92
 
1-23-92
 
Authorizing the Mayor to execute a contract with Thomas Excavating company
for Phase II of the Sewer Line Trunk Project.


4-92
 
1-23-92
 
Authorizing the Mayor to execute a contract with Sanitation district No. 1 of
Campbell and Kenton Counties for sewer inspection services.


16-93
 
6-24-93
 
Approving a joint and cooperative program for self-insurance, insurance, and
the investment of public funds among various cities within the state;
authorizing the execution of the "Interlocal Cooperation Management Agreement
to establish the Municipal Risk Management Association;" and approving the
articles of association and bylaws of the association.


5-94
 
2-11-94
 
Adopting of an interlocal agreement between the Campbell County Fiscal Court
and cities of Campbell County establishing the Campbell County Board as the
cable television regulatory authority.


16-94
 
6-16-94
 
Authorizing the Mayor to execute a contract with the Kentucky Transportation
Cabinet regarding a highway project for Alexandria Pike (US27).


06-97
 
5-20-97
 
Authorizing execution of a contract for street resurfacing and storm sewer
improvements.


07-97
 
5-20-97
 
Authorizing execution of a contract for street resurfacing, reconstruction,
construction of storm sewers and curb improvements on Maple Avenue.


2013-13
 
9-3-13
 
Authorizing the Mayor to execute an agreement with General Cable Industries,
Inc., for issuance of a 40% reduction in employee fees for up to 15
non-resident employees as a result of this economic development project.


06-2014
 
8-5-14
 
Establishing a development area for economic development purposes, to be
known as the U.S. 27 development area.


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE III:  REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


33-89
 
8-10-89
 
Authorizing the execution of any and all contractual requirements to acquire
the real estate located at 2716 Alexandria Pike for town center project


35-94
 
12-15-94
 
Agreement with the City of Fort Thomas, Kentucky transferring land from Fort
Thomas on the northwesterly side of highway I-275 to Highland Heights; and,
transferring land from Highland Heights on the northwesterly side of highway
I-275 to Fort Thomas.


 
 



 



TABLE IV:  STREET NAME CHANGES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


19-88
 
9-22-88
 
Renaming Campbell Drive at the point it intersects with Three Mile Road and
extends the length of Northern Kentucky University Foundation Research and
Technology Park Property to Tesseneer Drive.


12-2013
 
8-6-13
 
Changing the name of Old Alexandria Pike to Alexandria Way.


 
 



 



TABLE V:  STREET CLOSINGS AND VACATIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




23-84
 
12-13-84
 
Closing and vacating Haley Court in the Steelman Subdivision.


42-89
 
12-14-89
 
Closing portions of a right-of-way which is commonly known as McDyer Road
being an unimproved right-of-way of and in the city.


43-89
 
12-14-89
 
Closing portions of a right-of-way which is commonly known as Yeager Avenue
being an unimproved right-of-way of and in the city.


44-89
 
12-14-89
 
Closing portions of a right-of-way which is commonly known as Wiland Drive
being an unimproved right-of-way of and in the city.


2-92
 
1-2-92
 
Closing portions of a right-of-way which is commonly known as Campbell Avenue
being an unimproved right-of-way of and in the city.


28-92
 
8-27-92
 
Closing portions of a right-of-way which is commonly known as Old Three Mile
Road from the terminus of Tesseneer Drive to the intersection of Three Mile
Road and Scherrer Road, being an unimproved right-of-way of and in the city.


40-92
 
11-12-92
 
Closing a right-of-way which is commonly known as Clara Avenue being an
unimproved right-of-way of and in the city.


06-95
 
3-16-95
 
Partially closing Main Avenue.


10-96
 
8-6-96
 
Closing portions of a right-of-way commonly known as Myrtle and Preston
Avenues.


15-97
 
9-2-97
 
Closing a portion of a public right-of-way known as Maple Avenue.


11-99
 
1-4-00
 
Closing a portion of a public way currently known as Myrtle Avenue.


12-99
 
1-4-00
 
Closing a portion of a public way currently known as Harriet Avenue.


05-2001
 
7-17-01
 
Closing a portion of a public way currently known as Harriet Avenue.


02-2005
 
5-17-05
 
Closing a portion of a public way currently known as Hill Road.


13-2008
 
10-21-08
 
Closing a portion of a public way currently known as Hale Avenue.


01-2009
 
3-3-09
 
Closing a portion of a public way currently known as Marshall Lane.


02-2009
 
3-3-09
 
Closing a portion of a public way currently known as Myrtle Avenue.


03-2009
 
3-3-09
 
Closing a portion of a public way currently known as Harriet Avenue.


18-2009
 
12-1-09
 
Closing a portion of a public way currently known as Clara Avenue.


01-2013
 
2-5-13
 
Closing a public way currently known as Myrtle Avenue.


05-2013
 
3-19-13
 
Closing a public way currently known as Baker Road.


06-2013
 
4-16-13
 
Closing a 15 foot right-of-way on the northeast side of Main Avenue.


01-2016
 
4-5-16
 
Closing a public way currently known as the right of way of Hill Road between
Lincoln Road and Forest Avenue.


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE VI:  ZONING MAP CHANGES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




5-83
 
3-10-83
 
Zoning certain property beginning at a point on the east right-of-way line of
U.S. 27, said point being the dividing line between the Vogt and Schabell
property to Professional Office Zone.


22-83
 
9-22-83
 
Rezoning certain property beginning at a point in the west lien of Alexandria
Turnpike 50 feet southwardly from a stone the southwest corner of Alexandria
Turnpike and Renshaw Road from R-1E Single-Family Residential to GC General
Commercial


5-84
 
1-26-84
 
Rezoning certain property being the undeveloped tract immediately south of
the I-275/U.S. 27 Bridge on the east side of relocated Alexandria Pike from
Residence 1-EF to Professional Office Zone.


10-85
 
6-27-85
 
Rezoning certain property beginning at a point in the center of Campbell
County Turnpike Road (now U.S. 27) and a corner of church lot, from R-4E
Single-Family Residential to R-1E/PO-CR Professional Office-Corridor
Rehabilitation Overlay Zone.


7-86
 
4-10-86
 
Rezoning certain property located at the intersection of Main Avenue, Taylor
Road and Blair Road from R1-G to General Commercial Zone.


9-86
 
4-24-86
 
Rezoning certain property located at 124 Marshall Lane and a portion of 126
Marshall Lane from R1-G to General Commercial Zone.


14-86
 
10-9-86
 
Rezoning certain property at 2622 Alexandria Pike in the David Leitch Patent
and a part of Lot F, William Caldwell's Estate, from R-1D Single-Family
Residential to PO (Professional Office).


1-87
 
- - 87
 
Rezoning certain property lying and being in the city, and being that portion
of Lot Eight of the Highland Trace Condominiums from R:1E(P) (Single-Family
Dwelling) to R3 (Multi-Family Dwelling).


10-87
 
8-13-87
 
Rezoning certain property consisting of 47.3 acres at the intersection of
Johns Hill and Martha Lane from R-2 (Multi-Family Dwellings) to MLU (Mixed
Land Use).


13-87
 
9-24-87
 
Rezoning certain property consisting of 1,222 acres at 2939 Alexandria Pike
form R-1E(P) (Single-Family Residential Phased Zoning) to GC (General
Commercial)


14-88
 
8-11-88
 
Rezoning certain property consisting of 35 acres lying west of Harrison
Avenue, north of Sunset and Three Mile, and north of Monroe Avenue from R-1E
(Single-Family Residential) to MLU (Mixed Land Use).


20-88
 
10-13-88
 
Rezoning certain property located at 2622 Alexandria Pike, in the Dave Leitch
Patent and a part of Lot F, William Caldwell's Estate, form R-1D
(Single-Family Residential) to PO (Professional Office).


34-89
 
9-14-89
 
Rezoning an unimproved acreage tract containing more or less 11.75 acres of
land inherited by Charles J. and George P. Herbst from R1-D (Single-Family
Residential) to R-2 (Multi-Family).


35-89
 
9-28-89
 
Rezoning certain property located at 130 Main Avenue in and being part of
Section 3 of the Highland Baby Farms from GC (General Commercial) to I
(Industrial)


6-90
 
4-12-90
 
Rezoning certain property located at 2811 Alexandria Pike, 2903 Alexandria
Pike, in and being part of Lot 5 of the Elijah Pierce Homestead Tract from PO
(Professional Office) to LSC (Limited Service Commercial).


4-91
 
2-14-91
 
Rezoning a parcel of land, from LSC to R-3 Multi-Family Dwelling, beginning
at the southeast corner of Lot No. 6 of Block "A", containing 4.236 acres.


5-91
 
3-14-91
 
Rezoning certain property located at 2315 Alexandria Pike, situated in the
Cold Spring District, from GC to R1-G, single family residential.


6-91
 
3-14-91
 
Rezoning certain property located at 2331 Alexandria Pike, beginning at the
centerline of Bordeaux Drive and Alexandria Pike, from SC to R1-G,
Single-Family Residential.


16-91
 
8-8-91
 
Rezoning certain property located at 124 Marshall Lane and a portion of 126
Marshall Lane to Professional Office.


17-91
 
8-22-91
 
Rezoning certain property to R-1E, single family residential, beginning at a
point in the west line of Alexandria Turnpike 50 feet southwardly from a
stone at the southwest corner of Alexandria Pike and Renshaw Road


1-92
 
1-2-92
 
Rezoning a parcel of land at U.S. 27 and the I-275 bridge adjacent to the
Long John Silver's Restaurant in Fort Thomas, Kentucky from R-3
(Residential-3) to LSC (Limited Service Commercial).


9-92
 
3-26-92
 
Rezoning two parcels of land located adjacent to the Lakeside Place Nursing
Home within Highland Heights, from R-3 (Residential-3) to PO (Professional
Office).


22-92
 
6-25-92
 
Rezoning four parcels of land adjacent to Blangy Road from R-3
(Residential-3) to R-1C (Single Family Residential).


3-94
 
2-11-94
 
Amending the comprehensive plan to allow for multi-family use R-2 for the
property in the southwest quadrant of the intersection of Johns Hill Road
with Highway I-275.


4-94
 
2-16-94
 
Rezoning certain property located at 550 Johns Hill Road from Single Family
Residential to R-2 (Multi-family).


20-94
 
8-18-94
 
Rezoning a parcel of land at U.S. 27 and the I-275 Bridge from LSC (Limited
Service Commercial) to R-3 (Multi-family Residential-3).


32-95
 
11-16-95
 
Rezoning Lots 13 - 19 of Hale Avenue from R-1G (Single family residential) to
GC (General Commercial).


15-96
 
10-15-96
 
Rezoning approximately four acres located near the intersection of Johns Hill
Road and Alexandria Pike (U.S. 27) from R-1E, single family residential to
ROD, Redevelopment Overlay District.


05-98
 
5-5-98
 
Rezoning Lots 15-19 and Lots 101 and 105 of Section 1 of the Highland Baby
Farms Subdivision from R-1G (single family residential) to GC (general
commercial).


07-98
 
- -
 
Rezoning Lots K and L of William Caldwell's Estate, Johns Hill District, from
R-1E (Residential 1 Corridor Rehabilitation Overlay Zone) to Professional
Office.


06-2000
 
8-1-00
 
Rezoning the Jerry Kremeer property known as Lots 103-106 and 117-120 of
Highland Baby Farms Section 9 from R-1G (Single family residential) to ROD
(Redevelopment Overlay District).


01-2001
 
2-6-01
 
Rezoning approximately three acres located near the intersection of Johns
Hill Road and Alexandria Pike from general commercial/single family
residential, R-1E/single family residential R-1G to Redevelopment Overlay
District (ROD)


06-2003
 
3-4-03
 
Rezoning approximately 13 acres adjacent to Nunn Drive from Limited Service
Commercial and Residential I-D (LSC &R-ID) zone to Mixed Land Use (MLU) zone.


04-2004
 
6-1-04
 
Rezoning land located at Old US 27 and New US 27 from Residential I (R-1E) to
Limited Service Commercial (LSC) zone.


04-2008
 
3-4-08
 
Rezoning land referred to as the Neltner Property from Residential I (R-1E)
to Redevelopment Overlay District (ROD) zone.


07-2008
 
6-17-08
 
Rezoning land located at 3500 N. Martha Layne Collins Blvd. from Residential
2 (R-2) to Residential 3 (R-3) zone.


11-2008
 
7-15-08
 
Rezoning land located at 2740 Alexandria Pike, Myrtle Avenue from Single
Family Residential (R-1E) to Limited Service Commercial (LSC) zone.


08-2011
 
8-2-11
 
Rezoning property located at 124 Marshall Lane from Professional Office (PO)
to Limited Service Commercial  (LSC) zone.


01-2012
 
2-21-12
 
Rezoning property located at 515 Main Avenue from Residential (RG1) (Single
Family) to Residential 3 (PUD) (Multi-family).


11-2012
 
8-21-12
 
Rezoning property located at 2700 Alexandria Pike from Residential (RE1)
(Single Family) to ROD (Redevelopment Overlay District Zone).


13-2012
 
9-4-12
 
Rezoning property known as excess Fifth Third property just north of 2700
Alexandria Pike from Residential (RE1) (Single Family) to ROD (Redevelopment
Overlay District Zone).


18-2012
 
12-4-12
 
Rezoning the premises known as Jerome Kremer parcel as described in deed book
665, page 236, and located adjacent to Alexandria Pike, from Residential
(RE1) (Single Family) to ROD (Redevelopment Overlay District Zone).


04-2013
 
3-19-13
 
Rezoning property located at 2515, 2523, and 2525 Alexandria  Pike from
Residential 3 (R-3) Zone to General Commercial (GC) Zone.


03-2015
 
6-16-15
 
Rezoning property located at 2555, 2557, and 2559 Alexandria  Pike from
Residential 3 (R-3) Zone to General Commercial (GC) Zone.


03-2018
 
6-19-18
 
Rezoning property located at 2622 Alexandria Pike from Professional Office
(PO) Zone to Mixed Land Use (MLU) Zone; and 24 Faren Drive, 28 Faren Drive,
32 Faren Drive, 40 Faren Drive, 48 Faren Drive, an unnumbered parcel between
Faren Drive and Alexandria Pike, and a portion of an unnumbered parcel at the
northwest corner of Louis B. Nunn Drive and Alexandria Pike to Mixed Land Use
(MLU) Zone.


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE VII:  REPEALED OR SUPERSEDED ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description
 
Reason




1958-237
 
- -
 
Ch. 112 relating to alcoholic beverage control
 
02-2014


1968-359
 
- -
 
Ch. 112 relating to alcoholic beverage control
 
02-2014


1973-422
 
- -
 
Ch. 112 relating to alcoholic beverage control
 
02-2014


1978-506
 
- -
 
Ch. 112 relating to alcoholic beverage control
 
02-2014


830.3
 
8-8-94
 
§ 91.49 relating to notice of ownership of pit bull terriers.
 
01-98


12-87
 
9-24-87
 
§ 91.50 relating to ownership or use of pit bull terriers.
 
01-98


4-93
 
1-14-93
 
§ 31.26 relating to the Recreation Board
 
01-2007


18-98
 
12-15-98
 
§ 31.25 - 31.31 relating to the Parks, Playground, and Recreation Commission
 
01-2005


02-2001
 
2-20-01
 
§ 92.20 (part) establishing a 911 fee per phone line
 
17-2013


2005-12
 
10-4-05
 
§ 112.40 relating to alcoholic beverage control
 
02-2014


18-2013
 
12-3-13
 
§ 112.40 relating to alcoholic beverage control
 
02-2014


01-2014
 
- -
 
§ 154.01 relating to flood damage prevention
 
06-2018


 
 
 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE VIII:  FRANCHISES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


02-98
 
4-21-98
 
Renewing cable television franchise with TKR Cable of Northern Kentucky.


 
 



 



PARALLEL REFERENCES



References to Kentucky Revised Statutes



References to 1981 Code of Ordinances



References to Ordinances



REFERENCES TO KENTUCKY REVISED STATUTES



 

KRS SECTION
 
CODE SECTION




Kentucky Constitution Sec. 228
 
31.63


Chapter 13A
 
93.02


Chapter 13B
 
93.06


39.415
 
31.10


42.450 - 42.495
 
33.04


Chapter 45A
 
34.16, 34A.05


Chapter 56
 
34.16, 34A.05


Chapter 61
 
30.018


61.300
 
91.60


61.805(1) - (5)
 
34A.01


61.805 - 61.850
 
34A.10


61.810
 
34A.05


61.815
 
34A.06


61.820
 
34A.07


61.823
 
34A.09


61.826
 
34A.09


61.846
 
34A.10


61.848
 
34A.10


61.870
 
34.01


61.870 - 61.884
 
34.17


61.872(4)
 
34.06


61.872(5)
 
34.07


61.872(6)
 
34.08


61.874(1) - (3)
 
34.12


61.874(3), (4)
 
34.13


61.874(5)
 
34.14


61.874(6)
 
34.15


61.878
 
34.01 , 34.16


61.878(1)(i)
 
34A.05


61.880
 
34.09


61.880(1)
 
34.16


61.884
 
34.11


65.120
 
71.64


65.8801 - 65.8839
 
31.61 , 31.73


65.8815(5)
 
31.64


82.600 - 82.640
 
72.50


Chapter 83A
 
30.002


83A.010(5)
 
10.02


83A.010(6)
 
10.02


83A.010(7)
 
10.02 , 30.015


83A.010(8)
 
10.02 , 30.015


83A.010(9)
 
10.02


83A.010(10)
 
10.02


83A.010(11)
 
10.02


83A.030(1)
 
30.015


83A.040
 
30.002


83A.060
 
30.016


83A.060(5)
 
72.50


83A.065
 
10.02 , 10.99


83A.130
 
10.18


83A.130(2)
 
30.015


83A.130(5)
 
30.017


83A.130(11)
 
30.015


83A.175(2) - (7)
 
30.002


91A.010
 
33.01


91A.010(6)
 
33.01


91A.010(7)
 
10.02 , 33.01


91A.010(8)
 
10.02


91A.020
 
33.02


91A.200
 
33.11


91A.210
 
33.10 , 33.11


91A.220
 
33.11


91A.220(2)
 
33.11


91A.230
 
33.12


91A.240
 
33.13


91A.250
 
33.14


91A.260
 
33.15


91A.270
 
33.16


91A.280
 
33.17


91A.290
 
33.18


Chapters 116 - 121
 
30.002


117.450 et seq.
 
150.52


Chapter 118
 
30.002


121.180
 
30.002


131.183
 
114.03 , 120.01


Chapter 136
 
118.01


136.120
 
110.03


174.100
 
98.16


174.100(2), (3)
 
98.17


174.100(4)
 
98.18


174.100(5)
 
98.19


174.100(6), (7)
 
98.20


186.042
 
72.14


189.010
 
70.01 , 71.60 , 73.01 , 90.01


189.011
 
71.60


189.020
 
71.27


189.265
 
71.60


189.290
 
71.25


189.330(8)
 
71.02


189.338
 
70.15


189.378
 
71.30 , 71.99


189.378(1)
 
70.01


189.390(4)
 
71.05


189.394
 
71.05


189.450(5)(6)
 
72.03


189.456
 
72.14


189.580
 
71.15


189.725
 
72.08


189.910
 
71.30


189.920
 
71.30


189.930
 
71.26


189.990(1)
 
72.14


198B.010(5)
 
150.02


198B.050
 
150.50


198B.060(8)
 
150.01


198B.990(1)
 
150.99


Chapter 224
 
94.01


226.010
 
115.01


226.020
 
115.03


226.030
 
115.07


226.040
 
115.03


226.050
 
115.04


226.060
 
115.08


226.070
 
115.03


226.080
 
115.05


226.090
 
115.06


226.100
 
115.08


226.990(1)
 
115.99


226.990(3)
 
115.99


227.450
 
150.52


227.489
 
150.50


227.500
 
150.52


227.700 - 227.750
 
93.01 , 93.06


227.700
 
93.01


227.702
 
93.01 - 93.03


227.702(1)
 
93.03


227.704
 
93.01


227.706
 
93.01


227.708
 
93.01


227.710
 
93.02


227.715
 
93.01 - 93.03


227.715(7) - (9)
 
93.03


227.720
 
93.04


227.730
 
93.05


227.750
 
93.06


227.990(1)
 
150.99


227.990(4)
 
93.99


Chapter 241
 
111.02 – 111.04 , 112.01


241.160
 
112.01 , 112.02


Chapter 242
 
111.02 – 111.04 , 112.01


Chapter 243
 
110.03 , 111.02 – 111.04 , 112.01


243.070
 
112.03 , 112.09


243.070(19)
 
112.09


243.450
 
112.06


243.480
 
112.07


243.490
 
112.07


243.500
 
112.07


Chapter 244
 
111.02 - 111.04 , 112.01


318.990
 
150.99


376.275 et seq.
 
72.22


Chapter 416
 
150.21 . 150.24


Chapter 424
 
33.14 , 33.15


446.010(1)
 
10.02


446.010(2)
 
10.02


446.010(9)
 
10.02


446.010(10)
 
10.02


446.010(12)
 
10.02


446.010(13)
 
10.02


446.010(14)
 
10.02


446.010(15)
 
10.02


446.010(17)
 
10.02


446.010(18)
 
10.02


446.010(23)
 
10.02


446.010(25)
 
10.02


446.010(26)
 
10.02


446.010(27)
 
10.02


446.010(28)
 
10.02


446.010(30)
 
10.02


446.010(31)
 
10.02


446.010(33)
 
10.02


446.010(37)
 
10.02


446.010(39)
 
10.02


446.010(43)
 
10.02


446.010(46)
 
10.02


446.010(47)
 
10.02


446.010(49)
 
10.02


446.010(55)
 
10.02


446.020(1)
 
10.03


446.020(2)
 
10.03


446.030
 
10.04


446.050
 
10.05


446.060
 
10.06


446.080(1)
 
10.03


446.080(3)
 
10.03


446.080(4)
 
10.03


446.090
 
10.07


446.100
 
10.08


446.110
 
10.09


446.140
 
10.01


Chapter 528
 
119.01


532.090(1)
 
10.02 , 112.99


534.040
 
10.99


534.040(2)(a)
 
10.02


534.040(2)(c)
 
10.02


534.050(2)(a)
 
112.99


Chapter 610
 
130.02


610.180
 
130.02


610.200
 
130.02


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO 1981 CODE OF ORDINANCES



 

1981 CODE SECTION
 
1992 CODE SECTION




150.2
 
31.70


220.1
 
33.03


220.2
 
33.06


220.6, § 2
 
50.16


220.6, § 3
 
50.17


230.1, § 1
 
32.20


230.1, § 2
 
32.20


230.1, § 3
 
32.21


230.1, § 4
 
32.22


230.1, § 5
 
32.23


230.1, § 6
 
32.24


230.2, § I
 
30.001


230.2, § II
 
30.016, 30.018 – 30.019


230.2, § III
 
30.030


230.2, § VI
 
30.055


230.2, § IX
 
30.090


230.2, § X
 
30.100 – 30.102


230.2, § XI
 
30.004


230.3, § X
 
32.01


240.1
 
33.35


240.2
 
33.36


240.3
 
33.05


240.4
 
33.05


250.0
 
33.04


310, § 3
 
31.10


310.1, § 1
 
31.02


310.1, § 2
 
31.03


310.1, § 3
 
31.04


310.1, § 4
 
31.01


310.1, § 5
 
31.05


310.1, § 6
 
31.05


310.1, § 7
 
31.05


310.1, § 8
 
31.05


310.1, § 9
 
31.06


310.1, § 10
 
31.07


310.1, § 11
 
31.08


310.1, § 12
 
31.09


310.2
 
130.01, 130.99


320.4, § 1
 
92.01


320.4, § 2
 
92.02


320.4, § 3
 
92.03


320.4, § 4
 
92.04


320.4, § 5
 
92.05


320.4, § 6
 
92.99


320.4, § 7
 
92.99


320.5, § 1
 
113.01, 113.02


320.5, § 3
 
113.03


320.5, § 4
 
113.14


320.5, § 5
 
113.04


320.5, § 6
 
113.18


320.5, § 7
 
113.05


320.5, § 11
 
113.99


320.5, § 12
 
113.98


320.5, § 13
 
113.10


320.5, § 14
 
113.11


320.5, § 15
 
113.12


320.5, § 16
 
113.12


320.5, § 17
 
113.13


320.5, § 18
 
113.16


320.5, § 19
 
113.15


320.5, § 22
 
113.17


330.1,§ 1
 
93.35


330.1,§ 3
 
93.36


330.1,§ 4
 
93.36


330.1,§ 5
 
93.36


330.1,§ 6
 
93.36


330.1,§ 7
 
93.37


330.1,§ 8
 
93.38


330.2
 
130.01


330.2, § 1
 
117.15


330.2, § 2
 
117.16


330.2, § 3
 
117.17


330.2, § 4(A)
 
117.21


330.2, § 4(B)
 
117.19


330.2, § 4(C)
 
117.22


330.2, § 5
 
117.23


330.2, § 6
 
117.18


330.2, § 7
 
117.20


410.4, § A.1.
 
111.02


410.4, § B.1
 
111.03


410.4, § B-2
 
111.01


410.4, § C
 
111.04


410.4, § E
 
111.99


420.1, § 1
 
116.01


420.1, § 2
 
116.02


420.1, § 3
 
116.04


420.1, § 4
 
116.05


420.1, § 5
 
116.06


420.1, § 6
 
116.07


420.1, § 7
 
116.99


420.1, § 8
 
116.08


420.1, § 9
 
116.03


420.2, § 1
 
52.01


420.2, § 2
 
52.99


430.1, § 1
 
130.20


430.1, § 2
 
130.21


430.1, § 3
 
130.23


430.1, § 4
 
130.24


430.1, § 5
 
130.25


430.1, § 6
 
130.22


430.1, § 7
 
130.99


510.1, § 2
 
70.99


520.1
 
71.05


520.2, § 1
 
71.60


520.2, § 2
 
71.61


520.2, § 3
 
71.62


520.2, § 4
 
71.64


520.2, § 5
 
71.63


520.3, § 1
 
94.01


520.3, § 2
 
94.02


520.3, § 3
 
94.03


520.3, § 4
 
94.04


520.3, § 5
 
94.99


530.2
 
73.99, Ch. 74, Sch. I


530.3
 
73.99, Ch. 74, Sch. , T.S.O. II


540.1, § 1
 
72.04


540.1, § 2
 
72.04


540.1, § 3(a)
 
72.03


540.1, § 3(b)
 
72.03


540.1, § 3(d)
 
72.03


540.1, § 3(e)
 
72.03


540.1, § 3(f)
 
72.03


540.1, § 3(g)
 
72.03


540.1, § 3(h)
 
72.03


540.1, § 3(i)
 
72.03


540.1, § 3(k)
 
72.03


540.1, § 3(l)
 
72.03


540.2
 
Ch. 75, Sch. 1


540.2, § 1
 
73.99


540.3, § 1
 
72.20


540.3, § 2
 
72.21


540.3, § 3
 
72.22


540.4
 
72.12


540.6
 
72.13


610.1, § 1
 
51.01


610.1, § 2
 
51.47


610.1, § 3
 
51.48


610.1, § 4
 
51.15


610.1, § 5
 
51.02


610.1, § 6(A)
 
51.30


610.1, § 6(B)
 
51.31


610.1, § 6(C)
 
51.32


610.1, § 6(D)
 
51.33


610.1, § 6(E)
 
51.33


610.1, § 6(F)
 
51.18


610.1, § 7(A)
 
51.48


610.1, § 7(B)
 
51.19


610.1, § 7(C)
 
51.99


710.2
 
97.01


710.3, § I
 
97.15


710.3, § I(a)
 
97.16


710.3, § II
 
97.19


710.3, § III
 
97.19


710.3, § IV
 
97.21


710.3, § IV(c)
 
97.20


710.3, § IV(d)
 
97.20


710.3, § V
 
97.25


810.1, § 1
 
96.01


810.1, § 2
 
96.02


810.1, § 3
 
96.03


810.1, § 4
 
96.04


810.1, § 5
 
96.05


810.1, § 6
 
96.06


810.1, § 7
 
96.07


810.1, § 8
 
96.08


810.1, § 9
 
96.09


810.1, § 10
 
96.10


810.1, § 11
 
96.11


810.1, § 12
 
96.12


810.1, § 13
 
96.13


810.1, § 14
 
96.99


810.3
 
50.02, 50.99


810.4
 
51.16


810.1, § 1
 
91.01


810.1, § 2
 
91.60


810.1, § 3
 
91.28


820.1, § 5(a)
 
91.25


820.1, § 5(c)
 
91.03


820.1, § 5(d)
 
91.05


820.1, § 5(e)
 
91.05


820.1, § 5(h)
 
91.13


820.1, § 5(j)
 
91.04


820.1, § 5(k)
 
91.06


820.1, § 5(l)
 
91.10


820.1, § 5(m)
 
91.11


820.1, § 5(n)
 
91.07


820.1, § 5(o)
 
91.08


820.1, § 5(p)
 
91.09


820.1, § 6
 
91.99


820.1, § 7
 
91.61


820.2
 
91.12


820.5, § 1(b)
 
91.02


830.1, § 1
 
95.02


830.1, § 3
 
95.03


830.1, § 4
 
95.04


830.1, § 5
 
95.04


830.1, § 6
 
95.04


830.1, § 7
 
95.05


830.1, § 8
 
95.06


830.1, § 9
 
95.07


830.1, § 10
 
95.01


830.1, § 11
 
95.08


830.1, § 12
 
95.99


830.1, § 13
 
95.99


830.2
 
91.99


830.3, § 1(A)
 
91.46


830.3, § 1(B)
 
91.47


830.3, § 1(C)
 
91.48


830.3, § 2
 
91.45


830.3, § 3
 
Repealed


830.4, § I
 
150.20


830.4, § II
 
150.25


830.4, §  III
 
150.25


830.4, § IV
 
150.21


830.4, § V(1)
 
150.22


830.4, § V(2)
 
150.22


830.4, § V(3)
 
150.23


830.4, § V(4)
 
150.23


830.4, § VI
 
150.24


930.1, § 2
 
150.02


930.2, § 2
 
150.01


1020.2, § 1
 
130.35


1020.2, § 2
 
130.36


1020.2, § 3
 
130.37


1020.4, § 1
 
36.01


1020.4, § 3
 
36.02


1020.5
 
130.03


1020.6
 
130.04


1020.7
 
30.066


 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

ORD.NO.
 
DATE PASSED
 
CODE SECTION




10
 
5-13-60
 
10.18


15
 
1-1-70
 
10.18


418
 
7-24-72
 
T.S.O. II


445
 
7-11-74
 
91.01, 91.25 - 91.33, 91.46, 91.99


16-83
 
6-23-77
 
31.40


10
 
1-1-80
 
10.18


20
 
1-1-80
 
10.18


10
 
1-17-80
 
10.18


2-82
 
- - 82
 
Ch. 75, Sch. II


10-82
 
7-22-82
 
72.99


15-82
 
9-9-82
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


18-82
 
9-23-82
 
50.02, 50.99


1-83
 
2-10-83
 
T.S.O. I


2-83
 
2-10-83
 
T.S.O. I


5-83
 
3-10-83
 
T.S.O. VI


9-83
 
3-24-83
 
T.S.O. I


13-83
 
5-12-83
 
33.11


14-83
 
6-9-83
 
50.02, 50.99


16-83
 
6-23-83
 
152.01


18-83
 
7-28-83
 
50.02, 50.99


19-83
 
8-11-83
 
51.16


20-83
 
8-11-83
 
T.S.O. I


22-83
 
9-22-83
 
T.S.O. VI


23-83
 
10-27-83
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


24-83
 
10-27-83
 
97.15 - 97.24


25-83
 
12-8-83
 
130.20 - 130.25, 130.99


2-84
 
1-12-84
 
94.01 - 94.04, 94.99


5-84
 
1-26-84
 
T.S.O. VI


3-84
 
1-26-84
 
95.99


6-84
 
3-22-84
 
Ch. 75, Sch. II


7-84
 
3-22-84
 
Ch. 75, Sch. II


12-84
 
5-24-84
 
151.01


17-84
 
6-28-84
 
30.001, 30.001, 30.003, 30.004, 30.016, 30.018, 30.019, 30.030, 30.031,
30.055, 30.065, 30.075 - 30.079, 30.090, 30.100 - 30.102


830.3
 
8-8-84
 
91.45 - 91.48, 91.99


830.4
 
8-8-84
 
150.20 - 150.25


23-84
 
12-13-84
 
T.S.O. V


20
 
1-1-85
 
10.18


25
 
1-1-85
 
10.18


530.2(70)
 
3-28-85
 
Ch.74, Sch. I


10-85
 
6-27-85
 
T.S.O. VI


13-85
 
8-8-85
 
T.S.O. I


-
 
3-13-86
 
111.01 - 111.04, 111.99


5-86
 
4-10-86
 
114.01 - 114.05


7-86
 
4-10-86
 
T.S.O. VI


9-86
 
4-24-86
 
T.S.O. VI


11-86
 
8-14-86
 
92.20


12-86
 
9-25-86
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


1-87
 
-  -87
 
T.S.O. VI


8-87
 
6-25-87
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


10-87
 
8-13-87
 
T.S.O. VI


13-87
 
9-24-87
 
T.S.O. VI


12-87
 
9-24-87
 
Repealed


15-87
 
11-12-87
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


3-88
 
2-11-88
 
T.S.O. I


6-88
 
3-10-88
 
152.01


8-88
 
4-28-88
 
32.01


9-88
 
5-12-88
 
32.05


11-88
 
6-9-88
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


12-88
 
7-14-88
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


14-88
 
8-11-88
 
T.S.O. VI


16-88
 
8-11-88
 
51.45


17-88
 
8-25-88
 
51.17


19-88
 
9-22-88
 
T.S.O. IV


22-88
 
9-22-88
 
117.01, 117.99


20-88
 
10-13-88
 
T.S.O. VI


24-88
 
1-12-89
 
30.002


2-89
 
1-26-89
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


27-89
 
6-22-89
 
T.S.O. I


33-89
 
8-10-89
 
T.S.O. III


34-89
 
9-14-89
 
T.S.O. VI


35-89
 
9-28-89
 
T.S.O. VI


39-89
 
10-12-89
 
32.01


42-89
 
12-14-89
 
T.S.O. V


43-89
 
12-14-89
 
T.S.O. V


44-89
 
12-14-89
 
T.S.O. V


2-90
 
3-8-90
 
51.48


1-90
 
3-8-90
 
150.35 - 150.38, 150.99


7-90
 
3-22-90
 
32.03


6-90
 
4-12-90
 
T.S.O. VI


10-90
 
4-26-90
 
Repealed


11-90
 
4-26-90
 
117.01, 117.99


12-90
 
5-10-90
 
Ch. 75, Sch. II


14-90
 
5-24-90
 
91.99


15-90
 
6-14-90
 
96.13


18-90
 
8-9-90
 
30.002


21-90
 
9-27-90
 
150.03


1-91
 
1-24-91
 
72.50, 72.51


2-91
 
1-24-91
 
Ch. 74, Sch. III


3-91
 
2-14-91
 
152.01


4-91
 
2-14-91
 
T.S.O. VI


5-91
 
3-14-91
 
T.S.O. VI


6-91
 
3-14-91
 
T.S.O. VI


8-91
 
5-9-91
 
35.05


9-91
 
5-9-91
 
T.S.O. II


10-91
 
5-23-91
 
31.11


11-91
 
5-23-91
 
51.46


13-91
 
6-27-91
 
150.50 - 150.54


14-91
 
6-27-91
 
150.55


15-91
 
6-27-91
 
T.S.O. II


16-91
 
8-8-91
 
T.S.O. VI


17-91
 
8-22-91
 
T.S.O. VI


18-91
 
8-22-91
 
T.S.O. II


19-91
 
9-12-91
 
30.002


21-91
 
8-12-91
 
T.S.O. II


22-91
 
9-26-91
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


23-91
 
9-26-91
 
T.S.O. II


24-91
 
10-10-91
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


25-91
 
10-10-91
 
150.01


26-91
 
10-10-91
 
90.01 - 90.04


27-91
 
11-14-91
 
150.04


1-92
 
1-2-92
 
T.S.O. VI


2-92
 
1-2-92
 
T.S.O. V


3-92
 
1-23-92
 
T.S.O. II


4-92
 
1-23-92
 
T.S.O. II


5-92
 
2-27-92
 
Ch. 75, Sch. II


9-92
 
3-26-92
 
T.S.O. VI


12-92
 
4-27-92
 
T.S.O. II


17-92
 
5-14-92
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


19-92
 
5-28-92
 
91.14, 91.99


21-92
 
6-11-92
 
Ch. 75, Sch. II


22-92
 
6-25-92
 
T.S.O. VI


27-92
 
8-27-92
 
T.S.O. I


28-92
 
8-27-92
 
T.S.O. V


29-92
 
8-27-92
 
Adopting Ordinance


32-92
 
9-24-92
 
152.01


33-92
 
9-24-92
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


40-92
 
11-12-92
 
T.S.O. V


4-93
 
1-14-93
 
T.S.O. VII


5-93
 
2-11-93
 
150.01


6-93
 
2-11-93
 
152.01


7-93
 
3-11-93
 
30.002


9-93
 
3-25-93
 
152.01


10-93
 
4-8-93
 
T.S.O. I


11-93
 
6-10-93
 
151.01


12-93
 
6-10-93
 
152.01


15-93
 
6-24-93
 
35.05


16-93
 
6-24-93
 
T.S.O. II


19-93
 
10-14-93
 
T.S.O. I


20-93
 
10-14-93
 
152.01


21-93
 
10-28-93
 
T.S.O. I


22-93
 
10-28-93
 
T.S.O. I


23-93
 
10-28-93
 
T.S.O. I


25-93
 
11-7-93
 
T.S.O. I


26-93
 
11-11-93
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


27-93
 
12-9-93
 
T.S.O. I


28-93
 
12-9-93
 
152.01


1-94
 
1-13-94
 
152.01


2-94
 
1-13-94
 
32.01


3-94
 
2-11-94
 
T.S.O. VI


4-94
 
2-10-94
 
T.S.O. VI


5-94
 
2-11-94
 
T.S.O. II


8-94
 
3-10-94
 
T.S.O. I


9-94
 
3-10-94
 
152.01


10-94
 
3-24-94
 
T.S.O. I


11-94
 
4-21-94
 
152.01


15-94
 
5-16-94
 
97.16 - 97.25


16-94
 
6-16-94
 
T.S.O. II


18-94
 
7-21-94
 
50.15


19-94
 
8-18-94
 
152.01


20-94
 
8-18-94
 
T.S.O. VI


21-94
 
8-18-94
 
152.01


22-94
 
8-18-94
 
152.01


23-94
 
8-18-94
 
152.01


24-94
 
8-21-94
 
151.01


25-94
 
8-18-94
 
152.01


26-94
 
8-18-94
 
150.05


27-94
 
8-18-94
 
T.S.O. I


28-94
 
8-18-94
 
T.S.O. I


29-94
 
9-15-94
 
152.01


30-94
 
10-20-94
 
50.15


31-94
 
10-26-94
 
37.01 - 37.05


33-94
 
11-17-94
 
50.15


34-94
 
11-17-94
 
35.05


35-94
 
12-15-94
 
T.S.O. I, III


36-94
 
12-15-94
 
37.03(B)




 



 

ORD. NO.
 
DATE PASSED
 
DESCRIPTION
 
CODE SECTION




1-95
 
2-16-95
 
Zoning ordinance amendment
 
152.01


2-95
 
3-9-95
 
Annexation
 
T.S.O. I


3-95
 
3-10-95
 
Annexation
 
T.S.O. I


4-95
 
3-16-95
 
Compensation to Board Members
 
37.05


5-95
 
3-16-95
 
Amending Ethics Code
 
37.03


6-95
 
3-16-95
 
Street closing
 
T.S.O. V


7-95
 
4-20-95
 
Annual budget
 
Not Included


8-95
 
4-20-95
 
Establishing position of detective
 
30.055


9-95
 
4-20-95
 
Zoning ordinance amendment - walls and fences
 
152.01


10-95
 
4-20-95
 
Annexation
 
T.S.O. I


11-95
 
4-24-95
 
Annexation
 
T.S.O. I


12-95
 
4-27-95
 
Annexation
 
T.S.O. I


13-95
 
5-22-95
 
Annexation
 
T.S.O. I


14-95
 
5-22-95
 
Annexation
 
T.S.O. I


15-95
 
5-22-95
 
Annexation
 
T.S.O. I


16-95
 
6-13-95
 
Annexation
 
T.S.O. I


17-95
 
6-14-95
 
Annexation
 
T.S.O. I


18-95
 
6-15-95
 
Annexation
 
T.S.O. I


19-95
 
6-16-95
 
Annexation
 
T.S.O. I


20-95
 
6-17-95
 
Annexation
 
T.S.O. I


21-95
 
6-19-95
 
Annexation
 
T.S.O. I


22-95
 
6-23-95
 
Annual budget for FY 95-96
 
Not Included


23-95
 
6-24-95
 
Ad valorem tax
 
35.05


24-95
 
6-24-95
 
Annexation
 
T.S.O. I


25-95
 
7-3-95
 
Annexation
 
T.S.O. I


26-95
 
7-3-95
 
Annexation
 
T.S.O. I


27-95
 
7-20-95
 
Compensation Plan
 
32.06


28-95
 
8-17-95
 
Speed limit
 
Not Included


29-95
 
8-17-95
 
Annexation
 
T.S.O. I


30-95
 
10-19-95
 
Stop signs
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


31-95
 
10-19-95
 
Comprehensive Plan
 
Ch. 153


32-95
 
11-16-95
 
Amending zoning map
 
T.S.O. VI


33-95
 
11-16-95
 
Stop signs
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


34-95
 
12-14-95
 
Stop signs
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


01-96
 
05-16-96
 
Requiring carbon monoxide detectors
 
150.06, 150.99


02-96
 
05-16-96
 
Establishing time and place of Council meetings
 
Repealed


03-96
 
05-16-96
 
Zoning (ROD)
 
152.01


04-96
 
06-11-96
 
Defining snow emergencies
 
72.35(A)


05-96
 
07-02-96
 
Establishing time and place of regular Council meetings
 
30.018(B)


06-96
 
07-02-93
 
Establishing stop streets
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


07-96
 
07-16-96
 
Imposing a bank franchise and local deposit tax
 
Ch. 118


08-96
 
07-16-96
 
Establishing stop streets
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


09-96
 
07-16-96
 
Annual budget FY 1996-97
 
 


10-96
 
08-06-96
 
Street closing
 
T.S.O. V


11-96
 
08-06-96
 
Establishing stop streets
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


12-96
 
07-17-96
 
Zoning Code
 
152.01


13-96
 
10-01-96
 
Establishing ad valorem taxation on property
 
35.05


14-96
 
10-15-96
 
Establishing stop streets
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


15-96
 
10-15-96
 
Amending zoning map
 
T.S.O. VI


16-96
 
11-05-96
 
Zoning Code
 
152.01


17-96
 
11-05-96
 
Levying ad valorem taxation
 
35.02, 35.03


18-96
 
-  -
 
Requiring snow emergency signs
 
72.37


01-97
 
-  -
 
Establishing fees, charges and expenses for zoning permits, appeals and
applications
 
150.03, 151.01,152.01


02-97
 
2-4-97
 
Annexing property adjacent to the city on the westerly side of Ridge Hill
Drive
 
T.S.O. I


03-97
 
2-18-97
 
Designating reserved parking spaces for disabled persons
 
72.14


04-97
 
3-18-97
 
Regulating charitable gaming
 
Ch. 119


05-97
 
-  -
 
Amending Ord. 18-96 regarding snow emergency signs
 
72.37


06-97
 
5-20-97
 
Providing for a special assessment for street resurfacing and storm sewer
improvements
 
T.S.O. II


07-97
 
5-20-97
 
Providing for a special assessment for street resurfacing, construction of
storm sewers and curb improvements
 
T.S.O. II


08-97
 
-  -
 
Amending Ord. 1-97 regarding fees, charges and expenses for zoning permits,
appeals and applications
 
150.03, 151.01, 152.01


09-97
 
5-20-97
 
Amending zoning ordinance
 
152.01


10-97
 
6-3-97
 
Repealing a portion of Ord. 17-84 and Ord. 10-91 regarding job descriptions
 
30.055, 30.065, 30.075 - 30.078, 30.100 - 30.102, 31.11


11-97
 
7-15-97
 
Creating the position of Police Records Specialist [Repealed]
 
30.055(H)


12-97
 
7-15-97
 
Creating the position of Public Works Director
 
30.103


13-97
 
7-15-97
 
Adopting the Annual Budget for FY 1997-1998
 
Not Included


14-97
 
9-2-97
 
Assessing an ad valorem tax
 
35.05


15-97
 
9-2-97
 
Closing a portion of Maple Avenue
 
T.S.O. V


16-97
 
12-2-97
 
Amending zoning code regarding sign regulations
 
152.01


01-98
 
1-20-98
 
Amending Ordinance regulating and controlling vicious dogs
 
91.45 - 91.48, 91.99, T.S.O. VII


02-98
 
4-21-98
 
Renewing cable television franchise with TKR Cable of Northern Kentucky
 
T.S.O. VIII


03-98
 
5-5-98
 
Establishing a stop sign at the northwest corner of Baker Road at the
intersection of Main Avenue and Baker Road
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


04-98
 
5-5-98
 
Establishing a stop sign at the northeast corner of the exit from E-Jay's
Plaza onto old US 27 or Alexandria Pike
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


05-98
 
5-5-98
 
Amending zoning map
 
T.S.O. VI


06-98
 
6-16-98
 
Establishing a waste collection and recycling fee
 
50.15(F)


07-98
 
- -
 
Amending zoning map
 
T.S.O. VI


08-98
 
8-4-98
 
Amending annual budget FY 97-98
 
Not Included


09-98
 
8-4-98
 
Adopting annual budget FY 98-99
 
Not Included


10-98
 
8-4-98
 
Adopting the 1997 S-6 Supplement to the city's Code of Ordinances
 
Front


11-98
 
8-4-98
 
Expressing the city's intention to reduce its boundaries
 
T.S.O. I


12-98
 
9-1-98
 
Amending ad valorem taxes
 
35.05


13-98
 
10-20-98
 
Amending regulations of vicious dogs
 
91.99(G)(3)


14-98
 
10-20-98
 
Establishing a stop sign at the northeast corner at the intersection of Clara
Avenue and Harriet Avenue
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


15-98
 
12-1-98
 
Amending zoning ordinance
 
152.01


17-98
 
12-15-98
 
Establishing a stop sign, providing for one-way traffic at the northern exit
of the Perkins restaurant lot at US Route 27 and no left turn
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


18-98
 
12-15-98
 
Amending Playground and Recreation Commission
 
T.S.O. VII


19-98
 
12-15-98
 
Declaring an area to be stricken from the corporate limits of the city
 
T.S.O. I


01-99
 
7-20-99
 
Imposing payroll tax
 
Ch. 120


02-99
 
VOID
 
Assessing and levying a special ad valorem tax for fire and ambulance services
 
Not Included


03-99
 
8-3-99
 
Expressing the city's intention to reduce its boundaries
 
 


04-99
 
10-5-99
 
Assessing and levying an ad valorem tax on all property
 
35.05


05-99
 
10-5-99
 
Adopting the annual budget for FY 1999-2000
 
Not Included


06-99
 
11-16-99
 
Establishing a speed limit
 
Ch. 74, Sch III


07-99
 
11-16-99
 
Amending the zoning code
 
152.01


08-99
 
12-21-99
 
Amending the zoning code
 
152.01


09-99
 
12-21-99
 
Amending the zoning code
 
152.01


10-99
 
12-21-99
 
Amending the zoning code
 
152.01


11-99
 
1-4-00
 
Closing a portion of a public way
 
T.S.O. V


12-99
 
1-4-00
 
Closing a portion of a public way
 
T.S.O. V


01-2000
 
3-7-00
 
Establishing a stop sign on the southeast corner of Highland Meadows Drive at
the intersection of Deep Woods Drive
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


02-2000
 
3-7-00
 
Amending the zoning code
 
152.01


03-2000
 
5-2-00
 
Adopting the goals and policies of the new Comprehensive Plan
 
153.01


04-2000
 
6-20-00
 
Amending the annual budget for FY 1999-2000
 
Not Included


05-2000
 
7-18-00
 
Adopting the annual budget for FY 2000-2001
 
Not Included


06-2000
 
8-1-00
 
Amending zoning map
 
T.S.O. VI


07-2000
 
9-19-00
 
Assessing and levying an ad valorem tax on all property
 
35.05


01-2001
 
2-6-01
 
Amending zoning map
 
T.S.O. VI


02-2001
 
2-20-01
 
Amending fee for 911 Emergency Telephone Service
 
Repealed by Ord. 17-2013


03-2001
 
2-20-01
 
Amending room rental rates of the Civic Center
 
Not Included


04-2001
 
3-6-01
 
Amending the zoning code
 
152.01


05-2001
 
7-17-01
 
Closing a portion of Harriet Avenue
 
T.S.O. V


06-2001
 
7-17-01
 
Adopting new pay classifications for the police department, office personnel
and public works personnel
 
30.055, 30.075, 30.100


07-2001
 
8-21-01
 
Prohibiting the discharge of certain substances into the storm sewer system
 
51.34, 51.99(C)


08-2001
 
10-2-01
 
Adopting the annual budget for FY 2001-2002
 
Not Included


09-2001
 
10-2-01
 
Assessing and levying an ad valorem tax on all property
 
35.05


10-2001
 
11-6-01
 
Authorizing the payment of wage differential to employees called into active
military duty
 
30.005


11-2001
 
11-20-01
 
Amending the zoning code
 
152.01


12-2001
 
11-20-01
 
Amending the zoning code
 
152.01


01-2002
 
VETOED
 
Repealing Ord. 5-82 and Ord. 7-91 and fixing the amount of compensation to be
paid to the Mayor and to each Council member
 
Not Included


02-2002
 
4-16-02
 
Amending Ord. 25-91 adopting the BOCA National Property Maintenance Code with
amendments
 
150.01


03-2002
 
6-18-02
 
Amending the FY 2001-2002 annual budget
 
Not Included


04-2002
 
8-6-02
 
Adopting a new pay classification for police, office and public works
personnel, city boards and commissions
 
30.055, 30.075, 30.100 - 30.102, 32.06


05-2002
 
8-6-02
 
Adopting the FY 2002-2003 budget
 
Not Included


06-2002
 
VETOED
 
Adopting a new pay classification for police, office and public works
personnel, city boards and commissions
 
Not Included


07-2002
 
VETOED
 
Amending the zoning code
 
Not Included


08-2002
 
VETOED
 
Adopting the FY 2002-2003 budget
 
Not Included


09-2002
 
11-19-02
 
Assessing and levying an ad valorem tax on all property
 
35.05


10-2002
 
11-19-02
 
Amending the zoning ordinance
 
152.01


01-2003
 
1-21-03
 
Amending the zoning ordinance
 
152.01


02-2003
 
1-21-03
 
Amending the zoning ordinance
 
152.01


04-2003
 
1-21-03
 
Adopting the FY 2002-2003 budget
 
Not Included


05-2003
 
1-21-03
 
Adopting a new pay classification for police, office and public works
personnel, city boards and commissions
 
30.055, 30.075, 30.100 - 30.102, 32.06


06-2003
 
3-4-03
 
Amending zoning map
 
T.S.O. VI


07-2003
 
3-4-03
 
Amending the zoning ordinance
 
152.01


08-2003
 
4-15-03
 
Pertaining to peddlers and solicitors
 
116.01 - 116.07, 116.99


09-2003
 
4-15-03
 
Amending the zoning map
 
152.01


10-2003
 
5-6-03
 
Repealing ordinance #390
 
Not Included


11-2003
 
5-6-03
 
Establishing a municipal service for collection and disposal of garbage
 
50.03 - 50.07, 50.17, 50.18, 50.99


12-2003
 
5-6-03
 
Prohibiting parking near certain intersections
 
72.15


14-2003
 
6-17-03
 
Adopting the FY 2002-2003 budget
 
Not Included


15-2003
 
6-17-03
 
Adopting a new pay classification for police, office and public works
personnel, city boards and commissions
 
30.055, 30.075, 30.100 - 30.102, 32.06


16-2003
 
6-17-03
 
Amending payroll tax
 
120.01 - 120.10, 120.99


17-2003
 
6-17-03
 
Adopting the FY 2003-2004 budget
 
Not Included


18-2003
 
6-17-03
 
Establishing a waste collection fee
 
50.15


19-2003
 
8-19-03
 
Amending payroll tax license fee
 
120.02


20-2003
 
9-2-03
 
Designating certain spaces for handicapped persons
 
72.14


21-2003
 
9-2-03
 
Establishing a stop intersection
 
Ch. 74, Sched. I


22-2003
 
10-21-03
 
Assessing and levying an ad valorem tax on all property
 
35.02, 35.03, 35.05


23-2003
 
11-4-03
 
Prohibiting through traffic
 
Ch. 74, Sched. IV


25-2003
 
11-18-03
 
Amending payroll tax
 
120.01 - 120.11, 120.99


01-2004
 
3-9-04
 
Amending the license fee on insurance
 
114.01 - 114.06


02-2004
 
3-9-04
 
Amending the FY 2003-2004 budget
 
Not Included


03-2004
 
5-4-04
 
Amending field surveyrequirements
 
150.05


04-2004
 
6-1-04
 
Amending the zoning map
 
T.S.O. VI


05-2004
 
6-1-04
 
Amending the FY 2003-2004 budget
 
Not Included


06-2004
 
6-15-04
 
Accounting of Capital Assets
 
Not Included


07-2004
 
6-22-04
 
Adopting the FY 2004-2005 budget
 
Not Included


08-2004
 
7-20-04
 
Amending the payclassifications for certain departments
 
32.06


09-2004
 
8-17-04
 
Establishing an account foron-emergency unbudgeted capital repair items
 
Not Included


10-2004
 
9-21-04
 
Assessing ad valorem taxes
 
35.05


11-2004
 
12-21-04
 
Establishing occupational license tax
 
110.01 - 110.12, 110.99


12-2004
 
12-21-04
 
Establishing regulations for the revocation of licenses
 
121.01 - 121.05, 121.99


01-2005
 
3-15-05
 
Repealing the Parks, Playground and Recreation Commission and creating the
Recreation Board
 
31.25 - 31.30


02-2005
 
5-17-05
 
Closing a portion of Hill Road
 
T.S.O. V


03-2005
 
6-21-05
 
Adopting the FY 2005-2006 budget
 
Not Included


05-2005
 
6-21-05
 
Amending the FY 2004-2005 budget
 
Not Included


06-2005
 
6-21-05
 
Setting a waste collection and recycling fee for FY 2005-2006
 
50.15


07-2005
 
6-21-05
 
Amending pay classification for various city positions
 
32.06


08-2005
 
6-21-05
 
Establishing a fire lane
 
Ch. 75, Sched. II


10-2005
 
7-19-05
 
Adopting the 2005 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances
 
Front


11-2005
 
9-20-05
 
Assessing and levying an ad valorem tax on all property
 
35.05


12-2005
 
10-4-05
 
Amending hours of alcohol sale on Sundays
 
Repealed by Ord. 02-2014


13-2005
 
10-4-05
 
Amending the zoning ordinance
 
152.01


14-2005
 
12-6-05
 
Amending occupational license regulations
 
110.01, 110.04, 110.05, 110.08


15-2005
 
12-6-05
 
Amending 911 Emergency Service fees
 
92.20


16-2005
 
11-15-05
 
Regulation of non-storm water discharges to storm drainage system
 
53.01 - 53.20


01-2006
 
2-21-06
 
[Repealed by Ord. 13-2006]
 
Not Included


02-2006
 
6-6-06
 
Adopting the 2006 S-14 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances
 
Front


03-2006
 
6-20-06
 
Amending the FY 2005-2006 budget
 
Not Included


04-2006
 
6-20-06
 
Adopting the FY 2006-2007 budget
 
Not Included


05-2006
 
8-15-06
 
Amending pay classification for various city positions
 
32.06


06-2006
 
8-15-06
 
Repeals Ord. 11-1997
 
35.055


07-2006
 
6-20-06
 
Amending waste collection fee
 
Not Included


08-2006
 
9-5-06
 
Amending the Comprehensive Plan
 
Not Included


09-2006
 
9-19-06
 
Assessing and levying an ad valorem tax on all property
 
35.05


10-2006
 
9-19-06
 
Amending the FY 2006-2007 budget
 
Not Included


11-2006
 
9-19-06
 
Amending pay classification for various city positions
 
32.06


12-2006
 
11-7-06
 
Annexing certain property to the city
 
T.S.O. I


13-2006
 
12-19-06
 
Amending parking schedule, repealing Ord. 01-2006
 
Ch. 75, Sched. I


01-2007
 
3-20-07
 
Expanding the city’s Recreation Board from 5 to 6 members
 
31.28


02-2007
 
3-20-07
 
Amending the pay classification
 
32.06


03-2007
 
6-19-07
 
Amending the FY 2006-2007 budget
 
Not Included


04-2007
 
6-19-07
 
Adopting the FY 2007-2008 budget
 
Not Included


05-2007
 
6-19-07
 
Amending the pay classification
 
32.06


06-2007
 
Did not pass
 
 
 
 


07-2007
 
9-4-07
 
Amending parking regulations by increasing certain fees
 
72.99


08-2007
 
10-2-07
 
Adopting the S-15 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances
 
Front


09-2007
 
9-18-07
 
Assessing and levying an ad valorem tax on all property
 
35.05


10-2007
 
12-18-07
 
Amending subdivision regulations
 
151.01


03-2008
 
2-5-08
 
Amending occupational taxes
 
110.03


04-2008
 
3-4-08
 
Amending the zoning ordinance and zoning map
 
152.01, T.S.O. VI


05-2008
 
5-20-08
 
Annexing certain property to the city
 
T.S.O. I


06-2008
 
6-17-08
 
Amending the FY 2007-2008 budget
 
Not Included


07-2008
 
6-17-08
 
Amending the zoning ordinance and zoning map
 
152.01, T.S.O. VI


08-2008
 
6-17-08
 
Adopting the FY 2008-2009 budget
 
Not Included


09-2008
 
6-17-08
 
Amending the pay classification
 
32.06


10-2008
 
6-17-08
 
Creating abatement procedures for abandoned property
 
150.26


11-2008
 
7-15-08
 
Amending the zoning ordinance and zoning map
 
152.01, T.S.O. VI


12-2008
 
9-16-08
 
Assessing and levying an as valorem tax on all property
 
35.05


13-2008
 
10-21-08
 
Closing a portion of Hale Avenue
 
T.S.O. V


14-2008
 
12-2-08
 
Amending the zoning ordinance
 
152.01


15-2008
 
12-2-08
 
Amending the zoning ordinance
 
152.01


16-2008
 
12-2-08
 
Adopting the 2008 S-16 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances
 
Front


17-2008
 
- -
 
Issuing general obligation bonds
 
Not Included


01-2009
 
5-3-09
 
Closing portion of Marshall Lane
 
T.S.O. V


02-2009
 
3-3-09
 
Closing a portion of Myrtle Avenue
 
T.S.O. V


03-2009
 
3-3-09
 
Closing a portion of Harriet Avenue
 
T.S.O. V


04-2009
 
Did not pass
 
 
 
 


05-2009
 
4-7-09
 
Adopting International Property Code 2006 Edition
 
150.01


06-2009
 
4-7-09
 
Snow emergency
 
72.35


07-2009
 
4-7-09
 
Snow emergency routes
 
72.37


08-2009
 
Did not pass
 
 
 
 


09-2009
 
4-7-09
 
Amending regulations regarding garbage and refuse
 
50.03 - 50.08, 50.17

50.18, 50.99


10-2009
 
Did not pass
 
 
 
 


11-2009
 
5-19-09
 
Adopting 2009 S-17 supplement to Code of Ordinances
 
Front


12-2009
 
6-16-09
 
Amending the FY 2008-2009 budget
 
Not Included


13-2009
 
6-16-09
 
Adopting the FY 2009-2010 budget
 
Not Included


14-2009
 
–  –  –
 
Issuing general obligation bonds
 
Not Included


15-2009
 
9-15-09
 
Assessing and levying an valorem tax on all property
 
35.05


16-2009
 
Did not pass
 
 
 
 


17-2009
 
11-17-09
 
Regulating use of outdoor wood furnaces and similar wood burning heating
devices
 
93.50 - 93.52, 93.99


18-2009
 
12-1-09
 
Closing portion of Clara Avenue
 
T.S.O. V


01-2010
 
3-16-10
 
Repealing Ord. 5-82 and 7-91 regarding compensation to the Mayor
 
Not Included


02-2010
 
4-20-10
 
Establishing a Code Enforcement Board
 
31.60 - 31.73


03-2010
 
6-15-10
 
Amending the FY 2009-2010 budget
 
Not Included


04-2010
 
6-15-10
 
Adopting the FY 2010-2011 budget
 
Not Included


05-2010
 
6-15-10
 
Amending the pay classification plan
 
32.06


06-2010
 
8-17-10
 
Amending the zoning ordinance
 
152.01


07-2010
 
 
 
Number skipped
 
 


08-2010
 
9-21-10
 
Assessing and levying an ad valorem tax on all property
 
35.05


09-2010
 
10-5-10
 
Amending the zoning ordinance
 
152.01


01-2011
 
2-15-11
 
Amending the code of ethics
 
37.01 - 37.10, 37.99


02-2011
 
4-19-11
 
Amending Code Enforcement Board and increasing penalties
 
31.60 - 31.73


03-2011
 
6-7-11
 
Amending the zoning ordinance
 
152.01


04-2011
 
6-7-11
 
Amending the zoning ordinance
 
152.01


05-2011
 
6-21-11
 
Establishing a waste collection fee
 
Not Included


06-2011
 
6-21-11
 
Adopting the FY 2011-2012 budget
 
Not Included


07-2011
 
6-21-11
 
Amending the FY 2010-2011 budget
 
Not Included


08-2011
 
8-2-11
 
Amending the zoning ordinance and zoning map
 
T.S.O. VI


09-2011
 
8-16-11
 
Adopting 2011 S-19 supplement to the Code of Ordinances
 
Front


2011-10
 
10-4-11
 
Amending the zoning ordinance
 
152.01


11-2011
 
9-6-11
 
Assessing and levying an ad valorem tax on all property
 
35.05


12-2011
 
9-20-11
 
Establishing a fire lane on Linet Avenue
 
Ch. 75, Sched. II


13-2011
 
11-15-11
 
Announcing intent to withdraw from Highland Heights Southgate Police Authority
 
Not Included


01-2012
 
2-21-12
 
Amending the zoning ordinance and zoning map
 
T.S.O. VI


02-2012
 
2-21-12
 
Amending the zoning ordinance
 
152.01


03-2012
 
3-6-12   
 
Animal regulations
 
91.25


04-2012
 
4-3-12   
 
Creating police department
 
Not Included


05-2012
 
5-1-12
 
Amending the zoning ordinance
 
152.01


06-2012
 
5-1-12
 
Amending the zoning ordinance
 
152.01


07-2012
 
5-1-12
 
Amending the zoning ordinance
 
152.01


09-2012
 
6-19-12
 
Adopting the FY 2012-2013 budget
 
Not Included


10-2012
 
6-19-12
 
Amending the FY 2011-2012 budget
 
Not Included


11-2102
 
8-21-12
 
Amending the zoning ordinance and zoning map
 
T.S.O. VI


12-2012
 
9-4-12   
 
Assessing and levying an ad valorem tax on all property
 
35.05


13-2012
 
9-4-12
 
Amending the zoning ordinance and zoning map
 
T.S.O. VI


14-2012
 
9-4-12
 
Amending the zoning ordinance
 
152.01


15-2012
 
9-18-12
 
Adopting 2012 S-20 supplement to the Code of Ordinances
 
Front


16-2012
 
11-20-12
 
Amending the city waste collection fee
 
Not Included


17-2012
 
11-20-12
 
Issuing general obligation bonds
 
Not Included


18-2012
 
12-4-12
 
Amending the zoning ordinance and zoning map
 
T.S.O. VI


01-2013
 
2-5-13
 
Closing Myrtle Avenue
 
T.S.O. V


02-2013
 
4-2-13   
 
Amending the zoning ordinance
 
152.01


03-2013
 
4-16-13
 
Regulations for maintenance of vacant, foreclosed properties
 
150.70 - 150.75, 150.99


04-2013
 
3-19-13
 
Amending the zoning ordinance and zoning map
 
T.S.O. VI


05-2013
 
3-19-13
 
Closing Baker Road
 
T.S.O. V


06-2013
 
4-16-13
 
Closing part of Main Avenue
 
T.S.O. V


08-2013
 
6-18-13
 
Adopting goals and objectives of the comprehensive plan
 
153.01


09-2013
 
6-18-13
 
Adopting the FY 2013-2014 budget
 
Not Included


10-2013
 
6-18-13
 
Amending the FY 2012-2013budget
 
Not Included


11-2013
 
8-6-13   
 
Occupational license fee credit
 
Not Included


12-2013
 
8-6-13   
 
Changing the name of Old Alexandria Pike to Alexandria Way
 
T.S.O. IV


2013-13
 
9-3-13   
 
Agreement for reduction of non-resident employee fees
 
T.S.O. II


2013-14
 
9-24-13
 
Assessing and levying an ad valorem tax on all property
 
35.05


16-2013
 
11-19-13
 
Amending regulations regarding the City Code Enforcement Board
 
31.60 - 31.73


17-2013
 
11-19-13
 
Repealing 911 fee
 
92.20


18-2013
 
12-3-13
 
Amending alcohol regulations
 
Repealed by Ord. 02-2014


01-2014
 
- -
 
Adopting flood damage prevention regulations 
 
Repealed by Ord. 06-2018


02-2014
 
6-17-14
 
Repealing Ord. 1958-237, 1968-359, 1973-422, 1978-506, 2005-12, 18-2013;
adding new alcoholic beverages regulations
 
112.01 - 112.10, 112.99, T.S.O. VII


03-2014
 
6-17-14
 
Amending the FY 2013-2014 budget
 
Not Included


04-2014
 
6-17-14
 
Adopting the FY 2014-2015 budget
 
Not Included


05-2014
 
6-17-14
 
Adopting 2014 S-21 supplement to the Code of Ordinances
 
Front


06-2014
 
8-5-14
 
Establishing a development area for economic development purposes
 
T.S.O. II


07-2014
 
8-5-14
 
Amending Ord. 08-97 regarding fees, charges and expenses for zoning permits,
appeals and applications
 
150.03, 151.01, 152.01


08-0214
 
8-5-14
 
Amending regulations regarding parades and special events
 
71.40 - 71.55


09-2014
 
9-16-14
 
Assessing and levying an ad valorem tax on all property
 
35.05


10-2014
 
11-18-14
 
Amending the pay classification plan
 
32.06


01-2015
 
6-16-15
 
Amending the FY 2014-2015 budget
 
Not Included


02-2015
 
6-16-15
 
Adopting the FY 2015-2016
 
Not Included


03-2015
 
6-16-15
 
Amending the zoning ordinance and zoning map
 
T.S.O. VI


04-2015
 
6-16-15
 
Amending the zoning ordinance
 
152.01


05-2015
 
9-15-15
 
Assessing and levying an ad valorem tax on all property
 
35.05


06-2015
 
1-5-16
 
Amending the FY 2015-2016 budget
 
Not Included


01-2016
 
4-5-16
 
Closing a public way known as the right of way of Hill Road
 
T.S.O. V


02-2016
 
6-7-16
 
Adopting regulations prohibiting sweepings and debris on sidewalks
 
98.34


03-2016
 
6-21-16
 
Amending the FY 2015-2016 budget
 
Not Included


04-2016
 
6-21-16
 
Adopting the FY 2016-2017 budget
 
Not Included


05-2016
 
6-21-16
 
Issuing general obligation bonds
 
Not Included


06-2016
 
6-21-16
 
Amending the pay classification plan
 
32.06


07-2016
 
8-2-16
 
Adopting Kentucky Building Code
 
150.01


08-2016
 
9-20-16
 
Assessing and levying an ad valorem tax on all property
 
35.05


09-2016
 
12-6-16
 
Issuing general obligation bonds
 
Not Included


02-2017
 
6-20-17
 
Amending FY 2016/2017 budget
 
Not Included


03-2017
 
6-20-17
 
Adopting FY 2017/2018 budget
 
Not Included


04-2017
 
9-19-17
 
Ad valorem tax on property
 
35.05


05-2017
 
12-5-17
 
Amending pay classification plan
 
32.06


01-2018
 
1-16-18
 
Adding a stop sign on High Street
 
Ch. 74, Sched. I


02-2018
 
2-20-18
 
Amending development area
 
Not Included


03-2018
 
6-19-18
 
Amending the zoning ordinance and zoning map
 
T.S.O. VI


04-2018
 
6-19-18
 
Adopting FY 2018/2019 budget
 
Not Included


05-2018
 
6-19-18
 
Amending FY 2017/2018 budget
 
Not Included


06-2018
 
6-19-18
 
Repealing Ord. 01-2014 and adopting flood damage prevention regulations
 
154.01


07-2018
 
9-18-18
 
Assessing and levying an ad valorem tax on all property   
 
35.05


08-2018
 
12-4-18
 
Reducing the boundaries of the city
 
T.S.O. I


09-2018
 
1-15-19
 
Adopting the Kentucky Building Code and Residential Code; designating
enforcement officer; establishing inspection program;and adopting fee schedule
 
150.01, 150.03, 150.55


01-2019
 
2-5-19
 
Amending time and place of Council meetings
 
30.018


02-2019
 
3-5-19
 
Establishing a Tree Commission
 
31.80 - 31.85


03-2019
 
3-5-19
 
Amending Ord. 07-2014 regarding the schedule of fees, charges and expenses
for zoning permits, appeals, applications, and other matters
 
150.03, 151.01, 152.01


OFFICIAL ZONING ORDINANCE
CITY OF
HIGHLAND HEIGHTS,
KENTUCKY
Prepared by:
Planning and Development Services
of Kenton County
Table Of Contents i
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance October 2011 NKAPC
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE/SECTION NAME PAGE
ARTICLE I A ZONING ORDINANCE 1-1
ARTICLE II AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE
Section 2.0 Authority 2-1
Section 2.1 Purpose 2-1
ARTICLE III SHORT TITLE
Section 3.0 Short Title 3-1
ARTICLE IV INTERPRETATION
Section 4.0 Greater Restriction 4-1
Section 4.1 Permit Or License In Violation 4-1
ARTICLE V CONFLICT
Section 5.0 Conflict 5-1
ARTICLE VI SEVERABILITY CLAUSE
Section 6.0 Severability Clause 6-1
ARTICLE VII DEFINITIONS
Section 7.0 Words And Phrases 7-1
ARTICLE VIII ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES
Section 8.0 Zones 8-1
Section 8.1 Official Zoning Map Or Maps 8-1
Section 8.2 Changes On Zoning Map 8-1
Section 8.3 Replacement Of Official Zoning Map 8-2
Section 8.4 Rules For Interpretation Of Zone Boundaries 8-2
Section 8.5 Annexed Territory: Areas Not Included Within
Zones 8-2
ARTICLE IX GENERAL REGULATIONS
Section 9.0 Purpose 9-1
Section 9.1 Reduction In Building Site Area 9-1
Section 9.2 Interference With Traffic Signals 9-1
Section 9.3 Vision Clearance At Corners, Curb Cuts, And
Railroad Crossings 9-1
Section 9.4 Frontage On Corner Lots And Double Frontage
Lots 9-1
Section 9.5 Utilities Location 9-1
Table Of Contents ii
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance October 2011 NKAPC
TABLE OF CONTENTS (continued)
ARTICLE/SECTION NAME PAGE
Section 9.6 Railroad Rights-Of-Way Location 9-2
Section 9.7 Excavation, Movement Of Soil, Tree Removal,
And Erosion And Sedimentation Control 9-2
Section 9.8 Unsightly Or Unsanitary Storage 9-3
Section 9.9 Junkyard Location 9-4
Section 9.10 Application Of Zoning Regulations 9-4
Section 9.11 Special Requirements Governing Home
Occupations 9-5
Section 9.12 Nonconforming Lots, Nonconforming Uses,
Nonconforming Structures, Repairs And
Maintenance, And Nonconforming Signs 9-6
Section 9.13 Exceptions And Modifications 9-9
Section 9.14 Conditional Uses 9-11
Section 9.15 Building Regulations 9-12
Section 9.16 Move And Set 9-13
Section 9.17 Screening Area 9-14
Section 9.18 Outdoor Swimming Pools 9-15
Section 9.19 Development Plan Requirements 9-17
Section 9.20 Regulations Concerning Air Rights 9-19
Section 9.21 Regulations Pertaining To Parking Or Storing Of
Trailers, Mobile Homes, Campers, Inoperable
Vehicles, And Other Such Type Equipment 9-19
Section 9.22 Regulations Concerning Design And
Construction Of Improvements 9-20
Section 9.23 Hillside Development Controls 9-21
Section 9.24 Phased Zoning Regulations 9-22
Section 9.25 Corridor Rehabilitation Overlay Zoning 9-23
Section 9.26 Dish Type Satellite Receiving Station Regulations 9-23
Section 9.27 Sidewalks 9-23
Section 9.28 Underground Utilities 9-23
Section 9.29 Cellular Towers and Other Utilities 9-24
Section 9.30 Required Notice For Approval Of Development
Plans 9-31
ARTICLE X ZONE REGULATIONS
Section 10.0 C-O (Conservation) Zone 10-1
Section 10.1 R-RE (Residential Rural Estate and Agricultural)
Zone 10-4
Section 10.2 R-1B (Residential One-B) Zone 10-6
Section 10.3 R-1C (Residential One-C) Zone 10-8
Table Of Contents iii
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance October 2011 NKAPC
TABLE OF CONTENTS (continued)
ARTICLE/SECTION NAME PAGE
Section 10.4 R-1D (Residential One-D) Zone 10-10
Section 10.5 R-1E (Residential One-E) Zone 10-12
Section 10.6 R-1EF (Residential One-EF) Zone 10-14
Section 10.7 R-1F (Residential One-F) Zone 10-16
Section 10.8 R-1G (Residential One-G) Zone 10-18
Section 10.9 R-1H (Residential One-H) Zone 10-20
Section 10.10 R-2 (Residential Two) Zone 10-22
Section 10.11 R-3 (Residential Three) Zone 10-24
Section 10.12 PUD (Planned Unit Development) Overlay Zone 10-26
Section 10.13 RCD (Residential Cluster Development) Overlay
Zone 10-34
Section 10.14 SC (Shopping Center) Zone 10-42
Section 10.15 NSC (Neighborhood Shopping Center) Zone 10-45
Section 10.16 GC (General Commercial) Zone 10-48
Section 10.17 PO (Professional Office Building) Zone 10-52
Section 10.18 LSC (Limited Service Commercial) Zone 10-55
Section 10.19 MLU (Mixed Land Use) Zone 10-58
Section 10.20 I (Industrial) Zone 10-63
Section 10.21 CTO (Corridor Transition Overlay District) Zone 10-65
Section 10.22 ROD (Redevelopment Overlay District) Zone 10-67
ARTICLE XI FENCES, WALLS, AND OBSTRUCTION TO VIEW
REGULATIONS
Section 11.0 Vision Clearance At Corners And Railroad
Crossings 11-1
Section 11.1 Classification Of Fences And Walls 11-1
Section 11.2 Conservation Zones 11-1
Section 11.3 Residential Zones 11-1
Section 11.4 Commercial Zones 11-2
Section 11.5 Measurement Of All Fence And/Or Wall Heights
And/Or Locations 11-3
Section 11.6 Height Of Any Barbed Wire Or Sharp Pointed
Fences 11-3
Section 11.7 Height Of Fences Atop Retaining Walls 11-3
Section 11.8 Electrified Fences 11-3
Section 11.9 Permit Required For Erection Of Fences 11-3
Section 11.10 Structural Elements Of Fences 11-3
Section 11.11 Dilapidated Fences 11-3
Table Of Contents iv
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance October 2011 NKAPC
TABLE OF CONTENTS (continued)
ARTICLE/SECTION NAME PAGE
ARTICLE XII OFF-STREET PARKING REGULATIONS
Section 12.0 General Requirements 12-1
Section 12.1 Specific Off-Street Parking Requirements 12-12
ARTICLE XIII OFF-STREET LOADING AND/OR UNLOADING
REGULATIONS
Section 13.0 General Requirements 13-1
Section 13.1 Off-Street Loading And/Or Unloading – Use
And Bulk Regulations 13-1
ARTICLE XIV SIGN REGULATIONS
Section 14.0 Scope Of Regulations 14-1
Section 14.1 General Rules, Regulations, And Limitations 14-1
Section 14.2 Exemptions 14-5
Section 14.3 Sign Permit Required For Erection Of Signs 14-7
Section 14.4 Application For Sign Permit 14-7
Section 14.5 Sign Permit Fees 14-8
Section 14.6 Permitted Use And Location Of Signs 14-8
Section 14.7 Classification Of Signs 14-9
ARTICLE XV ADMINISTRATION
Section 15.0 Enforcing Officer 15-1
Section 15.1 Zoning Permits 15-1
Section 15.2 Building Permits 15-3
Section 15.3 Certificate Of Occupancy 15-5
Section 15.4 Certificate Of Occupancy For Existing Building 15-5
Section 15.5 Certificate Of Occupancy For Lawful
Nonconforming Uses And Structures 15-5
Section 15.6 Denial Of Certificate Of Occupancy 15-5
Section 15.7 Certificate Of Occupancy Records 15-6
Section 15.8 Complaints Regarding Violations 15-6
Section 15.9 Penalties 15-6
ARTICLE XVI AMENDMENT PROCEDURE
Section 16.0 Amendment Procedure 16-1
ARTICLE XVII BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
Section 17.0 Establishment Of Board Of Adjustment;
Membership; Appointment; Terms; Vacancies;
Oaths; Compensation; Removal; Officers 17-1
Table Of Contents v
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance October 2011 NKAPC
TABLE OF CONTENTS (continued)
ARTICLE/SECTION NAME PAGE
Section 17.1 Meetings Of Boards; Quorum; Minutes;
By Laws; Finances; Subpoena Power;
Administration Of Oaths 17-2
Section 17.2 Procedure For All Appeals To Board 17-2
Section 17.3 Appeals From Planning Commission, Board Of
Adjustment, Or Legislative Body 17-3
Section 17.4 Stay Of Proceedings 17-3
Section 17.5 Powers Of Board Of Adjustment 17-3
Section 17.6 Dimensional Variances; Change From One
Nonconforming Use To Another; Conditions
Governing Applications; Procedures 17-4
Section 17.7 Conditional Use Permits 17-7
Section 17.8 Decisions Of The Board Of Adjustment 17-7
ARTICLE XVIII FEES, CHARGES, AND EXPENSES
Section 18.0 Schedule Of Fees, Charges, And Expenses 18-1
APPENDIX A FORMS AND PROCEDURES A-1
APPENDIX B ZONE REGULATIONS SUMMARY B-1
APPENDIX C SUMMARY OF AMENDMENTS C-1
Article I A Zoning Ordinance 1-1
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
ARTICLE I
A ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION 1.0: An Ordinance dividing the city of Highland Heights, Commonwealth of
Kentucky, into zones. Zones of such shape and area as is deemed suited to carry out these
regulations: Regulating the location, heights, number of stories and size of building and other
structures; regulating the size of yards and other open spaces and the density and distribution of
population and uses of buildings, structures and land for residential, commercial, industrial, and
other purposes; prescribing penalties for the violations; providing for enforcement; a board of
adjustments and repealing all regulations, resolutions, orders, ordinances and/or codes in conflict
with this ordinance.
BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the city of Highland Heights, Commonwealth of
Kentucky, as follows:
Article II Authority And Purpose 2-1
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
ARTICLE II
AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE
SECTION 2.0 AUTHORITY: The City Council of the city of Highland Heights in pursuance
of the authority of Kentucky Revised Statutes (K.R.S. 100.201 - 100.991) hereby ordains and
enacts into law the following Articles and Sections.
SECTION 2.1 PURPOSE: The zoning regulations and districts as herein set forth have been
prepared in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan for the city of Highland Heights to promote
the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the city, to facilitate orderly and
harmonious development and the visual or historical character of the city, and to regulate the
density of population and intensity of land use in order to provide for adequate light and air. In
addition, this Ordinance has been prepared to provide for vehicle off–street parking and loading
and/or unloading space, as well as to facilitate fire and police protection, and to prevent the
overcrowding of land, blight, danger, and congestion in the circulation of people and
commodities, and the loss of life, health, or property from fire, flood or other dangers. The
zoning regulations and districts as herein set forth are also employed to protect highways, and
other transportation facilities, public facilities, including schools and public grounds, the central
business district, natural resources and other specific areas in the city of Highland Heights which
needs special protection by the city.
Article III Short Title 3-1
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
ARTICLE III
SHORT TITLE
SECTION 3.0 SHORT TITLE: This Ordinance shall be effective throughout the city of
Highland Heights, Kentucky, and shall be known, referred to and recited to as the "OFFICIAL
ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF HIGHLAND HEIGHTS".
Article IV Interpretation 4-1
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
ARTICLE IV
INTERPRETATION
SECTION 4.0 GREATER RESTRICTION: The provisions of this ordinance shall be held
to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of public safety, health, and general welfare.
Where this Ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the buildings, structures or premises,
upon heights of buildings or structures or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or
required by any other ordinances, rules, codes, permits or regulations, or by easements,
covenants, deed restrictions or agreements, the provisions of this Ordinance shall govern.
SECTION 4.1 PERMIT OR LICENSE IN VIOLATION: Not withstanding any other
provisions of this ordinance or any other ordinances, rules, codes, permits, or regulations of the
city of Highland Heights; If any permit or license is issued in violation of any provision of this
Ordinance or purports to authorize the doing of any act not permitted by any provision of the
Ordinance, said permit or license shall be void.
Article V Conflict 5-1
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
ARTICLE V
CONFLICT
SECTION 5.0 CONFLICT: All ordinances and parts of ordinances of the city of Highland
Heights in conflict herewith are hereby repealed; providing, however, that such repeal shall not
effect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for any act done or committed in
violation of any such ordinances and parts there of hereby repealed prior to the effective date of
this Ordinance.
Article VI Severability Clause 6-1
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
ARTICLE VI
SEVERABILITY CLAUSE
SECTION 6.0 SEVERABILITY CLAUSE: That should any Article, Section, sub-section,
sentence, clause, or phrase of this Ordinance, for any reason, be held unconstitutional or invalid,
such decision or holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining potions hereof. It being the
intent of the City Council of the city of Highland Heights to enact each section, and portion
thereof, individually, and each such section shall stand alone, if necessary, and be in force not
withstanding the invalidity of any other Section or provision.
Article VII Definitions 7-1
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
ARTICLE VII
DEFINITIONS
SECTION 7.0 WORDS AND PHRASES: For the purposes of this Ordinance, certain terms,
phrases, words, and their derivatives are herewith defined as follows: Words used in the future
tense include the present; Words used in the present tense include the future; Words used in the
singular include the plural; Words used in the plural include the singular; Words used in the
masculine include the feminine; Words used in the feminine include the masculine; The word
“shall” is mandatory and not directory; The word “may” shall be deemed as permissive.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE CUSTOMARY: A “customary accessory building or use”
is one which:
A. is subordinate to and serves the principal building or principal use; and
B. is subordinate in area, extent, or purpose to the principal building or principal use served;
and
C. contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of occupants of the principal
building or principal use served; and
D. is located on the same lot as the principal building or principal use served, with the single
exception of such accessory off–street parking facilities as are permitted to locate
elsewhere than on the same zoning lot with the building or use served; and
E. is of a size such that the projected area in any vertical plane is greater than 15 square
feet or have a total surface area of greater than 36 square feet.
AGRICULTURE: The use of land for agricultural purposes including agriculture, dairying,
farming, floriculture, horticulture, pasturage, viticulture, and animal and poultry husbandry and
the necessary accessory uses for packing, treating, or sorting the produce; provided, however,
that the operation of any such accessory use shall be secondary to that of the normal agricultural
activities.
AIR RIGHTS: Air rights for the purpose hereof shall be defined to mean the ownership or
control of all land, property, and that area of space at and above a horizontal plane over the
ground surface of land. This horizontal plane shall be at a height above the existing or proposed
development (depending on the individual property in question) which is reasonably necessary or
legally required for the full and free use of the ground surface.
ALLEY: All public rights–of–way at the rear of the lot which normally affords a secondary
means of access to abutting property.
APARTMENT: A portion of a building consisting of a room or suite of rooms intended,
designed, or used as a permanent residence by an individual or one (1) family.
Article VII Definitions 7-2
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
APARTMENT HOUSE: See DWELLINGS, MULTIPLE.
AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY: A building or portion thereof, containing facilities for washing
more than two (2) automobiles, using production line methods with chain conveyer, blower,
steam cleaning device, or other mechanical devices. Thus use of personnel for one or more
phases of this operation in conjunction with or without complete automatic or mechanical
devices does not alter its classification. For this purpose of this Ordinance, coin operated devices,
of the above nature, which are operated on a self service basis shall be constructed to be the
same.
AUTOMOBILE AND TRAILER SALES AREAS: An open, partially open, or enclosed area
other than a street, used for the display, sale or rental of new or used automobiles or trailers, and
where no repair work is done except minor incidental repair of automobiles or trailers to be
displayed, sold or rented from the premises.
BASEMENT: That portion of a building between floor and ceiling, which is partly below and
partly above the average level of the adjoining grade but so located that the vertical distance
from the average level of the adjoining grade to the floor below is less than the vertical distance
from the average level of the adjoining grade to the ceiling.
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT OR BOARD: Board of Adjustment, city of Highland Heights,
Commonwealth of Kentucky.
BOARDING HOUSE: A residential building other than a hotel, motel, or tourist cabin where
lodging and meals for four (4) or more persons are served for compensation, and by
prearrangement for definite periods.
BORROW PIT: Any place or premises where dirt, soil, sand, gravel, or other compensation,
material is removed by excavation or otherwise, below the grade of the surrounding land, for any
purpose other than mining operations such as gold, silver, coal, etc., and that necessary and
incidental to grading or to building construction on the premises.
BUFFER AREA: Areas so planned and/or zoned which act as a buffering or separation area
between two (2) or more uses or structures not compatible, due to design, function, use, or
operation.
BUILDING: A structure enclosed within exterior walls or firewalls for the shelter, housing,
support or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind.
BUILDING, ALTERATION OF: Any change or rearrangement in the supporting members
(such as bearing walls, beams, columns or girders) of a building or any addition to a building, or
movement of a building from one location to another.
BUILDING AREA OR LOT COVERAGE BY BUILDING: That portion of a lot or building
site that can be legally occupied by the ground floor of the principal building or use and all
Article VII Definitions 7-3
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
permitted accessory uses excluding those portions of the lot or building site, which shall be
reserved for minimum required yard spaces.
BUILDING, COMPLETELY ENCLOSED: A building separated on all sides from the adjacent
open space, or from other buildings or other structures, by a permanent roof and by exterior walls
or party walls, pierced only by windows and normal entrance or exit doors.
BUILDING, DETACHED: A building surrounded by open space on the same lot or tract of
land.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF: The vertical distance measured from average elevation of the
finished grade adjoining the building at the front building line to the highest point of the roof
surfaces, if a flat roof; to the deck line of a mansard roof; and to the average height level between
eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs.
BUILDING INSPECTOR: The official or officials appointed by the city of Highland Heights
for carrying out the building codes.
BUILDING LINE: A line defining the minimum front, side and rear yard requirements.
BUILDING, MAIN: See BUILDING, PRINCIPAL.
BUILDING PERMIT: A permit issued by the city of Highland Heights’ Building Inspector
authorizing the construction or alteration of a specific building, structure, sign or fence on a
specific tract.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: The building on a lot used to accommodate the primary use to which
the premises are devoted.
BUILDING SITE: One continuous piece of land that meets all of the provisions of the city of
Highland Heights’ Ordinances, regulations, and codes for building on said site. For the purpose
of this Ordinance, the entire amount of ground being called a building site shall be in one (1)
specific zone category and this shall not be constructed to mean merely a residential,
commercial, industrial, etc., but specifically Residential R-1A, R-1B, R-2, CBD-1, CBD-2, etc.
CAMPING/VACATION MOBILE UNIT: Any coach, cabin, house trailer, house car or other
vehicle or structure intended for, designed for, and used for temporary human habitation or
sleeping purposes, mounted upon wheels or supports, or supported and/or capable of being
moved by its own power or transported by another vehicle.
CANOPY (MARQUEE): A roof–like structure serving the purpose of protecting pedestrians
from rain, snow, sun, or hail which structure projects from a building. Such structure shall be
open on three (3) sides and, if ground supported, supports shall be confined in number and cross
section area to the minimum necessary for actual support of the canopy.
Article VII Definitions 7-4
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
CARPORT: See GARAGE, PRIVATE.
CELLAR: The portion of a building between floor and ceiling which is wholly or partly below
the average level of the adjoining grade and so located that the vertical distance from the average
level of the adjoining grade to the floor below is equal to or greater than the vertical distance
from the average level of the adjoining grade to the ceiling.
CITIZEN MEMBER: Any member of the Planning Commission or Board of Adjustment who is
not an elected or appointed official or employee of the City.
CITY: The City of Highland Heights, Kentucky.
CLINIC, ANIMAL: A building used by a group of professional medical persons for the healing
arts or treatment of small animals on an out-patient/in-patient, but or nonboarding basis only,
without runs.
CLINIC, PERSONS: A building used by a group of professional medical persons for the healing
arts or treatment of persons on an out-patient or nonboarding basis.
CLUB: A building owned or rented by a nonprofit association made up of bona fide members
paying dues, the use of which is restricted to said members and their guests.
COMMISSION (PLANNING COMMISSION): The Highland Heights Planning Commission,
Campbell County, Kentucky.
COMPREHENSIVE (MASTER) PLAN: A guide for public and private actions and decisions to
assure the development of public and private property in the most appropriate relationships. It
shall contain, as a minimum, the following elements:
A. A statement of goals and objectives, principles, policies, and standards;
B. A land use plan element;
C. A transportation plan element;
D. A community facilities plan element;
E. May include any additional elements, such as, without being limited to, community
renewal, housing, flood control, pollution, conservation, natural resources, and others.
COMPUTER STORE – RETAIL: Business in which computers, computer components, and
software are available for retail sales. Service and upgrades are secondary to the retail aspect of
the operation.
COMPUTER STORE – SERVICE: Business in which computer repair, service, and/or
consulting is offered as the primary function of the business with the sale of components and
other repair items being a part of that service. Software is secondary to the service aspect of the
business.
Article VII Definitions 7-5
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
CONCEALED LIGHTING: An artificial light source intended to illuminate the face of a sign,
the direct source of which is shielded from public view and surrounding properties.
CONDITIONAL USE: A use which may be suitable as determined by the Board of Adjustments
in zones herein defined, but which would impair the integrity and character of the zone in which
it is located, or in adjoining zones, unless restrictions on locations, size, extent, and character of
performance are imposed.
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT: Legal authorization to undertake a conditional use, issued by
the Zoning Administrator pursuant to authorization by the Board of Adjustment, consisting of
two parts;
A. A statement of the factual determination by the Board of Adjustment which justifies the
issuance of the permit; and
B. A statement of the specific conditions which must be met in order for the use to be
permitted.
CONFORMING USE: Any lawful use of a building, structure, lot, sign or fence which complies
with the provisions of this Ordinance.
COUNCILMEN: Members of the City Council, city of Highland Heights, Commonwealth of
Kentucky.
COURT: An open, unoccupied space other than a yard, on the same lot with a building and
which is bounded on two (2) or more sides by the building.
CURB CUT: Any interruption, or break in the line of a street curb in order to connect a
driveway to a street, or otherwise to provide vehicular access to abutting properties.
CURB LEVEL: The level of the established curb in front of the building measured at the center
of such front. Where no curb has been established, the City Engineer shall authorize and approve
the establishment or such curb level or its equivalent for the purpose of the Ordinance.
DECIBEL: A unit of measurement of the intensity (loudness) of sound. Sound level meters
which are employed to measure the intensity of sound are calibrated in “decibels”.
DEEDED AND ACCEPTED RIGHT-OF-WAY: An appropriation of land to some public uses,
made by the owner of the fee and accepted for such use by and in behalf of the public.
DISH: That part of a satellite signal receiving station characteristically shaped like a saucer or
dish.
DISH-TYPE SATELLITE SIGNAL RECEIVING STATION: A signal receiving device
(antenna, dish antenna, or dish-type antenna) the purpose of which is to receive communications
or other signals from satellites in each orbit or other extraterrestrial sources. The device usually
Article VII Definitions 7-6
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
has a low-noise amplifier (LNA) which is situated at the focal point of the receiving component,
and the purpose of which is to magnify, store, transfer and/or transmit electronic of light signals.
DECOMPOSE BY DETONATION: Refers to the detonation of explosives as part of blasting
and to those uses that utilize blasting during processing, manufacturing, compounding, packing
or assembling.
DISTRICT: For purpose of this Ordinance, Synonymous with “Zone”.
DORMITORY: A building used to provide residences for a group or persons (including
students, faculty, or staff) of whom all are exclusively associated with an institution of higher
education.
DRIVE-IN, EATING OR DRINKING PLACE: See EATING ESTABLISHMENTS—
RESTURANTS.
DWELLING: Any building which is completely intended for, designed for and used for
residential purposes, but for the purposes of this Ordinance, shall not include a hotel-motel,
hotel, motel, nursing home, tourist cabins, college or university dormitories, or military barracks.
DWELLING, ATTACHED SINGLE-FAMILY: A dwelling unit which is attached to one or
more dwelling units, each of which has independent access to the outside of the building to
ground level and which has no more than two (2) exterior walls fully exposed and not in
common with the exterior walls of any other unit.
DWELLING, DETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY: A dwelling standing by itself and containing
only one (1) dwelling unit, separate from other dwellings by open space, but shall not include
mobile homes.
DEWLLING, DOUBLES: See DWELLING, TWO FAMILY.
DWELLING, DUPLEXES: See DWELLING, TWO FAMILY.
DEWLLING, GROUP HOUSE: A building that has not less than three (3) one-family
housekeeping units erected in a row as a single building on one lot or one adjoining lot, each
being separated from the adjoining unit or units by an approved masonry party wall or walls
extending from the basement or cellar floor to the roof along the dividing lot line, and each such
building being completely separated from any other building by space on all sides and such
space shall be at least the required minimum yard setbacks as so specified in this Ordinance.
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY: A residential building used and/or arranged for rental
occupancy, owner occupancy, or cooperatively owned by occupants, have three (3) or more
dwelling units, as separate housekeeping units. This type of dwelling shall be inclusive of
apartment buildings and group house dwellings.
Article VII Definitions 7-7
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
DWELLING, TRAILER: See MOBILE HOME.
DWELLING, TWO–FAMILY: A residential building designed, arranged, or used exclusively
by two (2) families, living independently of each other.
DWELLING UNIT: A building or portion thereof providing complete housekeeping facilities
for one (1) person or one (1) family.
EARTH STATION: See Dish-Type Satellite Receiving Station.
EASEMENT: A right, distinct from the ownership of the land, to cross property with facilities
such as, but not limited to sewer lines, water lines, and transmission lines, or the right, distinct
from the ownership of the land, to reserve and hold an area for drainage or access purposes.
EATING ESTABLISHMENTS –– RESTAURANTS:
A. Fast Service Restaurants - Those restaurants which have limited variety of menu and use
limited food preparation techniques to serve food quickly. The food is often dispensed in
disposable material, there is less need for storage (food or china) and less elaborate
scullery area (Dishwashing machinery) is needed.
1. Carry-out: A fast service of “call in and order” restaurant which does not have sit
down eating arrangements and consumptions of food on the premises is
prohibited (or discouraged).
2. Drive-in: A restaurant which encourages the consumption of food on the premises
(in car, no seating facilities) serving the food by “car-hop” or self-service.
B. Sit Down Restaurants – Those restaurants which provide waiter service, seating
arrangements, whether interior or exterior. This category would also include cafeteria
type self-service, sit down restaurants (the variety of food and preparation is still
elaborate). The menu will have a variety or preparation techniques; scullery areas, china
storage, and larger food storage facilities will be necessary.
1. Combination – A restaurant which provides any combination of sit down service
plus the capability of providing carry-out, drive-on, or both services.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES: The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public
utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies of underground or overhead gas, electrical,
steam or water transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or
disposal systems; including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm
boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, and other similar equipment and accessories reasonably
necessary for furnishing adequate service for the public health, safety, or general welfare. This
definition is not mean to include buildings.
Article VII Definitions 7-8
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
FAMILY: An individual or two (2) or more persons related by blood or marriage, or group of
not more than three (3) persons (excluding servants) who need not be related by blood or
marriage, living together in a single housekeeping unit as their common home for the time, as
distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house, lodging house, hotel, club, fraternity or
sorority house.
FENCE: A structure made of wire, wood, metal, masonry, or other material, including hedges,
which is constructed or erected in a more or less permanent location in or on the ground and
which constitutes an enclosure or barrier around or along a field, year, etc.
FILLING STATION: See SERVICE STATION
FLOOD AREA, GROSS: The sum of the gross horizontal area of the several floors of a
dwelling unit or units exclusive of porches, balconies and garages measured from the exterior
faces of the exterior walls or from the center lines of walls or partitions separating dwelling
units. For uses other than residential, the gross floor area shall be measured from the exterior
faces of the exterior walls or from the center line of walls or partitions separating such uses and
shall include all floors, lofts, balconies, mezzanines, cellars, basements and similar areas devoted
to such uses. The gross floor area shall not include floors used for parking space when such
parking appertains to a residential commercial, or office use in the same structure.
FRATERNITY OR SORORITY: A club or social activity officially associated with and
recognized and supervised by an institution for higher education whose member ship is limited
exclusively to students of the said institution.
FRATERNITY/SORORITY HOUSE: A building used by a fraternity or sorority to provide
living quarters for some or all members as well as to provide study, meeting, recreational and
other facilities.
FREQUENCY: The number of oscillations per second in a sound wave. This is an index of the
pitch of the resulting sound.
FRONTAGE: All the property abutting on one (1) side of the right–of–way of a street, measured
along the right–of–way line of the street between the lot lines as extended to intersect said rightof-
way line of said street. In no case shall the line along an alley be considered as acceptable for
frontage.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building or portion of a principal building not exceeding
eight hundred (800) square feet in area, per dwelling unit, designed, intended and used for the
storage of not more than four (4) motor driven vehicles, per dwelling unit, owned, used and
registered in the name of the occupants of the dwelling unit for which said private garage is
intended. Not more than one (1) of the vehicles shall be a commercial vehicle and this vehicle
shall not be more than two (2) ton capacity. This definition shall not include a public garage.
Article VII Definitions 7-9
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
GARAGE, PUBLIC: A building or portion thereof designed, intended and used exclusively for
the car, repair or equipment or self-propelled motor vehicles or other vehicles. This definition
shall not include private garages.
GROUP HOUSING: See DWELLING, GROUP HOUSE.
HOME OCCUPATION: An accessory use customarily conducted entirely within a dwelling, as
permitted; herein, and carried on solely by the inhabitants thereof, and further meeting the
requirements specified in Section 9.11.
HOSPITAL, PERSONS: A building used by a group of professional medical persons for the
healing arts or treatment of persons on an, generally, in-patient or boarding basis.
HOSPITAL, ANIMAL: A building used by a group of professional medical persons for the
healing arts or treatment of animals on an, generally, in-patient or boarding basis and shall not
have outside runs.
HOTEL: A building occupied as the more or less temporary abiding place for travelers and
transient guests who are lodged with or without meals and in which there are sleeping rooms
usually occupied singly and with no provisions made for cooking in any individual room or a
group of rooms occupied by a person or persons and with no provision made for cooking in any
of the rooms as specified.
HOUSE TRAILER: See MOBILE HOME.
JUNK YARD: An open area where any waste, used or second hand materials are bought, sold,
exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled, including but not limited to scrap
iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires and bottles. A “Junk Yard” includes an auto
wrecking yard or other storage or keeping of one (1) or more inoperative motor vehicles unless
where otherwise specifically permitted but does not include uses established entirely within
enclosed buildings.
KENNEL: Any building or a portion of a building or open space devoted in its entirety or in part
to the raising, boarding or harboring of four (4) or more dogs, at least four (4) months of age.
LABORATORY: A building or portion of a building devoted to the experimental study in
science, or the testing and analysis of chemicals, drugs, explosives, minerals, etc.
LABORATORY, MEDICAL OR DENTAL: A building or portion of a building devoted in use
of providing bacteriological, biological, medical, X-Ray, pathological and similar analytical or
diagnostic services to doctors or dentists and where no fabrication is conducted on the premises,
except the custom fabrication of dentures.
LAUNDROMAT: A business that provides home-type washing, drying and/or ironing machines
for hire to be used by customers on the premises.
Article VII Definitions 7-10
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
LEASABLE AREA, GROSS: The total floor area designed for tenant occupancy and exclusive
use, including basements, mezzanines, and upper floors, if any, expressed in square feet and
measured from the centerline of joint partitions and from outside wall faces.
LIVESTOCK: Domestic animals of types customarily raised or kept on farms for profit or other
productive purposes.
LOADING AND/OR UNLOADING SPACE: A surfaced space within the main building or on
the same lot providing for the temporary standing, loading and/or unloading of trucks; said space
having a minimum dimension of forty-eight (48) feet in length, twelve (12) feet in width and
fourteen (14) feet in height, except as herein provided; and connected with an accepted deeded
public right-of-way which affords ingress and egress for vehicles.
LODGING HOUSE: A building, other than an apartment, hotel-motel, hotel, motel, or tourist
court where lodging for five (5) or more persons is provided for compensation.
LOT: A parcel of land or any combination of several lots of record, occupied or intended to be
occupied by a principal building or a building group, as permitted herein, together with their
accessory buildings or uses and such access, yards, and open spaces required under this
Ordinance.
LOT AREA: The total area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side and rear lot lines,
but not including any area occupied by rights-of-way, flood plains, the water of any lake, river,
creek or major drainage ditch, and shall be in one (1) zone only. For the purposes of this
Ordinance all of the area of a given lot shall be in the same specific zoning category.
LOT CORNER: A “Corner Lot” is a lot situated at the intersection of two streets or on a curved
street in which the interior angle of such intersection or curved street does not exceed one
hundred thirty–five (135) degrees.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot other than a corner lot that has frontage on more than one
(1) street.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot with only one (1) frontage on a deeded and
occupied public right–of–way.
LOT LINE FRONT: The common boundary line of an interior lot (other than a double frontage
lot) and a street right–of–way line or the common boundary line of a corner lot (other than a
double frontage lot) and that street right-of-way line toward which the principal or usual entrance
to the main building situated on such lot most nearly faces, or the common boundary line of a
through lot and any adjacent road or street right-of-way line.
LOT LINE, REAR: The boundary line of a lot which is most nearly opposite the front line of
such lot. In the case of a triangular or wedge shaped lot, for the measurement purposes only, a
Article VII Definitions 7-11
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
line ten (10) feet in length within the lot parallel to and at the maximum distance form the front
lot line. In the case of a corner lot, providing that all requirements for yard space are compiled
with, the owner may choose either side not abutting a street as the rear lot line, even though it is
not opposite the front lot line. Once the choice has been made, it cannot be changed unless all
requirements for the yard space can be compiled with.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any boundary line of a lot, other than a front lot line or rear lot line.
LOT OF RECORD: A designated fractional part or subdivision of a block, according to a
specific recorded plat or survey, the map of which has been officially accepted and recorded in
the office of the Campbell County Clerk, Commonwealth of Kentucky.
LOT WIDTH: The width of a lot as measured along the minimum building front set back line.
LOT, ZONING: A “zoning lot or lots” is a single tract of land located within a single block,
which (at a time of filing for a building permit) is designated by its owner or developers as a tract
to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control. Therefore, a
“zoning lot or lots” may or may not coincide with a lot of record.
MASSAGE THERAPIST: One who has received a diploma or other recognized credentials,
issued by a recognized school of massage which has been approved by the American Massage
and Therapy Association of like institution.
MEZZANINE: An intermediate or fractional story between the floor and ceiling of a main story,
used for a purpose accessory to the principal use. A mezzanine is usually just above the ground
floor and extending over only part of the main floor.
MINIMUM BUILDING SETBACK LINE: A line parallel to the front, side and/or rear lot line
and setback from the lot line a sufficient distance as specified in this Ordinance, to provide the
required minimum yard space.
MINIMUM FRONT YARD DEPTH: The minimum distance required by this Ordinance to be
maintained within the lot between a line parallel to the street right-of-way line and the front lot
line as defined herein.
MINIMUM REAR YARD DEPTH: The minimum distance required by this Ordinance to be
maintained within the lot between a line parallel to the rear lot line, as defined herein and the rear
lot line.
MINIMUM SIDE YARD WIDTH: The minimum distance required by this Ordinance to be
maintained within the lot between a line parallel to the side lot line, as defined herein and the
side lot line.
MOBILE HOME: Any coach, cabin, mobile home or other mobile structure in a single unit
which is intended for, designed for, and used for the fixed residence of a person, a family, or a
Article VII Definitions 7-12
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
household, mounted upon wheels or supports, or supported and/or capable of being moved or
transported by another vehicle. For the purpose of this Ordinance, the removal of wheels and/or
the permanent or semi-permanent attachment of a foundation to said mobile structure shall not
change its classification.
MOBILE HOME PARK: An lot, parcel or premises, subdivided, designed, maintained, intended
or used for the purpose of supplying a location or accommodation for mobile homes; or any lot
parcel or premises on which is parked, standing or located two (2) or more mobile homes for a
longer period then twenty-four (24) hours; or one (1) or more mobile homes connected to either
electrical lines, or water or sewer pipes; or any mobile home being utilized on the premises on
which it is located. For the purpose of this Ordinance, any lot or premises used for the wholesale
or retail sale of mobile homes shall not be included with this definition.
MODULAR: Housing manufactured off–site, often mass produced, and designed so that
sections are interchangeable. This is a production technique which can be applied to low or high
density type construction.
MOTELS: A group of attached or detached buildings but not house trailers containing
individual sleeping or living units for travelers and transient guests, with garage attached or
parking facilities conveniently located to each unit. The term includes tourist court when related
to the context specified herein.
NONCONFORMING LOT: A lot which was lawfully created but which does not conform to
the minimum lot requirements specified for the zone in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING USE OR STRUCTURE: An activity or a building, sign, fence, structure,
or a portion thereof, which lawfully existed before the adoption or amendment of this Ordinance,
but which does not conform to all of the regulations contained in this Ordinance or amendments
thereto which pertain to the zone in which it is located.
NOXIOUS MATTER OR MATERIALS: Matter or material which is capable of causing injury
to living organisms by chemical reaction or is capable of causing detrimental effects upon the
physical or economic well being of individuals as determined by the health department.
NURSERY: Any building or lot, or portion thereof, used for the cultivation or growing of plants
and including all accessory buildings, but does not include the wholesale or retail sale of any
items other than those incidental to the items raised or grown on said premises.
NURSERY SCHOOL: Any building used for the daytime care or education or pre-school age
children and including all accessory buildings and play areas, and shall, for the purpose of this
Ordinance, be considered group activity.
NURSERY HOME: A health establishment which provides nursing care under the direction of a
Kentucky licensed physician to patients who for reason of illness or physical infirmities are
unable to care for themselves properly.
Article VII Definitions 7-13
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
OCTAVE BAND: A means of dividing the range of sound frequencies into octaves in order to
classify sound according to pitch.
OCTAVE BAND FILTER: An electrical frequency analyzer designed according to standards
formulated by the American Standards Association and used in conjunction with a sound level
meter to take measurements in specific octave intervals.
ODOROUS MATTER: Any matter or material that yields an odor which is offensive in any way
to a person with reasonable sensitivity.
PARKING AREA, OFF-STREET: An open surfaced area other than the rights-of-way of a
street, road, highway, alley, or place, used for temporary parking of self-propelled motor vehicles
and available for public use either free, for compensation or as an accommodation for clients or
customers.
PARKING BUILDING OR GARAGE: A building or portion thereof designed, intended and
used exclusively for the temporary parking of self-propelled motor vehicles and may be publicly
or privately owned and/or operated and may be remuneration, free or privately utilized.
SCHOOLS, PUBLIC: An institution or place for instruction of education belonging to the
public and established and conducted under public authority in the various districts, counties or
cities and maintained at the public expense by taxation, and open with or without charge to the
public for their attendance. This does not include schools owned and/or conducted by private
parties though said schools may be open to the public generally and though tuition may be free.
Schools in the aforementioned category of public schools shall include all public cottage or
kindergarten, elementary, junior high, high school, junior colleges, college and universities, but
no others.
SCREENING AREA: An area set aside to remain vacant of buildings and to be planted and
landscaped to reduce the blighting effect of certain land uses on adjacent property.
SERVICE FACILITIES, PUBLIC UTILITIES: Service facilities include all facilities of public
utilities operating under the jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, or the Department of
Motor Transportation, or Federal Power Commission, and common carriers by rail, other than
office space, garage and warehouse space and include office space, garage space and warehouse
space when such space is incidental to a service facility.
SERVICE STATION: Any building, structure, or land used for the dispensing, sale, or offering
for sale at retail of any motor vehicle fuels, oils, or accessories and in connection with which is
performed general automotive servicing as distinguished from automotive repairs.
SIGN: Any work, lettering, figures, numbers, phrases, sentences, emblems, devices (including
loud speakers), designs, pictures, trade names or trademarks, by which is affixed to, or
represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure, vehicle (including portable type
Article VII Definitions 7-14
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
vehicles) or piece of land and which directs attention to an object, place, activity, person, firm,
corporation, institution, business, service, commodity or a product, which are visible from the
rights-of-way of any street, road, highway, or pedestrian area, and designed to attract attention.
The term “sign” shall not include the flag, pennant or insignia of any nation, state, county, city,
or other political unit, or any political, educational, charitable, philanthropic, civic, professional,
religious or like campaign, drive, monument, event or any type of traffic or warning sign or
signal or the usual house or building number or a sign posted on a service or delivery type
vehicle.
SING, ANIMATED: Any sign having a conspicuous and intermittent variation in the
illumination or physical position of any part of the sign.
SIGN, BUSINESS: A sign which directs attention to a business, profession or industry located
upon the premises where such sign is displayed or to which it is affixed to type of products sold,
manufactured or assembled and/or to service or entertainment offered upon said premises, but
not pertaining to an advertising sign if such activity is only minor and incidental to the principal
use of the premises.
SIGN, CANOPY: Any sign affixed directly to any canopy.
SIGN, FLASHING: Any sign having a conspicuous and intermittent variation in the
illumination of the sign.
SIGN FLAT: Any sign which is attached directly, in a rigid manner and parallel to the building
wall and shall not extend outward from the building wall more than twelve (12) inches, except,
however, if the sign is illuminated, the reflectors shall project not more than four (4) feet beyond
the face of the sign. Such sign or signs shall not extend beyond the top or ends of the wall
surface on which they are placed.
SIGN, GROSS AREA OF: The entire area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the
extreme limits of a sign and in no case passing through or between any adjacent elements of the
same. However, such perimeter shall not include any structural elements lying outside the limits
of such sign and not forming an integral part of the display.
SIGN, GROUND: Any sign erected, constructed, or maintained directly upon the ground or
upon uprights or braces placed in the ground with a maximum permitted ground clearance of
three (3) feet.
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION: A sign used to identify: the name of the individual, family,
organization, or enterprise occupying the premises; the profession of the occupant; the name of
the building on which the sign is displayed.
SIGN, INDIVIDUAL LETTER: Letters and/or numbers individually fashioned from metal,
glass, plastic, or other materials and attached directly to the wall of a building, but not including
a sign painted on a wall or other surface.
Article VII Definitions 7-15
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
SIGN, POLE: Any sign affixed to a free standing supporting pole or poles, embedded in, and
extending upward from the ground with a minimum ground clearance of three (3) feet.
SIGN, PROJECTING: Any sign projecting from the face of a building and securely attached to
the building by bolts, anchors, chains, guys, or to posts, poles, or angle irons attached directly to
the building.
SIGN, WINDOW: Any type of sign or outdoor advertising device which is attached to a
window of any building, but shall not extend past the limits of said window. For the purpose of
Article XIV, SIGN REGULATIONS, the word window shall be construed to mean any glass
which comprises part of the surface of the wall regardless of its moveability.
SOUND LEVEL METER: An instrument standardized by the American Standards Association
for measurement of intensity of sound.
STABLE, PRIVATE: A separate accessory building with a capacity for not more than one (1)
pony for each six thousand (6,000) square feet of lot area whereon such stable is located and
where such horses or ponies are owned by the owners or occupants of the premises and not kept
for compensation, hire or sale.
STABLE, PUBLIC: A main building with a capacity for not more than one (1) horse or one (1)
pony for each six thousand (6,000) square feet of lot area whereon such stable is located and
where such horses or ponies are owned by the owners or occupants of the premises and not kept
for compensation, hire or sale.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of
the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it, then the space between such floor and the
ceiling next above it. For purposes of this ordinance, abasement shall be counted as a story.
STORY, HALF: A story under a gable, hip, or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least
two (2) opposite exterior walls are not more than three (3) feet above the floor of such story.
STREET, ARTERIAL: Public thoroughfares which serve the major movements of traffic within
and through the community as identified in the adopted Comprehensive plan for the city.
STREET, COLLECTOR: Public thoroughfares which serve to collect and distribute traffic
primarily from local residential streets to arterial streets.
STREET, EXPRESSWAY: A divided arterial highway for through traffic with full or partial
control of access in general with grade separations at major intersections.
STREET, FREEWAY: A divided multi–lane highway for through traffic with all crossroads
separated in grades and with full control of access.
Article VII Definitions 7-16
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
STREET, LOCAL: Facilities which are designed to be used primarily for direct access to
abutting properties and leading into the collector street system.
STREET, PRIVATE: A paved private thoroughfare which affords access to abutting property
for private users, of such property. For the purposes of density calculations, a private street shall
constitute the areas of its paved surface and sidewalks.
STREET, PUBLIC: A public thoroughfare, constructed within the boundaries or an officially
deeded and accepted public right-of-way, which affords principle means of access to abutting
property. For purposes of density calculations, a public street shall constitute all of the area
within the public right-of-way.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or less
permanent location in or on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent location
in or on the ground, including buildings, mobile homes, signs, and fences, but not including
earthworks, ditches, canals, dams, reservoirs, pipelines, telephone or telegraph or electric power
lines, driveways or curbs.
SUBDIVISION: The division of a parcel of land into two or more lots or parcels for the
purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, lease, or building development, or if a new street
is involved any division of a parcel of land; providing that a division of land for agricultural
purposes into lots or parcels of five acres or more and not involving a new street shall not be
deemed a subdivision. The term includes re-subdivision and when appropriate to the context
shall relate to the process of subdivision or to the land subdivided.
SWIMMING POOL: Any structure or device of any kind that is intended for swimming
purposes, including but not limited to any pool or tank of any material or type of construction, or
any depression or excavation in any natural or constructed material or type of berm of any
material or type of construction; including all appurtenances to such structure or device and all
appliances used in connection there-with; which structure or device is intended to cause, or
would cause if completely filled, the retaining of water to a greater depth than eighteen (18)
inches at any point. Any such structure or device shall be deemed to be included within the
meaning of the term “structure” as used in this ordinance. Outdoor swimming pools shall be
deemed to consist of the following classes: private, semi-private, public and commercial, as
follows:
A. Private: when consisting of an accessory structure appurtenant to a one family or a two–
family dwelling and used only as such by persons residing on the same lot and their
private guests (as distinguished from groups of any kind) with no payment of any kind or
in any form charged or received for such use.
B. Semi–public: when consisting of an accessory structure appurtenant to a multiple
dwelling, hotel, motel, church, school or private club, or country club, and used only as
such by persons who reside or are housed on the same lot or who are regular members of
such church, club, country club or regular attendants at such school and by individual
Article VII Definitions 7-17
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
guests (as distinguished from groups of any kind) of the foregoing with no payment of
any kind or in any form being charged or being received for such use.
C. Public: a swimming pool operated by a unit of government for the general public.
D. Commercial: a swimming pool operated for profit, open to the public upon payment (of
an hourly, a daily, weekly, monthly, annual, or other fee).
TAVERN: Any establishment selling, by the drink, fermented malt beverages or malt, vinous or
spirituous liquors.
TENT: Any structure or enclosure, the roof of which and/or one-half (1/2) or more of the sides
are constructed of silk, cotton, canvas, fabric, or a similar light material.
TOURIST COURT: See MOTELS.
TOURIST HOME: A building designed for or used by a single family or two-family dwelling in
which sleeping rooms are provided or offered to transient guests for compensation, but not more
than four (4) transient guests.
TRAILER: See CAMPING/VACATION MOBILE UNIT.
USE, PERMITTED: A use which may be lawfully established in a particular district or districts,
provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations, and performance standards (if any) of
such district(s).
VARIANCE, DIMENSIONAL: A departure from the terms of this zoning ordinance pertaining
to the heights or width or structures and size of yards and open spaces, where such departure will
not be contrary to the public interest, and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property
because of its size, shape or topography, and not as a result of the actions of the applicant, the
literal enforcement of the zoning regulations would result in unnecessary and undue hardship.
YARD: An open space of the same lot or building site with a main building unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward, except by trees, Plants, shrubberies, ornaments, utility
poles and wires, dog houses, outdoor furniture, gas pumps, pump islands, and except as
otherwise permitted in Section 9.10 (G) “Permitted Obstructions in Minimum Required Yards”.
YARD DEPTH, FRONT: An open space extending the full width of the lot or building site
measured between a line parallel to the street right–of–way line intersecting the foremost point of
any building, excluding steps and unenclosed Porches and the front lot line, as defined herein.
YARD DEPTH, REAR: An open space extending across the full width of the lot and measured
between a line parallel to the rear lot line, as defined herein, which intersects the rearmost point
of any building, excluding steps and unenclosed porches and the rear lot line.
Article VII Definitions 7-18
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
YARD WIDTH, SIDE: An open space between any building and the side lot line, as defined
herein, extending from the front to the rear yard or on through lots or building sites from one
front lot line to the other front lot line.
ZONE: An established area within the city for which the provisions of this ordinance are
applicable. (Synonymous with the word “District”).
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: The official or officials appointed by the city for carrying out
the provisions and enforcement of this ordinance.
Article VIII Establishment Of Zones 8-1
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
ARTICLE VIII
ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES
SECTION 8.0 ZONES: For the purpose of this ordinance, the city is divided into the
following zones:
C-O CONSERVATION ZONE
R-RE RESIDENTIAL RURAL ESTATE AND AGRICULTURE ZONE
R-1B RESIDENTIAL ONE B ZONE
R-1C RESIDENTIAL ONE C ZONE
R-1D RESIDENTIAL ONE D ZONE
R-1E RESIDENTIAL ONE E ZONE
R-1EF RESIDENTIAL ONE EF ZONE
R-1F RESIDENTIAL ONE F ZONE
R-1G RESIDENTIAL ONE G ZONE
R-1H RESIDENTIAL ONE H ZONE
R-2 RESIDENTIAL TWO ZONE
R-3 RESIDENTIAL THREE ZONE
PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY ZONE
RCD RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY ZONE
SC SHOPPING CENTER ZONE
NSC NEIGHBORHOOD SHOPPING CENTER ZONE
GC GENERAL COMMERCIAL ZONE
PO PROFESSIONAL OFFICE ZONE
LSC LIMITED SERVICE COMMERCIAL ZONE
MLU MIXED LAND USE ZONE
SECTION 8.1 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP OR MAPS: The zones are bounded and defined
as shown on the map (or maps) entitled, "OFFICIAL ZONING MAP OF THE CITY OF
HIGHLAND HEIGHTS, KENTUCKY", and shall so remain on file in the office of the city
Zoning Administrator.
SECTION 8.2 CHANGES ON ZONING MAP: If, in accordance with the provisions of this
ordinance and the Kentucky Revised Statutes, changes area made in zone boundaries or other
matters portrayed on the Official Zoning Map (or maps), such changes shall be made on the
Official Zoning Map (or maps) promptly after the amendment to this ordinance has been
approved by the legislative body. Such change shall not become effective until said changes have
been made on sail map (or maps). In addition, no building, structure, sign or fence permit shall
be approved or issued until the OFFICIAL ZONING MAP (or maps) indicate the proper zoning
for the used intended as indicated upon the application for the permit.
Article VIII Establishment Of Zones 8-2
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
No changes of any nature shall be made on the Official Zoning Map (or maps) or matter shown
thereon which are not in conformity with procedures set forth in this ordinance.
Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the Official Zoning Map (or maps), the
OFFICIAL ZONING MAP, which shall be located in the office designated by law, shall be the
final authority as to the current zoning status of land, buildings and other structures in the city.
SECTION 8.3 REPLACEMENT OF OFFICIAL ZONING MAP: In the event that the
Official Zoning Map (or maps) become damaged, destroyed, lost, or are deemed necessary to be
replaced due to the age of the map or corrections in location of right-of-way or subdivisions, the
city of Highland Heights may, by ordinance, cause to have prepared and by ordinance, adopt a
new Official Zoning Map (or maps) which shall supersede the prior Official Zoning Map (or
maps), but no such corrections shall have the effect of amending the original Zoning Ordinance
or any subsequent amendment thereof.
SECTION 8.4 RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF ZONE BOUNDARIES: Rules for
interpretation of zone boundaries shown on the Official Zoning Map (or maps) are as follows:
A. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the rights–of–way boundary of a street,
road, or highway shall be construed to follow such rights–of–way lines and when said
rights–of–way are officially vacated the zones bordering such rights–of–way shall be
extended out to the centerline of said vacated rights–of–way.
B. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as
following such lot lines.
C. Boundaries indicated as approximately following political boundary lines shall be
construed as following such boundary lines.
D. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the rights–of–way of railroad lines shall
be construed as following such lines.
E. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, streams,
rivers, ditches, gullies, ravines or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such
centerlines.
F. Boundaries indicated as approximately parallel to features indicated in Rules A through
E, of this section, shall be construed as parallel to such features. Boundaries indicated as
approximate extensions of features indicated in Rules A through E or this section shall be
construed as being extensions of such features. Distances not specifically indicated on the
Official Zoning Map (or maps) shall be determined by the scale of the map (or maps), if
an accurate legal description cannot be determined from the original zoning case.
SECTION 8.5 ANNEXED TERRITORY: AREAS NOT INCLUDED WITHIN ZONES:
In any case where territory is annexed to the City of Highland Heights, the zoning classification
Article VIII Establishment Of Zones 8-3
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
for such territory shall be the same as it was under the unit of government which exercised
jurisdiction of such territory prior to its annexation. That all regulations, resolutions and
ordinances necessary to administer the said zoning shall be adopted into this ordinance by
reference until the action provided for below is complete.
Within a period of sixty (60) calendar days after a territory is finally annexed to the City of
Highland Heights, the Planning Commission shall initiate action to amend its comprehensive
plan, to include the annexed territory in accordance with requirements of KRS Chapter 100.
Following said action, the Planning Commission shall further take action to review the
appropriate zoning classification for said territory in accordance with the City’s adopted
comprehensive plan for implementing changes, if any, appropriate or necessary, in accordance
with KRS Chapter 100.
If any other case where territory has not been included within a zone, such territory shall be
considered to be in the C-O Zone until otherwise classified.
Article IX General Regulations 9-1
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
ARTICLE IX
GENERAL REGULATIONS
SECTION 9.0 PURPOSE: General regulations apply to all districts. Where requirements of a
general regulation and a district regulation differ, the more restrictive requirement shall prevail.
SECTION 9.1 REDUCTION IN BUILDING SITE AREA: Notwithstanding other
provisions of this ordinance, no lot, in any zone, may be reduced in area below the minimum lot
area as specified herein for the zone within which said lot is located except where such reduction
has been brought about by the expansion or acquiring of rights–of–way for a street, road, or
highway. If, however, by some means (e.g., misinterpretation of law, erroneous lot descriptions,
etc.) the lot area is reduced below the minimum required lot area as specified herein for the zone,
all of the uses and structures contained in the remaining portion of the area shall be subject to
compliance with all provisions of this ordinance. In the event that the uses and structures cannot
comply in such circumstances, the property owner shall seek relief from the Board of
Adjustment as provided for in Section 17.5 of this ordinance.
SECTION 9.2 INTERFERENCE WITH TRAFFIC SIGNALS: Notwithstanding other
provisions of this ordinance, in any zone, no sign, structure, tree, planting or vegetation or any
portion thereof shall protrude over or into any street, road or highway so as to create confusion
around, or otherwise interfere with, traffic signals of any kind.
SECTION 9.3 VISION CLEARANCE AT CORNERS, CURB CUTS, AND RAILROAD
CROSSINGS: Notwithstanding any part of this ordinance or any permit granted, or any
variance granted by the Board of Adjustment, no type of structure, vehicle, tree, planting,
vegetation, sign or fence or any type of obstacle or any portion thereof shall be placed or retained
in such a manner which would create a traffic hazard or would obstruct the vision clearance at
corners, curb cuts, or railroad crossings in any zone.
SECTION 9.4 FRONTAGE ON CORNER LOTS AND DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS:
On lots having frontage on more than one street, in any zone, the minimum front yard shall be
provided for each street, road, or highway in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance.
SECTION 9.5 UTILITIES LOCATION: Electrical transformer stations, gas regulator
stations, sewage and water treatment plants, pumping stations, standpipes for public water supply
and other similar utility uses may be located in any zone. The location of such facilities shall be
in accordance with Kentucky State law and the following requirements shall be complied with:
A. Such facilities shall be essential for the immediate area or for the proper functioning of
the total utility system of which the above element is a part.
Article IX General Regulations 9-2
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
B. A building or structure, except an enclosure fence, shall be set back at least fifty (50) feet
from any property line.
C. Such facilities shall be enclosed by a protective fence as regulated by Article XI.
D. Open spaces on the premises shall be suitably landscaped and maintained and a screening
area according to Section 9.17 of this ordinance may be required in and along any yard.
E. The stored vehicles and equipment on the premises, unless enclosed or screened, shall be
prohibited.
F. The surrounding area shall not be adversely affected by, and shall be protected from
noise, odor, glare, dust, gas, smoke and vibration by such suitable means and conditions
as the Planning Commission may specify.
SECTION 9.6 RAILROAD RIGHTS–OF–WAY LOCATION: Railroad rights–of–way,
exclusive of such uses as marshaling yards, passenger and fright terminals, maintenance shops,
fueling facilities and round houses, may be located in any zone of this ordinance providing said
railroad rights–of–way meet the requirements of those sections of the Kentucky State Law which
regulates such uses.
SECTION 9.7 EXCAVATION, MOVEMENT OF SOIL, TREE REMOVAL, AND
EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL:
A. No governmental entity or other person or entity shall strip, excavate, fill, or otherwise
move soil, trees, or other vegetation for sale, or any other purpose, except for minor
changes such as the filling of small pockets in lots, removal of vegetation which is
diseased or endangering the public safety, flower beds and other similar operations, in
any zone set forth in this ordinance without first insuring that all requirements of the
Subdivision Regulations of the city, if applicable, have been fulfilled and then obtaining a
permit from the building inspector for such stripping, excavation, filling, or other means
of soil movement including wholesale removal of trees and other vegetation.
B. The building inspector may issue the required permit after determining that the resulting
change in grade or removal of trees and other vegetation in the affected area will be in
conformance with all applicable provisions of this ordinance. The provisions of this
section shall not be construed to prohibit normal excavation or grading incidental to the
construction or alteration of a building on the premises for which a building permit has
been granted as required otherwise in this ordinance.
C. Erosion and Sedimentation Control: Controls for excavation, movement of soil, tree
removal and effective erosion and sediment controls shall be planned and applied
according to the following principles:
Article IX General Regulations 9-3
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
1. The smallest practical area of land should be exposed at any one time during
development.
2. When land is exposed during development, the exposure should be kept to the
shortest practical period of time.
3. Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect critical areas
exposed during development.
4. Sediment basins (debris basins or silt traps) shall be installed and maintained to
remove sediment from run-off water from land undergoing development.
5. Provisions shall be made to accommodate the increased runoff caused by changed
soil and surface conditions during and after development.
6. Permanent final vegetation and structures shall be installed as soon as practical in
the development.
7. The development shall be fitted to the topography and soils so as to create the
least erosion potential; and
8. Wherever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained and protected.
D. Stormwater retention and/or detention shall be required whenever the amount of
stormwater runoff from a site is increased b new development. The following criteria
shall be used in planning and designing the required stormwater retention and/or
detention areas:
1. Calculate the Pre-Development Site Runoff Rate based on the “Rational Method”,
Q=CIA based on the existing site conditions and a 25 year storm frequency.
2. Calculate the Post-Development Site Runoff Rate using the “Rational Method”,
Q=CIA based on the proposed site conditions and a 50 year storm frequency.
3. The Allowable Discharge Rate from the retention and/or detention area cannot
exceed the Pre-Development Site Runoff Rate calculated for the site.
4. The amount of detention volume required for a subdivision or development must
not be less than the Post-Development Runoff Rate minus the Pre-Development
Runoff Rate multiplied by the recruited detention time of 30 minutes.
5. Fencing may be required around the detention and/or retention facilities when the
location is not easily observed or in the opinion of the engineer is necessary.
E. All excavations within the public right-of-ways should be back filled full depth with flash
fill, or an equal product approved in writing by the City Engineer. This requirement shall
be applicable to the repair of existing utilities, or for the construction of any new utilities
under the existing or proposed paving and any utilities within three (3) feet of the paving
limits. Paved area shall include but not be limited to streets, sidewalks, driveways,
aprons, and curbs.
SECTION 9.8 UNSIGHTLY OR UNSANITARY STORAGE: No rubbish, salvage
materials, junk or miscellaneous refuse shall be openly stored or kept in the open and no weeds
shall be allowed to go uncut within any zones when the same may be construed to be a menace
to public health and safety by the appropriate Health Department, or to have a depressing
influence upon property values in the neighborhood, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator.
Article IX General Regulations 9-4
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
Regular salvage and junk yards shall be adequately enclosed with a solid fence or wall as
regulated by Article XI of this ordinance and an approved permanent planting screen may also be
required as regulated in Section 9.17 of this ordinance.
SECTION 9.9 JUNKYARD LOCATION: No person shall operate or cause to operate any
junkyard which is situated closer than two thousand (2,000) feet to the centerline of any county,
state, federal or limited access highway or turnpike including bridges and bridge approaches
unless a permit for such operations shall have been obtained from the Kentucky Department of
Highways in accordance with KRS 177.905 to 177.950.
SECTION 9.10 APPLICATION OF ZONING REGULATIONS:
A. Except as herein provided, no public or private structures except the service facilities or
public utilities operating under the jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission or the
Department of Motor Transportation or Federal Power Commission and common carriers
by rail, shall be erected reconstructed, or structurally altered, nor shall any public of
private structures or land, except the service facilities of public utilities operating under
the jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission or the Department of Motor
Transportation or Federal Power Commission and common carriers by rail, be used for
any purpose other than that permitted in the zone which such structures or land is to be
located or is located. All of the required lot area shall be in one (1) zone.
B. Except as hereinafter provided, no public or private structures, except the service
facilities of public utilities operating under the jurisdiction of the Public Service
Commission or the Department of Motor Transportation or Federal Power Commission
and common carriers by rail, shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered to
exceed the height or bulk limit herein established for the zone in which such structures is
to be located or is located.
C. Except as hereinafter provided, no lot area shall hereafter be so reduced or diminished
that the yards or other open spaces shall smaller than described by this ordinance and no
building shall be occupied by more families than prescribed for such building, structure
or premises for the zone in which it is located.
D. Except as hereinafter provided, no part of any yard, or other open space, or off-street
parking or loading and/or unloading space about or in connection with any building,
structures or use permitted by this ordinance shall be considered to be part of a required
yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or loading space for any other building,
structure or use.
E. Every public or private building or other structures hereafter erected shall be located on a
lot as herein defined and in no case shall there be more than one (1) principal building
and permitted accessory structures on one (1) lot, except as hereinafter provided, nor
shall any building be erected on any lot which does not abut at least twenty-five (25) feet
on a deeded and accepted public right-of-way. Flag lots shall only be used in those
Article IX General Regulations 9-5
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
locations where due to geometric, topographic and other physical features, it would be
impractical to extend a publicly dedicated street to serve lots located in said areas, as
determined by the planning commission. The minimum lot area and setback requirements
for flag lots shall be 2.5 times the requirements for residential zones. In no case shall
more than two flag lots be contiguous to each other at the publicly dedicated street.
F. Accessory structures and uses (excluding off-street parking, loading and/or unloading
areas, fences and signs) shall not be permitted within any required minimum front yard or
side yard (on each side of the lot) in any zones. Accessory structures and uses (excluding
off-street parking, loading and/or unloading, fences and signs) shall be permitted to
extend into the minimum rear yard areas, as defined herein, in all zones, but must be set
back from the rear lot line a minimum of ten (10) feet, and required minimum side yard
clearances must be maintained. Location of off-street parking, loading and/or unloading
areas, fences, and signs are governed by their respective sections, as provided herein.
G. Permitted Obstructions in Minimum Required Yards or Courts: Except as herein
provided, the following shall not be considered to be obstructions when located in the
required minimum yards or courts specified:
1. In All Minimum Required Yards or Courts – Awnings and canopies; steps four
(4) feet into the minimum required yards which are necessary for access to a lot
from a street or alley; fire escapes; chimneys projecting eighteen (18) inches or
less into the minimum required yards; arbors and trellises; flag poles; and bird
baths; fences and walls, subject to the requirements in Article XI of this
ordinance; off-street parking, as provided for in Article XII of this ordinance.
2. In Minimum Front Yard Depths – One-story bay windows projecting three (3)
feet or less into the minimum rear yard; overhanging eaves and gutters projecting
three (3) feet of less into the minimum required side yard; driveways.
3. In Minimum Rear Yard Depths – One story bay windows projecting three (3) feet
or less into the minimum required yard; overhanging eaves and gutters projecting
three (3) feet or less into the minimum required rear yard; air conditioning
equipment.
4. In Minimum side Yard Width – Air conditioning equipment, excluding
compressor for central air conditioning unit, overhanging eaves and gutters
projecting eighteen (18) inches or less into the minimum required side yard;
driveways.
5. Off-street parking as provided in Section 12.0, C, 1.
SECTION 9.11 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS GOVERNING HOME OCCUPATIONS:
The following requirements shall apply to home occupations when permitted herein:
A. No persons other than members of the family residing on the premises shall be engaged
in such operation.
Article IX General Regulations 9-6
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
B. The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and
subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and not more than
twenty–five (25) percent of the gross floor area of any one floor of the dwelling unit
(including the basement or cellar) shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation.
C. There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, or other
visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation that will indicate from the
exterior that the building is being utilized in part for any purpose other than that of
dwelling unit, except that a name plate as regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance,
shall be permitted.
D. No home occupation shall be conducted in any accessory building nor shall there be any
exterior storage of any materials on the premises.
E. There shall be no commodity sold upon the premises in connection with such home
occupation.
F. No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would
normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated
by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met off the street and not located in any
required yard except as herein provided.
G. No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates noise,
vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses
off the lot. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used
which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the
premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises, shall be used.
Home occupations shall include the use of the premises for such things as:
1. Professional offices where the service rendered is by other than direct contact
with customers at that location (for example, where the bulk of the business is by
telephone actual work is performed in home and customer is contacted in other
than that location); and
2. Also would be inclusive of persons engaged in the preparation of a commodity
(such as certain clothing items by a seamstress, certain candy items or bakery
items, etc.) to be sold at locations other than on the premises.
Home occupations shall include the use of the premises by a physician, surgeon, dentist,
lawyer, clergyman or other professional persons for consultation or emergency treatment,
but not for the general practice of his profession.
SECTION 9.12 NONCONFORMING LOTS, NONCONFORMING USES,
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES, REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE, AND
NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
Article IX General Regulations 9-7
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
A. NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD:
1. Any lot of record which does not meet the minimum requirements of this
ordinance shall be considered a nonconforming lot of record.
2. If two (2) or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with
continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of passage or
amendment of this ordinance, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the
requirements for lot width and area as established by this ordinance, the lands
involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this
ordinance, and no portion of said parcel shall be used or sold which does not meet
lot width and area requirements established by this ordinance, not shall any
division of the parcel be made which leaves remaining any lot with width or area
below the requirements stated in this ordinance.
3. Where a single nonconforming lot of record exists having a lot area less than
required by the particular zone district wherein said lot is located, development
may be permitted on the lot provided: the lot is located on a deeded and accepted
right-of-way; the lot is of separate ownership from all adjacent and contiguous
parcels exist as developed building lots or dedicated street right-of-ways
precluding acquisition of additional area to achieve conformity; and development
proposed on the lot is in conformance with all other requirements of this
ordinance. Where a dimensional variance from any minimum yard, setback, etc.,
is necessary to develop on said lot, an application for dimensional variance shall
be submitted for review and approval by the board of adjustments in accordance
with Article XVIII of this ordinance.
B. NONCONFORMING USES:
1. CONTINUANCE: Except as herein provided, the lawful use of structure or land
existing at the time of the adoption of this ordinance may be continued although
such use does not conform to the provisions of this ordinance – it shall become a
legal nonconforming use. However, no nonconforming use may be enlarged or
extended beyond its area of use at the time it becomes a legal nonconforming use,
unless and until the use is brought into conformance with all provisions of this
ordinance.
2. CHANGE FROM ONE NONCONFORMING USE TO ANOTHER: As
regulated by Article XVII, Section 17.6 D, of this ordinance.
3. TERMINATION: In all cases, the Board of Adjustments shall hold a public
hearing in accordance with the applicable requirements of Section 18.2 of this
ordinance. Following that hearing, the Board may terminate the right to operate a
nonconforming use based on any of the following the Board shall state its:
a. Nonoperative, nonused, or abandoned for a period of twelve (12)
consecutive months providing that the Board of Adjustment may allow the
Article IX General Regulations 9-8
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
continuation of such nonconforming use if it is determined that reasons for
such nonuse were beyond the owners/operators control.
b. Whenever the structure, in which the nonconforming use is operated, is
damaged in any manner whatsoever and the cost of repairing such damage
exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of such structure in which
the nonconforming use is operated and a determination is made by the
Board of Adjustments that this structure should not be reconstructed.
c. Whenever the structure, in which the nonconforming use is operated
becomes obsolete or substandard under any applicable ordinance of the
city and the cost of placing such structure in lawful compliance with the
applicable ordinance exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of such
structure as of the date of the official order under the applicable ordinance
and a determination is made by the Board of Adjustments that this
structure should not be reconstructed.
d. Whenever said nonconforming use is determined to be detrimental or
injurious to the public health, safety, or general welfare.
4. ZONE CHANGE: The foregoing provisions shall apply to uses which become
legally nonconforming due to zone changes which take place thereafter.
C. NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES:
1. CONTINUANCE: Except as herein provided, any lawful nonconforming
structure existing at the time of adoption of this ordinance, may be occupied,
operated, and maintained in a state of good repair, but no nonconforming structure
shall be enlarged or extended unless the enlargement or extension can be, and is,
made in compliance with all of the provisions of this ordinance.
2. TERMINATION: In all cases the Board of Adjustments shall hold a public
hearing in accordance with the applicable requirements of Section 17.2 of this
ordinance. Following that hearing, the Board may terminate the right to operate a
nonconforming structure based on any of the following conditions, and if the
decision is to do so, the Board shall state its bases, in writing, for such
determination:
a. Whenever the nonconforming structure is damaged in any manner
whatsoever and the cost of repairing such damage exceeds fifty (50)
percent of the market value of such structure and a determination is made
by the Board of Adjustments that the structure should not be
reconstructed.
b. Whenever the nonconforming structure becomes obsolete or substandard
under any applicable ordinance of the city and the cost of placing such
nonconforming structure in lawful compliance with the applicable
ordinance exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of such
nonconforming structures as of the date of the official order under the
Article IX General Regulations 9-9
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
applicable ordinance and a determination is made by the Board of
Adjustments that the structure should not be reconstructed.
c. Whenever said nonconforming structure is determined to be detrimental or
injurious to the public health, safety, or general welfare.
3. ZONE CHANGE: The foregoing provisions shall apply to structures which
become legally nonconforming due to zone changes which take place thereafter.
SECTION 9.13 EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS:
A. EXCEPTIONS TO HEIGHT LIMITS:
1. The height limitations of this ordinance shall not apply to church spires, belfries,
cupolas and domes not intended for human occupancy; monuments, water towers,
observation towers, transmission towers, chimneys, smoke stacks, radio and TV
towers, conveyors, flag poles, masts and aerials, penthouses, scenery lofts,
standpipes, parapet walls, outdoor theatre screens, other similar structures and
necessary mechanical appurtenances; provided their construction is in accordance
with existing or hereafter ordinances of the city, and is accepted to the Federal
Aviation Agency and the Federal Communications Commission.
2. In the districts where permitted as conditional uses, public or semi-public
buildings or hospitals may be erected to a height not exceeding seventy-five (75)
feet when the front, side and rear yards are increased an additional foot for each
foot such buildings exceed the maximum height permitted in that district.
B. EXCEPTIONS TO AREA AND YARD REGULATIONS:
1. For the purpose of side yard regulations the following dwellings with common
party walls shall be considered as one (1) building occupying one (1) lot: twofamily
and multi-family dwellings.
2. In the case of a court apartment or multifamily dwellings, side yards may be used
as rear yards provided that:
a. The required side yard shall be increased by one (1) foot for each entrance
or exit opening into or served by such yards.
b. The width of the court shall not be less than two and one-half (2 ½) times
the width of the side yard as required in the district in which said court
apartment or multi-family dwellings are located.
c. Where a roadway is provided in the court, the width allowed for such
roadway shall be in addition to the required in the foregoing regulation.
d. All other requirements, including front, side and rear yards shall be
complied with in accordance with the regulations of the district in which
said court apartments or multi-family dwellings are located.
Article IX General Regulations 9-10
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
e. Every part of a required minimum yard or court shall be open front, its
lowest point to the sky obstructed, except for permitted obstructions in
minimum required yards as specified in Section 9.10 (G) of this ordinance.
3. Where existing or proposed development within the multi-family (R-2 and R-3)
and commercial (SC, NSC, GC, PO, MLU, and LSC) Zones are to be subdivided,
the minimum area and yard requirements may be less than required by this
ordinance provided that:
a. The maximum density of the zone is not exceeded and/or the minimum
site for the total development must not be less than the required by the
respective zone.
b. A community association or other responsible entity is established prior to
the approval by the planning commission of any subdivided land. The
association shall be obligated and empowered to own, operate and
maintain all common areas (as specifically identified on the submitted site
plan required by Item c of this section) including such items as open
space, recreational facilities, access drives, parking areas, pedestrian
walkways, etc. and the facilities constructed thereon.
c. A site plan as regulated by the applicable requirements of Section 9.19 of
this ordinance, including the proposed area and yard requirements for the
development, is submitted for review and approval by the planning
commission.
d. In addition, the planning commission may waive the requirement that all
lots about a minimum frontage along a dedicated right-of-way are assured
an unencumbered and maintained access way by the association to a
dedicated right-of-way in accordance with Subsection 9.13, B, paragraph
3, b, above this ordinance.
C. OTHER EXCEPTIONS: Service stations or gasoline filing stations shall be so
constructed that the centerlines of the pumps shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet from
any street right-of-way line.
D. FRONT YARD VARIANCE:
1. Where the average depth of existing front yards within three hundred (300) feet of
the lot in question and within the same block front, is greater than the minimum
front yard depth required by this ordinance, the required minimum front yard
depth on such lot shall be modified to be the average depth of said existing front
yards.
2. In any residential zone, no front yard shall be required to exceed the average
depth of existing front yards on the same side of the street within the same block,
when fifty–one percent (51 percent) or more of lots within that block are
improved with residential buildings; provided that in no case shall a front yard
depth be less than twelve (12) feet.
Article IX General Regulations 9-11
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
SECTION 9.14 CONDITIONAL USES:
A. DETERMINATION: The Board of Adjustment may authorize a conditional building and
use to a located within any zone in which the particular conditional use is permitted by
the regulations of this ordinance, if the evidence presented by the applicant is such as to
establish beyond any reasonable doubt:
1. That the proposed building and use at the particular location is necessary or
desirable to provide a service of facility which will contribute to the general well
being of the neighborhood of the community; and
2. That such building and use will not, under the circumstances of the particular case
be detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of persons residing or
working in the vicinity, or injurious to property or improvements in the vicinity;
and
3. That the proposed building and use will comply with any regulations and
conditions specified in this ordinance for such building and use.
B. CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS: In accordance with KRS 100.237 the Board of
Adjustment shall have the power to hear and decide applications for conditional use
permits to allow the proper integration into the community uses which are specifically
named herein which may be suitable only in specific locations in the zone only if certain
conditions are met:
1. The Board of Adjustment may approve, modify, or deny any application for a
conditional use permit. If it approves such permit it may attach necessary
conditions such as time limitations, requirements that one or more things be done
before the request can be initiated, or conditions of a continuing nature. Any such
conditions shall be recorded in the Board's minutes and on the conditional use
pen-nit along with a reference to the specific section in the zoning regulation
listing the conditional use under consideration. In addition, the conditional use
permit shall be recorded in the office of the Campbell County Clerk and one copy
of said pen-nit attached to the deed for the property for which it is issued. The
Board shall have power to revoke conditional use permits, or variances for
noncompliance with the condition thereof. Furthermore, the Board shall have a
right of action to compel offending structures or uses removed at the cost of the
violator and may have judgment in personam for such cost.
2. Granting of a conditional use permit does not exempt the applicant from
complying with all of the requirements of this ordinance, the building code,
housing code and other regulations of the city.
3. In any case where a conditional use permit has not been exercised within twelve
(12) consecutive calendar months from date of issuance, if no specific time limit
has been set, such conditional use permit shall not revert to its original
designation unless there has been a public hearing. Exercised as set forth in this
section, shall mean that binding contracts for the construction of the main
Article IX General Regulations 9-12
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
building or other improvement has been let; or in the absence of contracts that the
main building or other improvement is under construction to a substantial degree,
or that prerequisite conditions involving substantial investment shall be under
contract, in development, or completed. When construction is not a part of the
use, exercised shall mean that the use is in operation in compliance with the
conditions as set forth in the permit.
4. The zoning administrator shall review all conditional use permits, except those for
which all conditions have been permanently satisfied, at least once annually and
shall have the power to inspect the land or structure where the conditional use is
located in order to ascertain that the land owner is complying with all of the
conditions which are listed on the conditional use permit. If the landowner is not
complying with all of the conditions listed on the conditional use permit, the
Zoning Administrator shall report the fact in writing to the chairman of the Board
of Adjustment. The report shall state specifically the manner in which the
landowner is not complying with the conditions on the condition use permit, and a
copy of the report shall be furnished the landowner at the same time that it is
furnished to the chairman of the Board of Adjustment. The Board shall hold a
hearing on the report within a reasonable time, and notice of the time and place of
the hearing shall be furnished to the landowner at least one week prior to the
hearing. If the Board of Adjustment finds that the facts alleged in the report of the
Zoning Administrator are true and that the landowner has taken no steps to
comply with time between the date of the report and the date of the hearing, the
Board of Adjustment may authorize the Zoning Administrator to revoke the
conditional use permit and take necessary legal action to cause the termination of
the activity on the land which the conditional use permit authorizes.
5. Once the Board of Adjustment has completed a conditional use permit and all the
conditions required are of such type that they can be completely and permanently
satisfied, the Zoning Administrator, upon request of the applicant, may, if the
facts warrant, make a determination that the conditions have been satisfied, and
enter the facts which indicate that the conditions have been satisfied and the
conclusion in the margin of the copy of the conditional use permit which is on file
with the county clerk, as required in KRS 100.329. Thereafter said use, if it
continues to meet the other requirements of this ordinance, will be treated as a
permitted use.
SECTION 9.15 BUILDING REGULATIONS: All structures shall be designed, erected, or
altered in accordance with the city’s housing and building codes.
A. ALL ZONES:
1. PUBLIC WATER AND SANITARY SEWERS: No building may be constructed
in any zone except the R-RE Zone unless such building is connected to a public
water and centralized sanitary sewer system of adequate capacity and design, and
approved by the proper authorities. In the case of the R-RE Zone, private sewage
Article IX General Regulations 9-13
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
disposal systems may be permitted, provided they are approved in accordance
with the requirements of the Northern Kentucky District Health Department.
Where existing buildings are presently unserved by a public sewer system and are
located within a reasonable distance, as determined by the Planning Commission
and/or the Northern Kentucky District Health Department, of an existing or newly
extended sewer line, said building shall be required to connect with the private
sewer system shall be prohibited.
SECTION 9.16 MOVE AND SET:
A. REQUIREMENTS: No building, structure, or improvement shall be moved or set from
or upon land located in any area or transported upon any public street in the county, until
and unless both: (1) a building pen-nit to move and set; and (2) a transport permit, have
been obtained, and said building, structure, or improvement complies with the provisions
of this section.
B. COMPLIANCE: All buildings, structures, and improvements shall comply with the
county’s housing and building code, and all other applicable codes and regulations.
C. PROCEDURE – PERMITS: The applicant shall submit to the building inspector, the
following:
1. An application for a building permit requesting an inspection of the building,
structure, or improvement to be moved or set.
2. A plot plan, footing and foundation plan, and construction plans for any new
construction.
3. A statement from the applicable city(s) insuring that all past and current taxes
have been paid.
4. Upon receipt of the foregoing items, the building inspector shall inspect said
building, structure, or improvements, and the proposed location where same will
be set within the city and determine if the proposed development will comply will
all applicable codes and regulations.
5. The move and set shall be referred to the Zoning Administrator for approval or
denial of compliance with this ordinance.
6. Upon approval of the Zoning Administrator and the Building Inspector, a building
permit to move and set shall be issued. The City Engineer shall then be notified of
same and shall issue a transport permit. The city engineer or his agent will
designate the route to be traveled. The transport permit is only good for the date
specified on permits. The transport permit will not be issued if ninety (90)
consecutive calendar days or more have lapsed form the date of inspection by the
Building inspector. The transport permit provided for in this section shall not be
in lieu of any other permits which my be required by the city.
7. No transport or building permit to move and set shall be issued until the applicant
has first obtained the necessary permits from the telephone company, public
Article IX General Regulations 9-14
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
utilities companies, railroad companies, and the Kentucky Department of
Transportation, and the county road supervisor, whichever are applicable.
D. FEES:
1. There will be a building investigation fee as established by the city to cover the
costs of investigation and inspection for determining the structural soundness of
buildings, structures, or improvements to be moved, the fee is payable in advance
and must accompany the application provided for herein. The inspection shall
determine what will be necessary to bring buildings, structures, or improvements
into compliance with all applicable codes and regulations should the building not
comply. This fee is not returnable. If buildings, structures, or improvements are
found to be in compliance with the city’s applicable codes and regulations, a
building permit to move and set will be issued and the fee will be based on the
cost of the new foundations and all work necessary to place the building or
structure in its completed condition in the new location. This fee in addition to the
building investigation fee.
2. No person, corporation, or company shall transport, move, or set any building,
structure, or improvement in the city until and unless such person, corporation, or
company shall post with the building inspector a good and sufficient indemnity
bond in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in favor of the city. Such
bond shall be made by a surety corporation authorized to do business in the state
of Kentucky.
SECTION 9.17 SCREENING AREA: Screening areas shall be provided for the purpose of
minimizing the friction between incompatible land uses and improving the aesthetic and
functional quality of any development.
A. SCREENING AREA REQUIREMENTS: All screening areas shall be approved by the
Zoning Administrator (or Planning Commission, where required by this ordinance),
according to a submitted development plan as regulated by the applicable requirements of
Section 9.19 of this ordinance. Screening areas shall be designed, provided, and
maintained according to the following:
1. Where vegetative and/or topographic conditions that provide a natural screening
and buffer exist prior to development of properties in question, every effort shall
be made to retain such conditions. In such cases additional screening may not be
required, provided that provision is made for maintenance of such condition to the
satisfaction of the city.
2. Wherever screening is required in this ordinance, all trees shall be evergreen.
3. All trees shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in height when planted, unless
otherwise required according to the submitted development plan.
4. All hedges shall be a minimum of three (3) feet in height when planted unless
otherwise required according to the submitted development plan.
Article IX General Regulations 9-15
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
5. All trees, shrubs, and other planting materials shall be living plants (not artificial)
and shall be suitable to the Northern Kentucky area and the specific conditions of
the site in question, such as but not limited to, soil conditions, slopes, reduction of
noise pollution, maintenance necessary, and the type of screening needed. The
city may require review of the proposed screening plan form the U.S. Soil
Conservation Service, the Campbell County Agricultural Extension Service.
6. Screening areas are to be provided within the required minimum yard setbacks as
required in each district’s regulations. In the case where property is located
adjacent to another governmental jurisdiction, screening requirements shall be the
same as if the zone in the adjacent city (or a zone containing the most similar
types of permitted uses as provided herein) were located within the city.
7. In the case where a zoning map change occurs resulting in adjacency to a different
zoning district than was previously the case, and where development has already
occurred on property in the unchanged district, required additional setbacks and
screening requirements (as required in each district’s regulations) shall be
provided for the property in the district where the zone change occurred.
B. PROVISIONS AND MAINTENANCE: Required screening areas shall be provided as a
condition of development by the owner and/or developer. All required screening
(including the planting of trees and other vegetation) shall be maintained by the property
owner.
C. INCLUSION OF SITE PLAN AND/OR SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT
DRAWINGS: Areas to be set aside as screening areas shall be identified on the required
site plans, as regulated in Section 9.19, and where applicable, on the improvement
drawings as regulated by the Subdivision Regulations. Sufficient bond, adequate to cover
the required improvements as determined by the city may be required to be posted. It
shall be unlawful to occupy any premises unless the required screening has been installed
in accordance with the requirements as provided herein.
SECTION 9.18 OUTDOOR SWIMMING POOLS:
A. PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS: All private swimming pools seventeen (17) inches or
more in depth shall be regulated according to the following requirements:
1. Swimming pools shall be permitted to be located only to the rear of the principal
permitted dwelling or dwellings.
2. Except as herein provided, no swimming pool, including the apparatus and
equipment pertaining to the operation of the swimming pool shall be permitted
within any required yards of the lot nor within the limits of any public utility
right-of-way easement.
3. Swimming pools which are constructed in-ground, shall be required to have a
fence or wall, including a self-closing or self-locking door or gate around the pool
or the property on which the pool is located, of at least four (4) feet in height, but
not exceeding seven (7) feet (only classes 1, 2, 4, or 5 are permitted as regulated
Article IX General Regulations 9-16
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
in Article XI of this ordinance) and of such construction that a small child may
not reach the pool from the street or any adjacent property without scaling a fence
or wall, or opening a gate or door.
4. Swimming pools which are located above ground shall be required to have a
fence or wall, including a self-closing or self-locking door or gate, around the
pool or property on which the pool is located, at lease four (4) feet in height, but
not exceeding seven (7) feet (only class 1, 3, 4, and 5 are permitted as regulated
by Article XI of this ordinance) and of such construction that a small child may
not reach the pool from the street or any adjacent property without scaling a wall
or fence or opening a gate or door. Said wall may be the wall of the above ground
pool providing, however, that said wall is at least four (4) feet about the
surrounding ground level. In addition, any access to above ground pools by means
of a ladder or stairway, shall be provided with a self-closing or self-locking door
or gate, or some other device that would prevent a small child from gaining access
to the pool by means of a ladder or stairway.
5. Glare from flood lights used to illuminate the swimming pool area for night
bathing shall be directed away from adjacent properties.
6. All swimming pools including the apparatus and equipment pertaining to the
operation of the swimming pool, shall be constructed and erected in accordance
with applicable codes, ordinances, and regulations of the city. Any water used in
the operation of the pool, other than from a public source, shall be approved by
the appropriate Health Department.
7. All swimming pools existing at the time of adoption of this ordinance which are
unprotected by a surrounding fence or wall, including gates or doors, as regulated
by subsection A. 3 and A. 4 of this section of the ordinance, shall be required to
comply with the provisions of this section within sixty (60) days after the
adoption of this ordinance.
B. PUBLIC, SEMI–PUBLIC, AND COMMERCIAL SWIMMING POOLS: All public,
semi–public, and commercial swimming pools shall be regulated according to the
following requirements:
1. Except as herein provided, no swimming pool including the apparatus and
equipment pertaining to the operation of the swimming pool shall be permitted
within any required yards of the lot or within the limits of any public utility rightof-
way easement.
2. The swimming pool or the property on which the pool is located shall be
surrounded by a fence or wall (only classes 1, 3, 4, or 5 are permitted as regulated
by Article XI of this ordinance) at least five (5) feet in height, but not exceeding
the height as herein required, and of such construction that a small child may not
reach the pool from the street or from adjacent property without opening a door or
gate or scaling a wall or fence.
3. Glare from flood lights used to illuminate the swimming pool area for night
bathing shall be directed away from adjacent properties.
Article IX General Regulations 9-17
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
4. All swimming pools including the apparatus and equipment pertaining to the
operation of the swimming pool shall be constructed and erected in accordance
with applicable codes, ordinances and regulations of the city. Any water used in
the operation of the swimming pool, other than from a public source, shall be
approved by the appropriate Health Department.
5. No mechanical device for the reproduction or amplification of sounds used in
connection with swimming pools shall create a nuisance to adjacent properties
though the emission of noises, voices, or music which is loud enough to cause
complaints form said adjacent residential property owners.
SECTION 9.19 DEVELOPMENT PLAN REQUIREMENTS: No building shall be erected
or structurally altered nor shall any grading take place on any lot or parcel in zones where a
development plan is required, except in accordance with the regulations of this section and an
approved development plan as hereinafter required. Before a permit is issued for construction,
one copy of the development plan of the area at a scale no smaller than one (1) inch to one
hundred (100) feet shall be filed with the Planning Commission and one (1) copy each with the
Building Inspector and the Zoning Administrator setting forth, identifying and locating the
following:
A. Total area in development project including legal description.
B. Present zoning or property in question and adjacent properties.
C. All public and private rights-of-way and easement line located on or adjacent to the
property which are proposed to be continued, created, relocated or abandoned.
D. Existing and proposed topography with a maximum of two (2) foot contour intervals.
Where existing ground is on a slope of less than two (2) percent, either one (1) foot
contours or spot elevations where necessary, but not more than fifty (50) feet apart in
both directions.
E. The proposed finish grade of the development area shown by contours with intervals not
larger than two (2) feet, supplemented where necessary by spot elevations.
F. The location of every existing and proposed building in the described parcel or parcels,
the use or uses to be contained therein, the number of buildings including dimensions and
height, the gross floor area and number of floors.
G. Location and dimension of all curb cuts, driving lanes, off-street parking and loading
and/or unloading areas including number of spaces, angles of stalls, grades, and
illuminated facilities.
H. All walks, malls, and other open spaces.
I. Location of all walls, fences and screen planting.
Article IX General Regulations 9-18
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
J. Location, size, height and orientation of all signs.
K. Types of surfacing proposed on the various off-street parking and driveways including
cross sections and drainage plans.
L. Location of all existing and proposed streets, highways, and alleys.
M. All existing and proposed water, storm and sanitary sewer lines, Indicating pipe sizes,
types and grades.
N. A drainage plan of the area showing the size and the location of each existing and
proposed structure. The approximate volume of water generated by development of the
subject area and the proposed method of disposing of said water. Provisions shall be
included for adequate control of erosion and sedimentation, indicating the proposed
temporary and permanent control practices and measures which will be implemented
during all phases of clearing, grading and construction.
O. Identification of the soil type on the subject property including soil problems and
proposed method of handling and said soil problems.
P. A schedule of development including the staging and phasing of:
1. Residential areas, in order of priority, by type of dwelling unit;
2. Streets, utilities, and other public facility improvements, in order of priority;
3. Dedication of land to public use or set aside for common ownership with a
preliminary statement indicating how maintenance of the latter will be handled;
and
4. The construction of nonresidential buildings, in order of priority.
Q. Such other information with regard to the development area as may be required by the
Planning Commission to determine conformance with this ordinance. Where
development is proposed on a parcel of land that is part of a larger tract of land which is
under one ownership, the developer shall be required to submit a development plan for
the entire property under said ownership, unless specifically waived by the Planning
Commission. The development plan will tie into adjacent properties not under said
ownership. All such development plans shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission
and the factual determination approving or rejecting such plans shall be made in
accordance with requirements of this or other applicable sections of this ordinance, and
the adopted Comprehensive Plan for the city. All development plans, approved shall be
binding upon the applicants, their successors and assigns and shall limit the development
to all conditions and limitations established in such plans. Amendments to plans may be
made in accordance with the procedure required by this ordinance subject to the same
limitations and requirements as those under such plans were originally approved. After
Article IX General Regulations 9-19
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
final approval the subject area may be developed in stages, providing all of the
procedures required by the Planning Commission have been complied with.
R. All development projects requiring a development plan under Section 9.19 shall provide
a separate landscape plan for the site in question. Such plans shall be prepared by a
landscape professional, either a landscape architect, or a landscape company. All
landscape plans, including walls, fences, screen planting shall be made in accordance
with all requirements of this ordinance, and in accordance (where applicable) with the US
27 Highway Corridor Street Plan. The landscape professional responsible for the
preparation of the landscape plan for the site in Question shall be required to certify to the
City Zoning Administrator that all landscape elements and features have been made in
accordance with the approved plan. The landscape professional shall be required to
recertify 12 months following the original certification that all landscape elements and
features are being maintained and/or replaced as needed. The applicants, their successors,
and assigns shall be responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of all elements of the
approved landscape plan throughout the lifetime of the project. The City Clerk shall have
the owner of the development and landscape professional sign an acknowledgment they
have received a copy of Section 9.19 R of the Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance.
However, failure to do so shall not affect the enforceability of this section.
SECTION 9.20 REGULATIONS CONCERNING AIR RIGHTS: Any proposed use of air
rights, as defined herein, shall be in the form of a development plan (as regulated in Section 9.19
of this ordinance) submitted to the Planning Commission for its review.
SECTION 9.21 REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO PAKRING OR STORING OF
TRAILERS, MOBILE HOMES, CAMPERS, INOPERABLE VEHICLES, AND OTHER
SUCH TYPE EQUIPMENT IN A RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT:
A. No motor vehicle which is inoperable shall be stored in any lot in any zone or parcel of
ground unless it is in a completely enclosed building. Parking shall be limited to the
number of vehicles regularly used by members of a resident family or their guests. All
vehicles whether operable or inoperable shall be duly registered and licensed vehicles of
the State of which the owner is a resident.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to live in any boat, automobile, recreational
vehicle or truck, within the limits of the city. It shall be unlawful for any person or
persons to keep or park any recreational vehicles, truck, camper, or boat in the front yard
of any premises in a residential district for a period of more than forty-eight (48) hours
per week. Said forty-eight hour period shall be for the purpose of loading or unloading of
same. Out of town guest(s) visiting a resident of the City of Highland Heights shall be
permitted to park a Recreational Vehicle in the driveway of the residents’ home for a
period of not more than seven (7) days. Beyond the seven day period the guest must
notify the City Police Department for permission to continue parking the vehicle for an
extension of not more than seven additional days. Parking a recreational vehicle on a
Article IX General Regulations 9-20
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
City street in front of the home visited shall not exceed a period of seventy-two (72)
hours.
C. Except as herein provided, it shall be unlawful to park or store any recreational vehicles
(such as a motor home, camping trailer, camper or boat) in any residential district, except
in the side or rear yard of a lot as defined in this ordinance. In no case shall more than
two (2) recreational type vehicles be permitted in any yard unless in a completely
enclosed building.
D. It shall be unlawful for a property owner or a resident to park or keep in any residential
district any truck and/or trailer designed or used for commercial purposes such as
wreckers, dump trucks, tracked vehicles, buses, construction vehicles, and equipment
carriers, bottle delivery trucks, and refrigerated trucks. No truck longer than 27 feet or in
excess of 10,000 pounds GVWR (gross vehicle weight rating) may be parked in a
residential district, regardless of whether it is a commercial vehicle, except in the case of
recreational vehicles as permitted in this Section 9.21.
E. All parking shall be on a hard surface, which can include existing gravel areas, except
that small boats, or utility trailers weighing less than 1,200 pounds GVWR (gross vehicle
weight rating) may be parked or stored on grass in a rear or side yard of a residential lot.
All new or expanded spaces shall be surfaced with asphalt or concrete. Pavers may be
permitted when installed in accordance with industry standards and approved by the
City’s Zoning Administrator. Gravel is not permitted for any new or expanded driveway
or parking area.
F. Upon adoption of this ordinance, for all new construction, not more than 25 percent of
the front yard may be used for driveway or parking in any single-family detached
residential zone.
G. Any property which is not in compliance with the provisions of Section 9.21 at the time
of adoption of this amendment’s effective date shall be given a period of sixty (60) days
to comply with such provisions, provided further that any property which is not
compliant with the provisions of Section 9.21.E, at the time of the effective date of this
amendment, shall be given a period of six (6) months from the effective date of this
amendment to comply. The Board of Adjustment may grant a waiver to comply with the
provisions of Section 9.21 based on hardship caused by conditions of lot dimension
and/or topography, or for other unique circumstance where the strict compliance of this
Section would cause undue hardship, which in the opinion of the Board would outweigh
its benefits to the community.
SECTION 9.22 REGULATIONS CONCERNING DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF
IMPROVEMENTS: Where deemed necessary by the Planning Commission, proposed
development, requiring the construction of streets (including curb and gutters), sidewalks, sewers
(sanitary and storm), water lines or other improvements, which does not constitute a subdivision,
Article IX General Regulations 9-21
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
as herein defined, shall be required to be designed and constructed in accordance with the
applicable articles and sections of the Highland Heights Subdivision Regulations.
SECTION 9.23 HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS:
A. This section is designed to ensure, when development is proposed in those areas of the
community which have physical characteristics limiting development will occur in a
manner harmonious with adjacent lands so as to minimize problems of drainage, erosion,
earth movement, and other natural hazards.
B. Areas of land on which development is physically restricted due to excessive hillside
slopes shall be limited according to the following requirements, notwithstanding any
other section of this or any other ordinance adopted by the city:
1. All land areas located within the city and identified on the comprehensive plan as
"Physically Restrictive Development Areas" and any other areas which have
slopes of 20 percent or greater shall require approval before development may
occur. In those areas which are identified in the comprehensive plan as
“Physically Restrictive Development Areas” and containing slopes less than 20
percent, the requirements contained herein may be waived; if, after review of the
proposed site plan by the engineer, it is deemed that said development will not
result in hillside slippage or soil erosion.
2. No excavation, removal or placement of any soil, foundation placement, or
construction of buildings or structures of any nature within the area identified in
(1) above, may occur until plans and specifications for such work have been
submitted in the form of a development plan as regulated by Section 9.19 of this
ordinance. In addition to development plan requirements, the following shall also
be submitted:
a. Plan(s) which show existing topography and the proposed physical
changes necessary for construction, indicating grading (cutting and filling)
compaction, erosion ponds, areas to be defoliated, and any other pertinent
information which will change the natural physical features of the site or
general area.
b. Subsurface investigation of the area under consideration, including test
borings, laboratory tests, engineering tests, and a geological analysis
should be made by a qualified registered civil engineer and a geologist
indicating that the building and physical changes proposed in the area will
be completed in a manner which will minimize hillside slippage or soil
erosion.
3. The development plan and other information required in Section 9.23, B, 2 of this
section of the ordinance shall be reviewed by the city engineer who will
recommend to the Planning Commission, or its duly authorized representative,
Article IX General Regulations 9-22
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
what effect the proposed development will have on hillside slippage and soil
erosion.
After consideration of the recommendations, the Planning Commission, or its
duly authorized representative, may grant a permit for use of the site in
accordance with the submitted plans.
4. If, after review of the plans required by this section of the ordinance, the Planning
Commission, or its duly authorized representative, determines that said proposed
plans will not minimize hillside slippage, the Planning Commission shall deny a
permit for the development of said land, and the site shall be limited to those open
type uses, excluding structures, as permitted or conditionally permitted in the
Conservation Zone.
SECTION 9.24 PHASED ZONING REGULATIONS:
A. Phased zoning is an overlay type regulation to be used in cases where the timing and/or
phasing of the zoning of an area is especially critical to the implementation of the
adopted comprehensive plan. The intent of the phased zoning regulations is to encourage
development or redevelopment or a specified area for the used and/or density designated
on the comprehensive plan when the necessary conditions for such development are
realized (e.g., demolition of existing deteriorated areas). Implicit in such a phased zoning
approach is the premise that until such conditions are realized, the type of development
identified by the comprehensive plan is premature; such development would be prevented
by temporarily zoning the area to generally conform with the predominant existing land
use, with a clear stipulation of an intended future rezoning, which would be in
compliance with the adopted comprehensive plan.
B. The phased zoning regulations may be overlaid over any zoning classification by means
of a conventional zone change process. The use of the phased zoning regulations would
indicate that the regulations of the overlaid zone are currently being enforced based upon
the general existing land use, but on attainment of all the requirements of the zone which
corresponds to the adopted comprehensive plan for type of use and/or density and other
requirements of this ordinance, the area could be rezoned in direct compliance with the
plan.
C. Phased zones are indicated on the official zoning map by adding to the overlaid zone, the
letter “P” as a suffix enclosed in parenthesis. For example, in order to properly phase its
redevelopment, an area zone “R-1E”, reflecting the existing single-family development,
which is identified as future multi-family residential development on the locally adopted
comprehensive plan could be temporarily zoned “R-1E (P)”, indicating that present
development on the site would be in conformance with the regulations of the overlaid R-
1E Zone, but that when efforts are possible to redevelop the entire area (or a significant
portion of the area) in a coordinated and comprehensive fashion, the area could be
rezoned through a conventional zone change procedure. At the time of the zone change,
Article IX General Regulations 9-23
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
the temporary R-1E (P) Zone is removed and the area is developed according to the
regulations of the new zone, which is in conformance with the adopted comprehensive
plan.
D. The minimum size of any area to be rezoned as regulated by this section of the ordinance
is five (5) acres, provided that all other provisions of this ordinance and the city’s
subdivision regulations are adhered to. Development of a smaller tract adjacent to an
existing zone being requested may be permitted if the proposed development conforms to
and extends the original development and provided further that the zone is in
conformance with the comprehensive plan.
SECTION 9.25 CORRIDOR REHABILITATION OVERLAY ZONING: Replaced
entirely by Section 10.21.
SECTION 9.26 DISH TYPE SATELLITE RECEIVING STATION REGULATION:
A. Ground Mounted Stations: An earth station shall be considered accessory structure with
the following additional requirements:
1. The height of the earth station, should the dish antenna be turned perpendicular to
the ground, shall not exceed 15 feet from the ground to the highest point on the
dish antenna.
2. The “dish” antenna shall not exceed 10 feet in diameter.
3. Wiring between an earth station and receiver shall be placed beneath the surface
of the ground.
4. The distance of any guy anchorage, edge of the dish or other associated
equipment shall be at least 10 feet from side or rear lot lines.
B. Roof Mounted Stations: Roof mounted stations may be mounted directly upon the roof of
a primary structure and shall not be mounted upon appurtenances such as chimneys,
towers, trees, poles, or spires. A roof mounted station shall not exceed more than 3 feet
above on roof upon which it is mounted, and shall not exceed 3 feet in diameter.
SECTION 9.27 SIDEWALKS:
A. All proposed residential, commercial, industrial and office subdivisions of developments
within the City limits shall have sidewalks on each side of all proposed or existing public
streets.
SECTION 9.28 UNDERGOUND UTILITIES:
A. All proposed residential, commercial, industrial and office subdivisions or developments
within the corporate limits of the City shall have their utilities underground where same is
deemed feasible by the local utility company and the City Engineer.
Article IX General Regulations 9-24
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
SECTION 9.29 CELLULAR TOWERS AND OTHER UTILITIES
A. PURPOSE: The purposes of these regulations are: to provide for the safest and most
efficient integration of cellular antenna towers for cellular telecommunications services
or personal communications services within the community; to provide for such facilities
in coordination with the recommendations of the comprehensive plan; and to allow for
such facilities with the intention of furthering the public health, safety and general
welfare.
B. PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE: Applicants are encouraged to notify the planning
commission's duly authorized representative: to discuss proposals; allow for early
coordination; and to identify those items which are in conformance/nonconformance with
the comprehensive plan zoning ordinance, and the provisions of these regulations.
C. DEFINITIONS: For the purposes of these regulations, the following definitions shall
apply:
1. CELLULAR ANTENNA TOWER: A tower constructed for, or an existing
facility that has been adapted for, the location of transmission or related
equipment to be used in the provision of cellular telecommunications services or
personal communications services whether temporary or permanent.
2. CELLULAR TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES: a retail telecommunications
service that uses radio signals transmitted through cell sites; and mobile switching
stations.
3. CO-LOCATION: Locating two (2) or more transmission antennas or related
equipment on the same cellular antenna tower.
4. PERSONAL COMMUNICATION SERVICE: As defined in 47 U.S.C. sec.
332(c).
5. UNIFORM APPLICATION: means an application for a certificate of
convenience and necessity issued under KRS 278.020 submitted by a utility to the
Public Service Commission to construct an antenna tower for cellular
telecommunications services or personal communications service .in a
jurisdiction, that has adopted planning and zoning regulations in accordance with
KRS Chapter 100, except for any county that contains a city of the first class.
6. UTILITY: Any person except a city, who owns, controls, or operates or manages
any facility used or to be used for or in connection with:
a. The generation, production, transmission, or distribution of electricity to
or for the public, for compensation, for lights, heat, power, or other uses;
Article IX General Regulations 9-25
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
b. The production, manufacture, storage, distribution, sale or furnishing of
natural or manufactured gas, or a mixture of same, to or for the public, for
compensation, for light, heat, power or other uses;
c. The transporting or conveying of gas, crude oil, or other fluid substance by
pipeline to or for the public, for compensation;
d. The diverting, developing, pumping, impounding, distributing or
furnishing of water to or for the public, for compensation;
e. The transmission or conveyance over wire, in air, or otherwise, of any
message by telephone or telegraph for the public;
f. The treatment of sewage for the public, for compensation.
D. GENERAL: Cellular antenna towers for cellular telecommunications services or personal
communications services may be allowed in any zone as a conditional. use after a
planning commission review in. accordance with the following procedures to ascertain
agreement with the adopted comprehensive plan and the regulations contained within the
zoning ordinance, a hearing with the city's board of adjustment and after being granted a
Certificate of Necessity and Convenience by the Public Service Commission.
E. APPLICABILITY: Every utility, or a company that is engaged in the business of
providing the required infrastructure to a utility, that proposes to construct an antenna
tower for cellular telecommunications services or personal communications services shall
submit a copy of the utility's completed uniform application to the planning commission
within five (5) consecutive days of applying to the Public Service Commission for a
certificate of necessity and convenience.
F. APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS: Applications for the construction of cellular antenna
towers for cellular telecommunications services or personal communications services
shall include a twenty five hundred dollar ($2,500.00) fee to assist the commission in
verifying the applicant's information in its application and the following:
1. All information that the applicant is required to submit to the Public Service
Commission, per the requirements of the uniform application.
2. A copy of the applicant's FCC license, or, if the applicant is not an FCC license
holder, a copy of at least one letter of commitment from an FCC license holder to
locate at least one antenna on the applicant's tower.
3. Unless co-locating, certification, supported by evidence, that co-location of the
proposed facility with an existing approved tower or facility cannot be
accommodated. The applicant's certification shall include a listing of all existing
towers and facilities within a two (2) mile radius of the proposed tower location, a
description of each existing site, and a discussion of the ability or inability to
collocate on each existing site, according to the following:
Article IX General Regulations 9-26
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
a. No existing towers or facilities are located or proposed to be located
within a two (2) mile radius of the proposed tower location.
b. Existing towers or facilities are not of sufficient height to meet the
applicant's engineering requirements.
c. Existing towers or facilities do not have sufficient structural strength to
support the applicant's proposed antenna(s) or related equipment.
d. The applicant's planned equipment would cause frequency interference
with other existing or planned equipment of the tower of facility, or the
existing or planned equipment of the tower or facility would cause
frequency interference with the applicant’s planned equipment, and which
cannot be reasonably prevented.
e. Unwillingness of the owner/owners of the existing tower/towers or
facility/facilities to entertain a co-location proposal.
4. Unless co-locating, certification, supported by evidence, that the proposed site is
the only appropriate site for the location of the facility. The applicant's
certification shall include a listing of all potential sites within a two (2) mile
radius of the proposed tower location, a description of each potential site, and a
discussion of the ability or inability of the site to host such a facility, according to
the following:
a. Unwillingness of the site owner(s); to entertain such a facility.
b. Topographic limitations of the site.
c. Adjacent impediments that would obstruct adequate transmission.
d. Physical site constraints that would preclude the construction of such a
facility.
5. A statement demonstrating that the proposal is in agreement with the adopted
comprehensive plan and is in conformity with these regulations.
6. A development plan, drawn to a scale not smaller than one (1) inch equals one
hundred (100) feet, showing the following information, where applicable. The
planning commission's duly authorized representative may waive the submission
of such data involving detailed engineering study until such time as the
application has been approved.
a. The total area of the site in question;
b. All public and private rights-of-way and easement lines located on or
adjacent to the subject property which are proposed to be continued,
created, enlarged, relocated or abandoned;
c. Existing topography, and approximate delineation of any topographical
changes shown by contour with intervals not to exceed five (5) feet;
d. Location, height, arrangement, and identification of all nonresidential
buildings, structures and uses on the subject property and, where
applicable, location and arrangement of all lots with lot dimensions;
Article IX General Regulations 9-27
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
e. Location and arrangement of all common open space areas, and methods
of ownership and operation and maintenance of such lands, shall be
identified;
f. Landscaping features, including identification of planting areas and the
location, type, and height of walls and fences;
g. Location of signs, indicating their orientation, size, and height;
h. All utility lines and easements:
(1) Water distribution systems, including line sizes, width of
easements, type of pipe, .location of hydrants, and valves, and
other appurtences;
(2) Sanitary sewer system, including pipe sizes, width .of easements,
gradients, type of pipes, invert elevations, location and type of
manholes, the location, type, size of all lift or pumping stations,
capacity, and process of any necessary treatment facilities, and
other appurtenances;
(3) Storm sewer and natural drainage system, including pipe and
culvert sizes, gradients, location of open drainage courses, width of
easements, location and size of inlets and catch basins, location
and size of retention and/or sedimentation basins;
(4) Other utilities (e.g. electric, telephone, etc.) including the type of
service and the width of easements;
i. Location of all off-street parking, loading and/or unloading, and driveway
areas, including typical cross sections, the type of surfacing, dimensions
and the number and arrangement of off-street parking and loading and/or
unloading spaces;
j. Circulation System:
(1) Pedestrian walkways, including alignment, grades, type of
surfacing, and width;
(2) Streets, including alignment, grades, type of surfacing, width of
pavement and right-of-way, geometric details, and typical cross
sections;
G. PROCESSING OF APPLICATION: Applications for the construction of cellular,
antenna towers for cellular telecommunications services or personal communications
services shall, be processed as follows:
1. New Sites
a. At least one (1) public hearing on the proposal shall be held, at which
hearing interested parties and citizens' shall have the opportunity to be
heard. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published at
Article IX General Regulations 9-28
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
least once, but may be published two (2) or more times, in a newspaper of
general circulation in the county, provided that one (1) publication occurs
not less than seven (7) calendar days nor more than twenty-one (21)
calendar days before the occurrence of such hearing.
b. Notice of the hearing shall be posted conspicuously on the property in
question, for fourteen (14) consecutive days prior to the hearing. Said
posting shall consist of one or more signs, constructed of durable material,
and clearly depicting the following information: "(Name of utility)
proposes to construct a telecommunications ("tower" or "monopole") on
this site" Four, (4) inch high lettering); and address, including telephone
number, of the planning commission where additional information
regarding hearing may be obtained.
c. Notice of the hearing shall be given at least fourteen (14) days in advance
of the hearing, by first class mail; with certification by the commission
secretary, or other officer of the planning commission that the notice was
mailed to an owner of every parcel of property within five hundred (500)
feet of the base of the proposed tower or monopole. It shall be the duty of
the person(s) proposing the facility to furnish to the planning commission
the names and addresses of said property owners. Records maintained by
the property valuation administrator may be relied upon conclusively to
determine the identity and address of said owner. In the event such
property is in condominium or cooperative forms of ownership, then the
person notified by mail shall be the president or chairperson of the owner
group which administers property commonly owned by the condominium
or cooperative owners of an adjoining property who are listed in the
property valuation administrator's records as having the same address.
d. Upon holding such hearing, the planning commission shall, within sixty
(60) days commencing from the date that the application is received by the
planning commission, or within a date specified in a written agreement,
between the planning commission and the applicant, make its final
decision to approve or disapprove the uniform application. The planning
commission shall submit to the Public Service Commission, along with
their action, the basis for their decision within sixty (60) days.
2. Previously Approved Sites
a. For facilities located on previously approved sites, an officer of the
planning commission shall review the application for its conformity with
these regulations and the regulations contained within the applicable local
zoning ordinance.
Article IX General Regulations 9-29
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
b. If an officer of the planning commission determines that the application is
in conformity with these regulations and the regulations contained within
the applicable local zoning ordinance, an administrative approval may be
granted. This administrative approval shall not be considered final until it
is ratified by a vote of the full commission.
c. If an officer of the planning commission determines that the application is
not in conformity with these regulations and the regulations contained
within the applicable local zoning ordinance, a public hearing, pursuant to
Section la of these regulations, shall be scheduled.
H. DESIGN STANDARDS: At the time of application submittal, the applicant shall provide
information demonstrating compliance with the following requirements. Where the
planning commission, or its duly authorized representative, finds that circumstances or
conditions relating to the particular application are such that one or more of the
requirements listed below are not necessary or desirable for the protection of surrounding
property or the public health, safety, and general welfare, and that such special conditions
or circumstances make one or more said requirements unreasonable, the planning
commission, or its duly authorized representative, may modify or waive such
requirement, either permanently or on a temporary basis. Any such modification or
waiver shall be requested by the applicant, and the applicant shall submit a written
justification for each requested modification or waiver.
1. All structures, except fences, shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from the
property line or lease line of any residentially zoned property.
2. A cellular antenna tower, or alternative antenna tower structure, may be
constructed to a maximum height of two hundred (200) feed regardless of the
maximum height requirements listed in the specific zoning district. This also
applies to any tower taller than fifteen (15) feet constructed on the top of another
building or structure, with the height being the overall height of'
building/structure and tower together, measured from the grade to the highest
point. The planning commission may allow antennas greater than two hundred
(200) feet in height upon review of the applicant’s justification that the additional
height meets the criteria identified in Subsection F, above.
3. When any cellular antenna tower, or alternative antenna tower structure, is taller
than the distance from its base to the nearest property line or lease line, the
applicant shall furnish the planning commission with a certification from an
engineer registered in the Commonwealth of Kentucky that the tower will
withstand winds of seventy (70) mile per hour, in accordance with current
ANSI/EIA/TIA standards.
4. Cellular antenna towers shall not be illuminated, except in accord with other state
or federal regulations.
Article IX General Regulations 9-30
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
5. The site shall be unstaffed. Personnel may periodically visit the site for
maintenance, equipment modification, or repairs. To accommodate such visits,
ingress/egress shall only be from approved access points.
6. A minimum of one (1) off-street parking spaces, per provider, shall be provided
on the site.
7. Woven wire or chain link (eighty (80) percent open) or solid fences made from
wood or other materials (less than fifty (50) percent open), shall be used to
enclose the site. Such fences shall not be less than four (4) feet in height nor more
than eight (8) feet in height. The use of barbed wire or sharp pointed fences shall
be prohibited. Such fence may be located within the front, side, or rear yard.
8. Screening shall be required where the site in question abuts residentially zoned
property. Screening shall be provided by evergreen trees, with a minimum height
of six (6) feet, planted in a staggered pattern at a maximum distance of fifteen
(15) feet on center. The screening shall be placed in an area between the property
line, or lease line, and a ten (10) foot set back.
9. Any site to be purchased or leased for the installation of a cellular antenna tower,
or alternative antenna tower, and ancillary facilities, shall comply with the
minimum lot size requirements of the zone in which the facility is to be located,
provided that such area shall not be required to exceed one-half (1/2) acre.
10. Surfacing of all driveways and off-street parking areas shall comply with the
requirements of the zoning ordinance.
11. There shall be no signs permitted, except those displaying emergency
information, owner contact information, warning or safety instructions, or signs
which are required by federal, state, or local agency. Such signs shall not exceed
five (5) square feet in area.
12. All new cellular antenna towers shall be designed and constructed to
accommodate a minimum of three (3) service providers.
13. All option and site lease agreements shall not prohibit the possibility of colocation.
I. CRITERIA: Evaluation of the proposal shall be based upon the following criteria:
1. Agreement with the various elements of the adopted comprehensive plan, and
where applicable, any other adopted plan.
2. Extent to which the proposal is consistent with the purposes of these regulations.
Article IX General Regulations 9-31
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
3. Adequacy of the proposed site, considering such factors as the sufficiency of the
size of the site to comply with the established criteria, the configuration of the
site, and the extent to which the site is formed by logical boundaries (e.g.
topography, natural features, streets, relationship of adjacent uses, etc.)
4. Extent to which .the proposal responds to the impact of the proposed development
on adjacent land uses, especially in terms of visual impact.
5. Extent to which the proposed cellular tower is camouflaged (i.e., use of "stealth
technology").
6. Extent to which the proposed facility is integrated with existing structures (i.e.
buildings, signs).
J. AMENDMENTS: Any amendments to plans, except for minor adjustments as
determined by the planning commission, or its duly authorized representative, shall be
made in accordance with the procedure required by Subsection F, above, subject to the
same limitations and requirements as those under which such plans were originally
approved.
SECTION 9.30 REQUIRED NOTICE FOR APPROVAL OF DEVELOPMENT PLANS:
A. Whenever this ordinance requires the approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission
or a development plan then notice shall be given to property owners who abut the
property upon which the development plan is applicable. Said notice shall be delivered to
the abutting property owners by first class regular mail not more than twenty-one (21)
days and not less than seven (7) days prior to the public meeting at which the Planning
Commission will consider approval of the development plans.
B. The chairman of the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Zoning Administrator in
reviewing development plans, may authorize minor changes form the approved
development plan, provided that the adjustments do not: Substantively affect the spatial
relationship of the structures; change land uses, increase overall density, alter circulation
patterns (vehicular and pedestrian), decrease the amount of and/or usability of open space
or recreation areas, or affect other applicable requirements of this ordinance.
C. Any amendments to development plans, except for the minor changes which may be
permitted by the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Zoning Administrator as noted
in Section Two (2), shall constitute a major change and shall be made only in accordance
with the procedure required by this Ordinance in Section One (1) subject to the same
limitations and requirements imposed when such plans were originally approved.
Article X Zone Regulations 10-1
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
ARTICLE X
ZONE REGULATIONS
SECTION 10.0 C-O - CONSERVATION ZONE:
A. USES PERMITTED:
1. Agricultural uses, but not including the feeding of garbage to animals
2. Public owned and/or operated parks and/or recreation areas, including public
swimming pools
3. Recreational uses other than those publicly owned and/or operated such as golf
courses, and country clubs including commercial swimming pools
B. ACCESSORY USES:
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses
2. Fences and walls as regulated by Article XI of this ordinance
3. Signs as regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance
C. CONDITIONAL USES: No building or occupancy permit shall be issued for any of the
following, nor shall any of the following uses or any customary accessory buildings or
uses be permitted until and unless the location of such use shall have been applied for and
approved by the Board of Adjustment as set forth in Section 9.14 of this ordinance.
1. Golf driving ranges
2. Riding academies and stables
3. The following uses are permitted in connection with streams, rivers, lakes or other
bodies of water, providing that the development of all permitted facilities in or
adjacent to navigable waters shall be approved by the Corps of Engineers,
Department of Army and such statement of approval or denial shall be submitted
to the Board of Adjustment at the time of submittal for a conditional zoning
certificate:
a. Boat Harbors and Marinas - The following uses shall be permitted as
accessory uses in connection with any boat harbor or marina and primarily
intended to serve only persons using the boat harbor or marina.
Advertising of any included or accessory uses shall be within the building
and shall not be visible from outside the building
(1) boat fueling, service and repairs
(2) sale of boat supplies
(3) grocery store
Article X Zone Regulations 10-2
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
(4) restaurant
(5) club house and lockers
b. Public boat landing or launching facilities
c. Dockage facilities
d. Off–street parking facilities and temporary parking of boat trailers
including spaces large enough to accommodate automobiles pulling boat
trailers
D. TEMPORARY USES: No building or occupancy permit shall be issued for any of the
following, not shall any of the following uses be permitted until and unless the location of
such use and a temporary permit for said location- and use shall have been applied for
and approved by the Board of Adjustment and subject to such conditions and/or
restriction as may be deemed necessary by the Board to protect the surrounding
development and to reasonably insure a reasonable and justifiable operation.
1. Extraction of minerals and other similar items
2. Sanitary landfill, provided such does not create a water diversion which would
endanger adjacent areas and further provided that such a sanitary landfill would
not create any undesirable odors or any unsightly area to adjacent properties
and/or buildings and further that such sanitary landfill, according to a registered
civil engineer report, would not cause contamination of any water body
E. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS: No building shall be erected or structurally
altered hereafter except in accordance with the following regulations:
1. Minimum Lot Area – Five (5) acres
2. Minimum Lot Width at Building Setback Line – Three Hundred (300) feet
3. Minimum Front Yard Depth – One hundred (100) feet
4. Minimum Side Yard Width on Each Side of Lot – Fifty (50) feet
5. Minimum Rear Yard Depth – Fifty (50) feet
6. Maximum Building Height – Twenty–Five (25) feet
F. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS:
1. All "Uses Permitted", "Conditional Uses", and “Temporary Uses”, permitted in
this zone shall require a certificate of approval from the city engineer, certifying
his approval of the type of and manner of construction to be built (insuring that
such constructions shall not cause flood hazard, soil erosion, adverse changes in
natural drainage courses or unnecessary destruction of natural features), which
completed certificate shall be submitted to the appropriate Officer or Board, as
required herein, at time of request
2. Dwelling units are not permitted in this zone
3. Off–street parking and loading or unloading shall be provided in accordance with
Articles XII and XIII of this ordinance
Article X Zone Regulations 10-3
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
4. No outdoor storage of any material (useable or waste) shall be permitted in this
zone except within enclosed metal containers
5. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street,
road, highway, deeded right–of–way or into any residential zone
6. Where any yard of any use permitted abuts a residential zone, a minimum yard
requirement of one hundred (100) feet for each side and/or rear yard which abuts
said zone shall be provided, ten (10) feet of which shall be maintained by a
screening area as regulated by Section 9.17 of this ordinance
7. No use producing objectionable odors, noise, or dust shall be permitted within
five hundred (500) feet from the boundary of any residential zone
Article X Zone Regulations 10-4
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
SECTION 10.1 R–RE RESIDENTIAL RURAL ESTATE AND AGRICULTURAL
ZONE:
A. USES PERMITTED: (Agricultural buildings, uses and accessory uses cannot be
regulated by zoning, except for setback requirements. The following regulations
therefore, apply only to those non-agricultural buildings, uses and accessory uses,
permitted herein – except item 10.1, D. 2, which applies to all uses:
1. Single Family Dwelling (detached)
2. Sale of products that are raised, produced, and processed on the premises,
providing that no roadside stands of any type for the sale or display of agricultural
products shall be permitted within fifty (50) feet from any street, road, highway,
or right-of-way line
3. Greenhouses and nurseries, including both wholesale and retail sales of products
grown on the premises provided that the storage of manure shall not be permitted
nearer the front of a street, road, highway, or right-of-way line than one hundred
(100) feet, or not nearer a side lot line than fifty (50) feet
4. Stables and riding academies, both public and private
B. ACCESSORY USES:
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses
2. Fences and walls as regulated by Article XI of this ordinance
3. Some occupations subject to the restrictions and limitations established in Section
9.11 of this ordinance
4. Signs as regulated by Article XIV of this Ordinance
C. CONDITIONAL USES: No building or occupancy permit shall be issued for any of the
following nor shall any of the following uses or any accessory buildings and uses be
permitted until and unless the location of said use shall have been applied for and
approved of by the Board of Adjustments as set for in Section 9.14.
1. Cemeteries
2. Churches and other buildings for the purpose of religious worship providing they
are located adjacent to an arterial street
3. Institutions for higher education providing they are located adjacent to an arterial
street
4. Institutions for human medical care – hospitals, clinic sanitariums, convalescent
homes, nursing homes, and homes for the aged providing they are located on
arterial streets
5. Nursery schools
6. Police and fire stations provided they are located adjacent to an arterial street.
7. Public and parochial schools
8. Publicly owned and/or operated parks, playgrounds, golf courses, community
recreational centers, including public swimming pools and libraries
Article X Zone Regulations 10-5
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
9. Recreational uses, other than those publicly owned and/or operated as follows:
a. golf courses
b. country clubs
c. semi-public swimming pools
D. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR PERMITTED USES: No building shall
be erected or structurally altered hereafter except in accordance with the following
regulations:
1. Minimum Lot Area – Three (3) acres
2. Minimum Lot Width at Building Setback Line – Three hundred (300) feet
3. Minimum Front Yard Depth – Seventy-five (75) feet
4. Minimum Side Yard Width on Each Side of Lot – Seventy–five (75) feet
5. Minimum Rear Yard Depth – Twenty–five (25) feet
6. Maximum Building Height – Thirty–five (35) feet or two and one–half (2 1/2)
stories
E. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES:
No conditional building and/or use shall be erected or structurally altered hereafter except
in accordance with the regulations in Section 10.1, D.
F. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS:
1. Off–street parking and loading or unloading shall be provided in accordance with
Articles XII and XII of this ordinance
2. With the exception of Subsection D of this Section of the Ordinance no outdoor
storage of any materials (usable or waste) shall be permitted in this zone except
within enclosed containers
3. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street,
road, highway, deeded right–of–way or into any residential zone
4. Where land in this zone is abutting a residential zone, a minimum yard
requirement of one hundred (100) feet for each side and/or rear yard which abuts
said zone shall be provided, ten (10) feet of which shall be maintained by a
screening area as regulated by Section 9.17 of this Ordinance
Article X Zone Regulations 10-6
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
SECTION 10.2 R–1B RESIDENTIAL ONE – B ZONE:
A. PERMITTED USES:
1. Single family dwelling (detached)
B. ACCESSORY USES:
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses
2. Fences and walls as regulated by Article XI of this ordinance
3. Home occupations subject to the restrictions and limitations in Section 9.11 of
this ordinance
4. Signs as regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance
C. CONDITIONAL USES: No building or occupancy permit shall be issued for any of the
following, not shall any of the following uses or and customary accessory buildings and
uses be permitted until and unless the location of said use shall have been applied for and
approved of by the Board of Adjustment as set forth in Section 9.14.
1. Cemeteries
2. Churches and other buildings for the purpose of religious worship, provided they
are located adjacent to an arterial street
3. Funeral homes, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
4. Institutions for higher education, provided they are located adjacent to an arterial
street
5. Institutions for human medical care – hospitals, clinic, sanitariums, convalescent
homes, nursing homes, homes for the aged and philanthropic institutions
providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
6. Nursery school
7. Police and fire stations and city buildings provided they are located adjacent to an
arterial street
8. Public and parochial schools
9. Publicly owned and/or operated parks, playgrounds, golf courses, community
recreational centers, including public swimming pools and libraries
10. Recreational uses, other than those publicly owned and/or operated as follows:
a. golf courses
b. country clubs
c. semi-public swimming pools
D. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR PERMITTED USES: No building shall
be erected or structurally altered hereafter except in accordance with the following
regulations:
1. Minimum Lot Area – One-half (1/2) acre
Article X Zone Regulations 10-7
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
2. Minimum Lot Width at Building Setback Line – One hundred (100) feet
3. Minimum Front Yard Depth – Forty (40) feet
4. Minimum Side Yard With on Each side of the Lot – Fifteen (15) feet
5. Minimum Rear Yard Depth – Twenty-five (25) feet
6. Maximum Building Height – Thirty-five (35) feet or two and a half (2-1/2) stories
E. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES:
No conditional building and/or use shall be erected or structurally altered hereafter except
in accordance with the following regulations:
1. Minimum Lot Area – Twenty–two thousand five hundred (22,500) square feet
2. Minimum Lot Width at Building Setback Line – One hundred fifty (150) feet
3. Minimum Front, Side (on each side of lot) and Rear Yards - Fifty (50) feet
4. Maximum Building Height – Thirty–five (35) feet or two and one-half (2-1/2)
stories
F. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS:
1. Off–street parking and loading or unloading shall be provided in accordance with
Articles XII and XII of this ordinance
2. No outdoor storage of any material (usable or waste) shall be permitted in this
zone except within enclosed containers
3. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street,
road, highway, deeded right-of-way or into any adjacent property
4. Where any yard of any conditionally use permitted in this zone abuts property in a
single family zone, a ten (10) foot wide screening area as regulated by Section
9.17 of this ordinance shall be provided
Article X Zone Regulations 10-8
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
SECTION 10.3 R–1C RESIDENTIAL ONE – C ZONE:
A. USES PERMITTED:
1. Single family dwelling (detached)
B. ACCESSORY USES:
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses
2. Fences and walls as regulated by Article XI of this ordinance
3. Home occupations subject to the restrictions and limitations established in Section
9.11 of this ordinance
4. Signs as regulated by section XIV of this ordinance
C. CONDITIONAL USES: No building or occupancy permit shall be issued for any of the
following, nor shall any of the following uses or any customary accessory buildings and
uses be permitted until and unless the location of said use shall have been applied for and
approved of by the Board of Adjustment as set forth in Section 9.14.
1. Cemeteries
2. Churches and other buildings for the purpose of religious worship providing they
are located adjacent to an arterial street
3. Funeral homes, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
4. Institutions for higher education providing they are located adjacent to an arterial
street
5. Institutions for human medical care – hospitals, clinic sanitariums, convalescent
homes, nursing homes, homes for the aged and philanthropic institutions
providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
6. Nursery school
7. Police and fire stations and city buildings provided they are located adjacent to an
arterial street
8. Public and parochial schools
9. Publicly owned and/or operated parks, playgrounds, golf courses, community
recreational centers, including public swimming pools and libraries
10. Recreational uses other then those publicly owned and/or operated as follows:
a. golf courses
b. country clubs
c. semi-public swimming pools
D. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR PERMITTED USES:
1. Minimum Lot Area – Twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) square feet
2. Minimum Lot Width at Building Setback Line – Eighty (80) feet
3. Minimum Front Yard Depth – Thirty-five (35) feet
Article X Zone Regulations 10-9
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
4. Minimum Side Yard Width on Each Side of Lot – Twelve feet (12)
5. Minimum Rear Yard Depth – Twenty–five (25) feet
6. Maximum Building Height – Thirty–five (35) feet or two and one–half (2 1/2)
stories
E. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES:
No conditional building and/or use shall be erected or structurally altered hereafter except
in accordance with the following regulations:
1. Minimum Lot Area – Twenty–two thousand five hundred (22,500) square feet
2. Minimum Lot Width at Building Setback Line – One hundred fifty (150) feet
3. Minimum Front, Side (on each side of lot) and Rear Yards – Fifty (50) feet
4. Maximum Building Height – Thirty–five (35) feet or two and one-half (2-1/2)
stories
F. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS:
1. Off–street parking and loading or unloading shall be provided in accordance with
Articles XII and XIII of this ordinance
2. No outdoor storage of any material (usable or waste) shall be permitted in this
zone except within enclosed containers
3. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street,
road, highway, deeded right-of-way or into any residential zone
4. Where any yard of any conditional use permitted in this zone abuts property in a
single family zone, a ten (10) foot wide screening area as regulated by Section
9.17 of this ordinance shall be required
Article X Zone Regulations 10-10
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
SECTION 10.4 R–1D RESIDENTIAL ONE – D ZONE:
A. USES PERMITTED:
1. Single family dwelling, detached
B. ACCESSORY USES:
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses
2. Fences and walls as regulated by Article XI of this ordinance
3. Signs as regulated by section XIV of this ordinance
4. Home occupations subject to the restrictions and limitations established in Section
9.11 of this ordinance
C. CONDITIONAL USES: No building or occupancy permit shall be issued for any of the
following, nor shall any of the following uses or any customary accessory buildings and
uses be permitted until and unless the location of said use shall have been applied for and
approved of by the Board of Adjustment as set forth in Section 9.14 of this ordinance.
1. Cemeteries
2. Churches and other buildings for the purpose of religious worship providing they
are located adjacent to an arterial street
3. Funeral homes, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
4. Fire and police stations and city buildings providing they are located adjacent to
an arterial street
5. Institutions for higher education providing they are located adjacent to an arterial
street
6. Institutions for human medical care – hospitals, clinic sanitariums, convalescent
homes, nursing homes, and homes for the aged providing they are located
adjacent to an arterial street
7. Nursery school
8. Public and parochial schools
9. Publicly owned and/or operated parks, playgrounds, golf courses, community
recreational centers, including public swimming pools and libraries
10. Recreational uses other then those publicly owned and/or operated as follows:
a. golf courses
b. country clubs
c. semi-public swimming pools
D. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR PERMITTED USES: No buildings shall
be erected or structurally altered hereafter except in accordance with the following
regulations:
1. Minimum Lot Area – Nine thousand (9,000) square feet
Article X Zone Regulations 10-11
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
2. Minimum Lot Width at Building Setback Line – Seventy (70) feet
3. Minimum Front Yard Depth – Thirty (30) feet
4. Minimum Side Yard Width on Each Side of Lot – Ten (10)
5. Minimum Rear Yard Depth – Twenty–five (25) feet
6. Maximum Building Height – Thirty–five (35) feet or two and one–half (2 1/2)
stories
E. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES:
No conditional building and/or use shall be erected or structurally altered hereafter except
in accordance with the following regulations:
1. Minimum Lot Area – Twenty–two thousand five hundred (22,500) square feet
2. Minimum Lot Width at Building Setback Line – One hundred fifty (150) feet
3. Minimum Front, Side (on each side of lot) and Rear Yards – Fifty (50) feet
4. Maximum Building Height – Thirty–five (35) feet or two and one-half (2-1/2)
stories
F. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS:
1. Off–street parking and loading or unloading shall be provided in accordance with
Articles XII and XIII of this ordinance
2. No outdoor storage of any material (usable or waste) shall be permitted in this
zone except within enclosed containers
3. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street,
road, highway, deeded right-of-way or into any residential zone
4. Where any yard of any conditional use permitted in this zone abuts property in a
single family zone, a ten (10) foot wide screening area as regulated by Section
9.17 of this ordinance shall be required
Article X Zone Regulations 10-12
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
SECTION 10.5 R-1E RESIDENTIAL ONE-E ZONE:
A. USES PERMITTED:
1. Single family dwellings, detached
B. ACESSORY USES:
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses
2. Fences and walls as regulated by Article XI of this ordinance
3. Signs as regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance
4. Home occupations subject to the restrictions and limitations established in Section
9.11 of this ordinance
C. CONDITIONAL USES: No building or occupancy permit shall be issued for any of the
following, nor shall any of the following uses or any customary accessory buildings or
uses be permitted until and unless the location of said uses shall have been applied for
and approved of by Board of Adjustment as set forth in Section 9.14 of this ordinance.
1. Cemeteries
2. Churches and other buildings for the purpose of religious worship providing they
are located adjacent to an arterial street
3. Fire and police stations and city buildings providing they are located adjacent to
an arterial street
4. Funeral homes providing that they are located on the corner lot of the intersection
of an arterial street and another public street
5. Institutions for higher education providing they are located adjacent to an arterial
street
6. Institutions for human medical care – hospitals, clinic sanitariums, convalescent
homes, nursing homes, and homes for the aged providing they are located
adjacent to an arterial street
7. Nursery schools
8. Public and parochial schools
9. Publicly owned and/or operated parks, playgrounds, golf courses, community
recreational centers, including public swimming pools and libraries
10. Recreational uses other than those publicly owned and/or operated as follows:
a. golf courses
b. country clubs
c. semi-public swimming pools
D. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR PERMITTED USES: No buildings shall
be erected or structurally altered hereafter except in accordance with the following
regulations:
Article X Zone Regulations 10-13
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
1. Minimum Lot Area – Seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet
2. Minimum Lot Width at Building Setback Line – Sixty (60) feet
3. Minimum Front Yard Depth – Thirty (30) feet
4. Minimum Side Yard Width on each Side of Lot – Eight (8) feet
5. Minimum Rear Yard Depth – Twenty-five (25) feet
6. Maximum Building Height – Thirty-five (35) feet or two and one-half (2-1/2)
stories
E. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES:
No conditional building and/or use shall be erected or structurally altered hereafter except
in accordance with the following regulations:
1. Minimum Lot Area – Twenty-two thousand five hundred (22,500) square feet
2. Minimum Lot Width at Building Setback Line – One hundred fifty (150) feet
3. Minimum Front, Side (on each side of lot), and Rear Yards – Fifty (50) feet
4. Maximum Building Height – Thirty-five (35) feet or two and one-half (2-1/2)
stories
F. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS:
1. Off-Street parking and loading or unloading shall be provided in accordance with
Articles XII and XIII of this ordinance
2. No outdoor storage of any material (useable or waste) shall be permitted in this
zone except within enclosed containers
3. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street,
road, highway, deeded right-of-way or into any adjacent property
4. Where any yard of any conditional use permitted in this zone abuts property in a
single family zone, a ten (10) foot wide screening area as regulated by Section
9.17 of this ordinance shall be required
Article X Zone Regulations 10-14
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
SECTION 10.6 R-1EF RESIDENTIAL ONE - EF ZONE:
A. USES PERMITTED:
1. Single family dwellings, detached
B. ACCESSORY USES:
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses
2. Fences and walls as regulated by Article XI of this ordinance
3. Signs as regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance
4. Home occupations subject to the restrictions and limitations established in Section
9.11 of this ordinance
C. CONDITIONAL USES: No building or occupancy permit shall be issued for any of the
following, nor shall any of the following uses or customary accessory buildings or uses
be permitted until and unless the location of said uses shall have been applied for and
approved by the Board of Adjustment as set forth in Section 9.14 of this ordinance.
1. Cemeteries
2. Churches and other buildings for the purpose of religious worship providing they
are located adjacent to an arterial street
3. Fire and police stations and city buildings providing they are located adjacent to
an arterial street
4. Funeral homes, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
5. Institutions for higher education providing they are located adjacent to an arterial
street
6. Institutions for human medical care – hospitals, clinic sanitariums, convalescent
homes, nursing homes, and homes for the aged providing they are located
adjacent to an arterial street
7. Nursery schools
8. Public and parochial schools
9. Publicly owned and/or operated parks, playgrounds, golf courses, community
recreational centers, including public swimming pools and libraries
10. Recreational uses other than those publicly owned and/or operated as follows:
a. golf courses
b. country clubs
c. semi-public swimming pools
D. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR PERMITTED USES: No buildings shall
be erected or structurally altered hereafter except in accordance with the following
regulations:
1. Minimum Lot Area – Seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet
Article X Zone Regulations 10-15
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
2. Minimum Lot Width at Building Setback Line – Fifty (50) feet
3. Minimum Front Yard Depth – Twenty (20) feet
4. Minimum Side Yard With on each Side Lot – Eight (8) feet
5. Minimum Rear Yard Depth – Twenty-five (25) feet
6. Maximum Building Height – Thirty-five (35) feet or two and one-half (2-1/2)
stories
E. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES:
No conditional building and/or use shall be erected or structurally altered hereafter except
in accordance with the following regulations:
1. Minimum Lot Area – Twenty-two thousand five hundred (22,500) square feet
2. Minimum Lot Width at Building Setback Line – One hundred fifty (150) feet
3. Minimum Front, Side (on each side of lot) and Rear Yards – Fifty (50) feet
4. Maximum Building Height – Thirty-five (35) feet or two and one-half (2-1/2)
stories
F. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS:
1. Off-street parking and loading or unloading shall be provided in accordance with
Articles XII and XIII of this ordinance
2. No outdoor storage of any material (useable or waste) shall be permitted in this
zone except within enclosed containers
3. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street,
road, highway, deeded right-of-way or into any adjacent property
4. Where any yard of any conditional use permitted in this zone abuts property in a
single family zone, a ten (10) foot wide screening area as regulated by Section
9.17 of this ordinance shall be required
Article X Zone Regulations 10-16
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
SECTION 10.7 R-1F RESIDENTIAL ONE - F ZONE:
A. USES PERMITTED:
1. Single family dwellings, detached
B. ACCESSORY USES:
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses
2. Fences and walls as regulated by Article XI of this ordinance
3. Signs as regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance
4. Home occupations subject to the restrictions and limitations established in Section
9.14 of this ordinance
C. CONDITIONAL USES: No building or occupancy permit shall be issued for any of the
following, nor shall any of the following uses or any customary accessory buildings or
uses be permitted until and unless the location of said uses shall have been applied and
approved by the Board of Adjustment as set forth in Section 9.14 of this ordinance.
1. Cemeteries
2. Churches and other buildings for the purpose of religious worship providing they
are located adjacent to an arterial street
3. Fire and police stations and city buildings providing they are located adjacent to
an arterial street
4. Funeral homes, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
5. Institutions for higher education providing they are located adjacent to an arterial
street
6. Institutions for human medical care – hospitals, clinic sanitariums, convalescent
homes, nursing homes, and homes for the aged providing they are located
adjacent to an arterial street
7. Nursery school
8. Public and parochial schools
9. Publicly owned and/or operated parks, playgrounds, golf courses, community
recreational centers, including public swimming pools and libraries
10. Recreational - uses other than those publicly owned and/or operated as follows:
a. golf courses
b. country clubs
c. semi-public swimming pools
D. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR PERMITTED USES: No buildings shall
be erected or structurally altered hereafter except in accordance with the following
regulations:
1. Minimum Lot Area – Six thousand (6,000) square feet
Article X Zone Regulations 10-17
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
2. Minimum Lot Width at Building Setback Line – Fifty (50) feet
3. Minimum Front Yard Depth – Twenty-five (25) feet
4. Minimum Side Yard With on each Side Lot – Five (5) feet
5. Minimum Rear Yard Depth – Twenty-five (25) feet
6. Maximum Building Height – Thirty-five (35) feet or two and one-half (2-1/2)
stories
E. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES:
No conditional building and/or use shall be erected or structurally altered hereafter except
in accordance with the following regulations:
1. Minimum Lot Area – Twenty-two thousand five hundred (22,500) square feet
2. Minimum Lot Width at Building Setback Line – One hundred fifty (150) feet
3. Minimum Front, Side (on each side of lot) and Rear Yards – Fifty (50) feet
4. Maximum Building Height – Thirty-five (35) feet or two and one-half (2-1/2)
stories
F. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS:
1. Off-street parking and loading or unloading shall be provided in accordance with
Articles XII and XIII of this ordinance
2. No outdoor storage of any material (useable or waste) shall be permitted in this
zone except within enclosed containers
3. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street,
road, highway, deeded right-of-way or into any adjacent property
4. Where any yard of any conditional use permitted in this zone abuts property in a
single family zone, a ten (10) foot wide screening area as regulated by Section
9.17 of this ordinance shall be required
Article X Zone Regulations 10-18
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
SECTION 10.8 R-1G RESIDENTIAL ONE-G ZONE:
A. USES PERMITTED:
1. Single family dwellings, detached
B. ACCESSORY USES:
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses
2. Fences and walls as regulated by Article XI of this ordinance
3. Signs as regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance
4. Home occupations subject to the restrictions and limitations established in Section
9.14 of this ordinance
C. CONDITIONAL USES: No building or occupancy permit shall be issued for any of the
following, nor shall any of the following uses or any customary accessory buildings or
uses be permitted until and unless the location of said uses shall have been applied and
approved by the Board of Adjustment as set forth in Section 9.14 of this ordinance.
1. Cemeteries
2. Churches and other buildings for the purpose of religious worship providing they
are located adjacent to an arterial street
3. Fire and police stations and city buildings providing they are located adjacent to
an arterial street
4. Funeral homes, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
5. Institutions for higher education providing they are located adjacent to an arterial
street
6. Institutions for human medical care – hospitals, clinic sanitariums, convalescent
homes, nursing homes, and homes for the aged providing they are located
adjacent to an arterial street
7. Nursery school
8. Public and parochial schools
9. Publicly owned and/or operated parks, playgrounds, golf courses, community
recreational centers, including public swimming pools and libraries
10. Recreational - uses other than those publicly owned and/or operated as follows:
a. golf courses
b. country clubs
c. semi-public swimming pools
D. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR PERMITTED USES: No buildings shall
be erected or structurally altered hereafter except in accordance with the following
regulations:
1. Minimum Lot Area – Five thousand (5,000) square feet
Article X Zone Regulations 10-19
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
2. Minimum Lot Width at Building Setback Line – Forty (40) feet
3. Minimum Front Yard Depth – Twenty (20) feet
4. Minimum Side Yard With on each Side Lot – Five (5) feet
5. Minimum Rear Yard Depth – Twenty-five (25) feet
6. Maximum Building Height – Thirty-five (35) feet or two and one-half (2-1/2)
stories
E. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES:
No conditional building and/or use shall be erected or structurally altered hereafter except
in accordance with the following regulations:
1. Minimum Lot Area – Twenty-two thousand five hundred (22,500) square feet
2. Minimum Lot Width at Building Setback Line – One hundred fifty (150) feet
3. Minimum Front, Side (on each side of lot) and Rear Yards – Fifty (50) feet
4. Maximum Building Height – Thirty-five (35) feet or two and one-half (2-1/2)
stories
F. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS:
1. Off-street parking and loading or unloading shall be provided in accordance with
Articles XII and XIII of this ordinance
2. No outdoor storage of any material (useable or waste) shall be permitted in this
zone except within enclosed containers
3. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street,
road, highway, deeded right-of-way or into any adjacent property
4. Where any yard of any conditional use permitted in this zone abuts property in a
single family zone, a ten (10) foot wide screening area as regulated by Section
9.17 of this ordinance shall be required
Article X Zone Regulations 10-20
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
SECTION 10.9 R-1H RESIDENTIAL ONE-H ZONE:
A. USES PERMITTED:
1. Single family dwellings, detached
B. ACCESSORY USES:
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses
2. Fences and walls as regulated by Article XI of this ordinance
3. Signs as regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance
4. Home occupations subject to the restrictions and limitations established in Section
9.14 of this ordinance
C. CONDITIONAL USES: No building or occupancy permit shall be issued for any of the
following, nor shall any of the following uses or any customary accessory buildings or
uses be permitted until and unless the location of said uses shall have been applied and
approved by the Board of Adjustment as set forth in Section 9.14 of this ordinance.
1. Cemeteries
2. Churches and other buildings for the purpose of religious worship providing they
are located adjacent to an arterial street
3. Fire and police stations and city buildings providing they are located adjacent to
an arterial street
4. Funeral homes, providing they are located adjacent to an arterial street
5. Institutions for higher education providing they are located adjacent to an arterial
street
6. Institutions for human medical care – hospitals, clinic sanitariums, convalescent
homes, nursing homes, and homes for the aged providing they are located
adjacent to an arterial street
7. Nursery school
8. Public and parochial schools
9. Publicly owned and/or operated parks, playgrounds, golf courses, community
recreational centers, including public swimming pools and libraries
10. Recreational - uses other than those publicly owned and/or operated as follows:
a. golf courses
b. country clubs
c. semi-public swimming pools
D. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR PERMITTED USES: No buildings shall
be erected or structurally altered hereafter except in accordance with the following
regulations:
1. Minimum Lot Area – Four thousand (4,000) square feet
Article X Zone Regulations 10-21
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
2. Minimum Lot Width at Building Setback Line – Forty (40) feet
3. Minimum Front Yard Depth – Twenty (20) feet
4. Minimum Side Yard With on each Side Lot – Five (5) feet
5. Minimum Rear Yard Depth – Twenty-five (25) feet
6. Maximum Building Height – Thirty-five (35) feet or two and one-half (2-1/2)
stories
E. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES:
No conditional building and/or use shall be erected or structurally altered hereafter except
in accordance with the following regulations:
1. Minimum Lot Area – Twenty-two thousand five hundred (22,500) square feet
2. Minimum Lot Width at Building Setback Line – One hundred fifty (150) feet
3. Minimum Front, Side (on each side of lot) and Rear Yards – Fifty (50) feet
4. Maximum Building Height – Thirty-five (35) feet or two and one-half (2-1/2)
stories
F. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS:
1. Off-street parking and loading or unloading shall be provided in accordance with
Articles XII and XIII of this ordinance
2. No outdoor storage of any material (useable or waste) shall be permitted in this
zone except within enclosed containers
3. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street,
road, highway, deeded right-of-way or into any adjacent property
4. Where any yard of any conditional use permitted in this zone abuts property in a
single family zone, a ten (10) foot wide screening area as regulated by Section
9.17 of this ordinance shall be required
Article X Zone Regulations 10-22
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
SECTION 10.10 R–2 RESIDENTIAL TWO ZONE:
A. USES PERMITTED:
1. Multi-family dwellings
B. ACCESSORY USES
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses
2. Fences and walls as regulated by Article XI of this ordinance
3. Signs as regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance
C. CONDITIONAL USES: No building or occupancy permit shall be issued for any of the
following, not shall any of the following uses or any customary accessory buildings or
uses be permitted until and unless the location of said use shall have been applied for and
approved by the Board of Adjustment as set forth in Section 9.14 of this ordinance.
1. Cemeteries
2. Churches and other buildings for the purpose of religious worship, provided they
are located adjacent to an arterial street
3. Fire and police stations, provided they are located adjacent to an arterial street
4. Institutions for higher education, provided they are located adjacent to an arterial
street
5. Institutions for human medical care – hospitals, clinic sanitariums, convalescent
homes, nursing homes, and homes for the aged providing they are located
adjacent to an arterial street
6. Nursery school
7. Public and parochial schools
8. Publicly owned and/or operated parks, playgrounds, golf courses, community
recreational centers, including public swimming pools and libraries
9. Recreational uses other than those owned and/or operated as follows:
a. golf courses
b. country clubs
c. semi-public swimming pools
D. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR PERMITTED USES:
1. Minimum Lot Area – Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet for the first four (4)
dwelling units or less in one building; four thousand (4,000) square feet shall be
provided for every dwelling unit thereafter in the building. In the case of this zone
more than one principal building as defined herein may be permitted on one lot
2. Minimum Lot Width at Building Setback Line – One hundred (100) feet
3. Minimum Front Yard Depth – Forty (40) feet
4. Minimum Side Yard Width on Each Side of Lot – Fifteen (15) feet
Article X Zone Regulations 10-23
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
5. Minimum Rear Yard Depth – Thirty (30) feet
6. Maximum Building Height – Three (3) stories or forty (40) feet
E. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES:
No conditional building and/or use shall be erected or structurally altered hereafter except
in accordance with the following regulations:
1. Minimum Lot Area – Twenty–two thousand five hundred (22,500) square feet
2. Minimum Lot Width at Building Setback Line – One hundred fifty (150) feet
3. Minimum Front, Side (on each side of lot) and Rear Yards – Fifty (50) feet
4. Maximum Building Height – Forty (40) feet or three (3) stories
F. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS:
1. Off–street parking and loading or unloading shall be provided in accordance with
Articles XII and XIII of this ordinance
2. No outdoor storage of any material (usable or waste) shall be permitted in this
zone except within enclosed containers
3. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street,
road, highway, deeded right-of way or into and adjacent property
4. Where any yard of any use permitted in this zone abuts property in a single family
zone, a ten (10) foot wide screening area as regulated by Section 9.17 of this
ordinance shall be required
5. A development plan, as regulated by Section 9.19 of this ordinance, shall be
required for any use permitted in this zone
6. Any portion of the land to be developed having slopes greater than 25% may not
be included in the determination of the total number of dwelling units to be
permitted on the site. In order to help control the erosion, minimize unstable
hillside conditions and minimize increase in storm water runoff, existing
vegetation shall be left undisturbed wherever possible. This development/density
control shall not be construed to include the slopes for constructed improvements
or grade changes within the development
Article X Zone Regulations 10-24
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
SECTION 10.11 R–3 RESIDENTIAL THREE ZONE:
A. USES PERMITTED:
1. Multi-family dwellings
B. ACCESSORY USES:
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses
2. Fences and walls as regulated by Article XI of this ordinance
3. Signs as regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance
C. CONDITIONAL USES: No building or occupancy permit shall be issued for any of the
following, nor shall any of the following uses or any customary accessory buildings of
uses be permitted until and unless the location of said use shall have been applied for and
approved of by the Board of Adjustment as set forth in Section 9.14 of this ordinance.
1. Cemeteries
2. Churches and other buildings for the purpose of religious worship, provided they
are located adjacent to an arterial street
3. Fire and police stations, provided they are located adjacent to an arterial street
4. Institutions for higher education, provided they are located adjacent to an arterial
street
5. Institutions for human medical care – hospitals, clinic sanitariums, convalescent
homes, nursing homes, and homes for the aged providing they are located
adjacent to an arterial street
6. Nursery school
7. Public and parochial schools
8. Publicly owned and/or operated parks, playgrounds, golf courses, community
recreational centers, including public swimming pools and libraries
9. Recreational uses other than those owned and/or operated as follows:
a. golf courses
b. country clubs
c. semi-public swimming pools
D. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR PERMITTED USES:
1. Minimum Lot Area – Twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) square feet for the
first four (4) dwelling units or less in one building; two thousand (2,000) square
feet shall be provided for every dwelling unit thereafter in the building. In the
case of this zone more than one principal building as defined herein may be
permitted on one lot
2. Minimum Lot Width at Building Setback Line – One hundred (100) feet
3. Minimum Front Yard Depth – Forty (40) feet
Article X Zone Regulations 10-25
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
4. Minimum Side Yard Width on Each Side of Lot – Fifteen (15) feet
5. Minimum Rear Yard Depth – Thirty (30) feet
6. Maximum Building Height – Three (3) stories or forty (40) feet
E. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES:
No conditional building and/or use shall be erected or structurally altered hereafter except
in accordance with the following regulations:
1. Minimum Lot Area – Twenty–two thousand five hundred (22,500) square feet
2. Minimum Lot Width at Building Setback Line – One hundred fifty (150) feet
3. Minimum Front, Side (on each side of lot) and Rear Yards – Fifty (50) feet
4. Maximum Building Height – No building shall exceed forty (40) feet or three (3)
stories in height unless such building is set back from the street right-of-way line
a distance of not less than one-half (1/2) its height and is set back from all other
property lines a distance of fifteen (15) feet from side yard and twenty-five (25)
feet from rear yard, plus two (2) feet on each side and rear yards for each foot of
height in excess of forty (40) feet. In addition to the above requirements any such
building shall provide a pad to support a fire truck within (20) feet of said
building
F. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS:
1. Off–street parking and loading or unloading shall be provided in accordance with
Articles XII and XIII of this ordinance
2. No outdoor storage of any material (usable or waste) shall be permitted in this
zone except within enclosed containers
3. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street,
road, highway, deeded right-of way or into and adjacent property
4. Where any yard of any use permitted in this zone abuts property in a single family
zone, a ten (10) foot wide screening area as regulated by Section 9.17 of this
ordinance shall be required
5. A development plan, as regulated by Section 9.19 of this Ordinance, shall be
required for any use permitted in this zone, except when development is proposed
under the Planned Unit Development regulations as regulated by Section 10.12 of
this Ordinance
6. Any portion of the land to be developed having slopes greater than 25% may not
be included in the determination of the total number of dwelling units to be
permitted on the site. In order to help control the erosion, minimize unstable
hillside conditions and minimize increases in storm water runoff, existing
vegetation shall be left undisturbed whenever possible. This development/density
control shall not be construed to include the slopes for constructed improvements
or grade changes within the development
Article X Zone Regulations 10-26
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
SECTION 10.12 PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY ZONE:
A. PURPOSE: The purpose of the Planned Unit Development (PUD) Overlay Zone are to:
promote flexibility in design and permit planned diversification in the relationships
between location of and types of uses and structures; promote the advantages of modern
large scale site planning for community development through the efficient use of land,
facilitating a more economic arrangement or buildings, circulation systems, land uses,
and utilities; preserve, to the greatest extent possible, the existing landscape features and
amenities, and to utilize such features in a harmonious fashion; provide for more useable
and suitably located recreation facilities, other public and common facilities than would
otherwise be provided under conventional land development procedures, but always with
the intention of furthering the public health, safety, and general welfare.
B. GENERAL: A Planned Unit Development Overlay Zone may be permitted only to be
superimposed over any of the Residential (R) Zones, provided that all conditions or
provisions of this section of the ordinance, the applicable requirements of the subdivision
regulations, and any additional requirements as may be determined necessary to provide
for the most efficient layout of the PUD and its proper integration with the surrounding
development are met; and a public hearing is held on the PUD application.
C. APPLICATION AND PROCESSING: Applications for the Planned Unit Development
Overlay Zone shall be processed as follows in two stages.
1. Stage I Development Plan and Zoning Map Amendment – Application for
amendment to PUD Overlay Zone shall include a development plan in accordance
with the requirements of Subsection D.
a. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed
application, in accordance with the requirements of KRS Chapter 424, and
review said application with regard to its compliance with the stated
purposes of the PUD Overlay Zone, the required elements of the Stage I
Development Plan and other applicable requirements of this section. Upon
holding such hearing, the Planning Commission shall submit along with
their recommendations a copy of the Stage I Development Plan and the
bases for their recommendations.
b. The legislative body shall, within forty-five (45) days after receiving the
recommendations of the Planning Commission, review said
recommendations and take action to approve, or disapprove said PUD
application. Such action may incorporate any conditions imposed by the
legislative body. However, should the legislative body take action to
impose different conditions than were reviewed and considered by the
Planning Commission, then said conditions shall be resubmitted to the
Planning Commission for further review and recommendation in
accordance with Section 10.13, C, 1, a. Approval of the PUD Overlay
Zone shall require that development be in conformance with the Stage I
Article X Zone Regulations 10-27
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
approved Development Plan. The legislative body shall forward a copy of
the approved Development Plan, to the Planning Commission for further
processing in accordance with the requirement for Stage II Development
Plan and Record Plat.
Zoning Map Amendment – Upon Arrival of the PUD Overlay Zone, the
official zoning map shall be amended by adding the prefix “PUD” to the
existing residential (R) zone (e.g., PUD-R-1B, PUD-R-1C, etc.) for the
area as shown on the Stage I approved Development Plan.
2. Stage II Development Plan and Record Plat – A Stage II development plan, and
record plat shall be developed in conformity with the Stage I approved
development plan and in accordance with the requirements of Subsection E, and
submitted to the Planning Commission for its review and approval. Except for the
manner of submission and processing, the subdivision regulations may be waived,
where applicable, and the requirements of Subsection E shall be submitted
therefore. Those requirements not specifically waived by the Planning
Commission shall conform with the Subdivision Regulations.
a. The Planning Commission shall review the submitted Stage II
development plan with regard to its compliance with the required elements
of Subsection E, 1, for a development plan, other applicable elements of
this ordinance and other applicable regulations, and its conformity with
the Stage I approved development plan. The Planning Commission, in
approving the Stage II Development Plan, provided that the adjustments
do not: affect the special relationship of structures, change land uses,
increase overall density, alter circulation patterns (vehicular and
pedestrian) or decrease the amount and/or usability of open space or
recreation areas, or affect other applicable requirements of this ordinance.
Upon Planning Commission approval of the Stage II Development Plan, a
copy of said plan, shall be forwarded to the zoning administrator who shall
grant permits only in accordance with the Stage II approved Development
Plan and other regulations as may be required by this ordinance.
b. Upon approval of the Stage II Development Plan, the Planning
Commission shall review the submitted record plat with regard to its
compliance with the required elements of Subsection E, 2, for record plats,
the applicable requirements of the Subdivision Regulations, and its
conformity with the Stage II approved Development Plan.
Upon Planning Commission approval of the record plat, copies of said
plat, certified by the Planning Commission, and suitable for recording,
shall be forwarded by the Planning Commission to the office of the
County Clerk to be recorded.
Article X Zone Regulations 10-28
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
D. STAGE I DEVELOPMENT PLAN REQUIREMENTS: The Stage I development shall
identify and provide the following information:
1. Plan(s) of the subject property drawn to a scale not smaller than one (1) inch
equals one hundred (100) feet showing:
a. The total area in the project
b. The present zoning of the subject property and all adjacent properties
c. All public and private rights-of-way and easement lines located on or
adjacent to the subject property which are proposed to be continued,
created, enlarged, relocated, or abandoned
d. Existing and proposed topography shown by contour with intervals not to
exceed five (5) feet
e. All existing and proposed housing units on the subject property:
(1) Detached housing – location, arrangement and number of all lots,
including a typical section(s) identifying approximate lot sizes and
dimensions, and setbacks and height of buildings
(2) Attached housing – location, height, and arrangement of buildings,
number of units within each building and all lot lines with
approximate dimensions where applicable
f. Location, arrangement, height and identification of all existing and
proposed nonresidential buildings and uses on the subject property
g. The amount of area proposed for common open space, including the
location and arrangement of recreational facilities, identification of unique
natural features to be retained and a statement indicating the means of
maintaining all common areas
h. Location of proposed pedestrian walkways, identifying type of surfacing
and approximate grades
i. Location of proposed streets identifying approximate dimensions of
pavement and right-of-way widths, type of surfacing and approximate
grades
j. Location of off-street parking, loading and/or unloading and driveway
areas, identifying the number of off-street parking spaces to be provided,
type of surfacing and approximate dimensions
k. Location of all existing and proposed water, sanitary, sewer and storm
drainage lines, indicating approximate pipe sizes and grades. Indication
should also be given regarding the provision of electric and telephone
service
l. Certification from appropriate water and sewer agencies that services will
be available. Landscaping features including identification of planting
areas and the location, type, and approximate height of fences and walls
Article X Zone Regulations 10-29
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
m. Location of signs, indicating their orientation and approximate size and
height
n. Identification of the soil types and geologic formations on the subject
property, indicating anticipated problems and proposed methods of
handling said problems
o. A schedule of development, including the staging and phasing of:
(1) Residential areas, in order of priority, by type of dwelling unit
(2) Streets, utilities, and other public facility improvements, in order of
priority
(3) Dedication of land to public use or set aside for common
ownership
(4) Nonresidential buildings and uses, in order of priority
The information required in items a through p, may be combined in any suitable
and convenient manner so long as the data required is clearly indicated. A
separate plan or drawing for each element is not necessary, but may be provided
at the option of the applicant.
E. STAGE II DEVELOPMENT PLAN AND RECORD PLAY REQUIREMENTS: The
Stage II development plan and record plat shall conform to the following requirements:
1. Stage II Development Plan: The applicant shall submit a Stage II development
plan, in conformance with the Stage I approved development plan, at a scale not
smaller than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet, that identifies and
provides the following information:
a. The existing proposed finished topography of the subject property shown
by contours with intervals not to exceed five (5) feet. Where conditions
exist that may require more detailed information on the proposed
topography, contours with intervals of less than five (5) feet may be
required be the Planning Commission
b. All housing units on the subject property:
(1) Detached housing – location, arrangement and number of lots,
including exact lot dimensions and setbacks, and maximum height
of buildings
(2) Attached housing – location, height, and arrangement of all
buildings indicating the number of units in each building, and
where applicable, location and arrangement of all lots with exact
lot dimensions
c. Location, height, arrangement and identification of all nonresidential
buildings and uses on subject property and, where applicable, location and
arrangement of all lots with exact lot dimensions
Article X Zone Regulations 10-30
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
d. All common open space area, including accurate lot dimensions and the
location and arrangement of all recreational facilities
e. Landscaping features, including identification of planting areas and the
location, type and height of walls and fences
f. Location of signs indicating their orientation and size and height
g. All utility lines and easements:
(1) Water distribution systems including line sizes, width of
easements, type of pipe, location of hydrants and valves, and other
appurtenances
(2) Sanitary sewer system, including pipe sizes, width of easements,
gradients, type of pipes, invert elevations, location and type of
manholes, the location, type, size of all lift or pumping stations,
capacity, and process of any necessary treatment facilities, and
other appurtenances
(3) Storm sewer and natural drainage system, including pipe and
culvert sizes, gradients, location of open drainage courses, width of
easements, location and size of inlets and catch basins, and data
indicating the quantity of storm water entering the subject property
naturally from areas outside the property, the quantity of flow at
each pickup point (inlet) the quantity of storm water generated by
development of the subject area, and the quantity of storm water to
be discharged at various points to areas outside the subject
property
(4) Other utilities (e.g., electric, telephone, etc.) including the type of
service and the width of easements
h. Location of all off-street parking, loading and/or unloading, and driveway
areas, including typical cross sections, the type of surfacing, dimensions,
and the number and arrangement or off-street parking, and loading and/or
unloading spaces
i. Circulation system:
(1) Pedestrian walkways, including alignment, grades, type of
surfacing and width
(2) Streets, including alignment, grades, type of surfacing, width of
pavement and right-of-way, geometric details, and typical cross
sections
j. Provisions for control of erosion, hillside slippage and sedimentation,
indicating the temporary and permanent control practices and measures
which will be implemented during all phases of clearing, grading, and
construction
Article X Zone Regulations 10-31
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
k. The schedule of development staging and phasing in accordance with the
requirement in Subsection D, 3, and as approved in Stage I approved
Development Plan
The information required by Section E, items a through k, may be combined in
any suitable and convenient manner so long as the data required is clearly
indicated.
2. Record Plat: The applicant shall submit a record plat, in conformance with the
Stage II approved Development Plan, at a scale not smaller than one (1) inch
equals fifty (50) feet. If the record plat is submitted in sections, an index shall be
developed showing the entire PUD. The particular number of sections, and the
relationship of each adjoining section shall be clearly shown by a small key map
on each section submitted. The record plat shall conform to the applicable
requirements of the Subdivision Regulations, unless specifically waived by the
Planning Commission, and in addition thereto, the following:
a. All areas reserved for common ownership with an indication of the
properties the owners will share in common
b. Such lot or parcel lines indicating tracts which are now in separate
ownership or which may be transferred to other ownership during or after
development. (Resubdivision of large lots containing several buildings
may be accomplished at a later date upon application and approval.)
c. Indication of areas to be developed for residential (by type of housing
unit), commercial, public and semi-public uses
F. RESIDENTIAL USES AND DENSITIES: All types of residential housing units
(attached or detached) may be permitted within a PUD Overlay Zone, including by not
limited to, single-family, two-family, and multi-family units. The density of dwelling
units in a PUD shall be determined by the density (dwelling units per net acre) as
calculated from the existing residential (R) zone superimposed by the PUD overlay zone.
This density shall be applied to the total project area excluding that land devoted to
commercial uses and streets (public and private).
G. COMMERCIAL USES: Commercial uses intended primarily for the service and
convenience of residents of the PUD may be permitted within the project area provided a
market analysis is made justifying the need for said uses. These commercial uses shall be
grouped in complexes clearly delineated on the Stage I Development Plan, and may
include one of more of the following uses:
1. Bakery shop
2. Bank
3. Beauty or barber shop
4. Business or professional office
5. Clothing store
Article X Zone Regulations 10-32
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
6. Delicatessen, grocery, meat, fruit, or vegetable market
7. Drug store
8. Hardware store
9. Laundry
10. Restaurant
11. Shoe repair shop
Another use may be substituted on the Stage I approved Development Plan for a use
previously approved providing it is one of the above listed uses and providing said use
will not involve any building expansion beyond that approved in the Stage I approved
Development Plan and further providing that said use is approve by the Zoning
Administrator.
H. PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC USES: Public and semi-public structures and uses may
be permitted in the PUD. These uses shall be delineated on the Stage I development plan
and shall be limited to one of more of the following uses:
1. Churches
2. Community centers, including day care facilities
3. Country clubs
4. Fire and police stations
5. Libraries
6. Open space – recreation areas
7. Schools (nursery, elementary and secondary)
I. AREA REQUIREMENTS: No PUD overlay zone shall be permitted on less than five (5)
acres of land. However, development of a smaller tract adjacent to an existing PUD
overlay zone, may be permitted, if the proposed development conforms to and extends
the original development as if the new area had been a part of the original development.
J. HEIGHT, YARD AND SETBACK REGULATIONS: Requirements shall be as
approved in the Stage I Development Plan.
K. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING AND/OR UNLOADING: Off-Street
parking and, when applicable, loading and/or unloading shall be provided in accordance
with Articles XII and XIII of this ordinance.
L. FENCES, WALLS, AND SIGNS: The location, height, and type of all fences, walls and
signs shall be as approved in the Stage I Development Plan.
M. EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL: Effective erosion and sedimentation
controls shall be planned and applied in accordance with Section 9.7 of this ordinance.
N. COMMON OPEN SPACE – RECREATION AREA: At least twenty percent (20%) of
the total acreage of the proposed PUD shall be retained as common open space and
Article X Zone Regulations 10-33
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
recreation area, and dedicated to a public and/or private entity for operation and
maintenance. Such open space and recreation areas shall be physically situated so as to be
readily accessible, available to, and useable by all residents of the PUD. Common open
space and recreation area shall be that part of the total project exclusive of dwellings,
streets, parking areas, single-family lots, commercial areas, and other non-open space and
nonrecreationally oriented facilities.
O. AMENDMENTS: Any amendments to plans, except for the minor adjustments which
may be permitted by the Planning Commission, shall be made in accordance with the
procedure required by this ordinance, subject to the same limitations and requirements as
those under which such planes were originally approved.
P. EXPIRATION: Any amendment to PUD Overlay Zone shall be subject to the time
constraint, as noted below. Upon expiration of said time period and any extensions
thereto, the legislative body may initiate a request for a public hearing by the Planning
Commission, in accordance with the requirements of KRS Chapter 100, for the purpose
of determining whether said PUD overlay zone should revert to its original zoning
designation. A public hearing may be initiated if either of the following conditions apply:
1. Stage II Development Plan has not been approved by the Planning Commission
within a period of twelve (12) consecutive months from the date of the Stage I
approved Development Plan on Overlay Zone Amendment by the legislative
body; provided that an extension may be permitted upon approval of the
legislative body or their duly authorized representative if sufficient proof can be
demonstrated that prevailing conditions have not changed appreciably to render
the Stage I approved Development Plan obsolete.
2. Substantial construction has not been initiated within a period of twelve (12)
consecutive months from the date of approval of the Stage II Development Plan
by the Planning Commission; provided that an extension may be permitted upon
approval of the legislative body or their duly authorized representative if
sufficient proof can be demonstrated that the construction was delayed due to
circumstances beyond the applicant’s control, and that prevailing conditions have
not changed appreciably to render the Stage I approved Development Pan
obsolete. The amount of construction constituting initiating substantial
construction shall be as approved in the Stage I approved Development Plan.
Article X Zone Regulations 10-34
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
SECTION 10.13 RCD RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY ZONE:
A. PURPOSE: The purpose of the Residential Cluster Development (RCD) Overlay Zone is
to provide a means whereby clusters of attached and detached single-family residential
units may be constructed in the R-1 Single Family Residential Zones, and therein,
through a development plan, permit a wide flexibility in the design, location, siting of
buildings, and yard and setback requirements in order to provide for, to the greatest
extent possible, the preservation of hillside areas, and other natural geographic and
topographic features, and to provide for more usable and suitably located recreation
facilities and open space than would otherwise be provided under conventional R-1
Single Family Residential land development procedures.
B. GENERAL: A Residential Cluster Development Overlay Zone may only be permitted to
be superimposed over any of the R-1 Single Family Residential Zones provided that all
conditions or provisions of this section of the ordinance, the applicable requirements of
the Subdivision Regulations, and any additional requirements as may be determined
necessary to provide for the most efficient layout of the RCD Zone and its proper
integration with the surrounding development are met; and a public hearing is held.
C. APPLICATION AND PROCESSING: Applications for Residential Cluster
Development Overlay Zone shall be processed in two stages:
1. Stage I – Development Plan and Zoning Map Amendment – Application for
amendment to RCD overlay zone shall include a development plan in accordance
with the requirements of Subsection D.
a. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed
application, duly noticed, in accordance with the requirements of KRS
Chapter 424, and review said application with regard to its compliance
with the stated purposes of the RCD overlay zone, the required elements
of the Stage I Development Plan and other applicable requirements of this
section. Upon holding such hearing, the Planning Commission shall make
one of the following recommendations to the legislative body: approval,
approval with condition or disapproval. The Planning Commission shall
submit along with their recommendations a copy of the Stage I
Development Plan and the bases for their recommendation.
b. The legislative body shall, within forty-five (45) days after receiving the
recommendations of the Planning Commission, review said
recommendations and take action to approve or disapprove said RCD
application. Such action may incorporate any conditions imposed by the
legislative body. However, should the legislative body take action to
impose different conditions than were reviewed and considered by the
Planning Commission, then said conditions shall be resubmitted to the
Planning Commission for further review and recommendations in
accordance with Subsection 10.14, C, 1, a. Approval of the RCD Overlay
Article X Zone Regulations 10-35
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
Zone shall require that development be in conformance with the Stage I
approved Development Plan.
The legislative body shall forward a copy of the approved Development
Plan, certified as such by said body, to the Planning Commission for
further processing in accordance with the requirements for Stage II
Development Plan and record plat. Zoning Map Amendment - upon
approval of the RCD Overlay Zone, the official zoning map shall be
amended by adding the prefix "RCD" to the existing residential (R-1) zone
(e.g., RCD-R-1B, RCD-R-1C, etc.) for the area as shown on the Stage I
approved development plan.
2. Stage II – Development Plan and Record Plat - A Stage II development plan and
record plat shall be developed in conformity with the Stage I approved
development plan and in accordance with the requirements of Subsection E, and
submitted to the Planning Commission for its review and approval. Except for the
manner of submission and processing, the Subdivision Regulations may be
waived, where applicable, and the requirements of Subsection E shall be
substituted therefore. Those requirements not specifically waived by the Planning
Commission shall conform with the Subdivision regulations.
a. The Planning Commission shall review the submitted Stage II
development plan with regard to its compliance with the required elements
of Subsection E. 1, for Stage II development plans, other applicable
elements of this ordinance, other applicable regulations, and its conformity
with the Stage I approved development plan. The Planning Commission,
in approving the Stage II development plan, may authorize minor
adjustments from the Stage I approved development plan, provided that
the adjustments do not: affect the spatial relationship of structures, change
land uses, increase overall density, alter circulation patterns (vehicular and
pedestrian), or decrease the amount and/or usability of open space or
recreation areas or affect other applicable requirements of this ordinance.
Upon Planning Commission approval of the Stage II Development Plan, a
copy of said plan, shall be forwarded to the Zoning Administrator, who
shall grant permits only in accordance with the Stage II approved
development plan and other plans as may be required by this ordinance.
b. Upon approval of the Stage II development pan, the Planning
Commission, shall review the submitted record plat with regard to its
compliance with the required elements of Subsection E, 2, for record plats,
the applicable requirements of the Subdivision Regulations, and its
conformity with the approved Stage II approved development plan.
Article X Zone Regulations 10-36
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
Upon Planning Commission approval of the record plat, copies of said
plat, certified by the Planning Commission, and suitable for recording,
shall be forwarded by the Planning Commission to the office of the
County Clerk to be recorded.
D. STAGE I DEVELOPMENT PLAN REQUIREMENTS: The stage I development plan
shall identify and provide the following information:
1. Plan(s) of the subject property drawn to a scale not smaller than one (1) inch
equals one hundred (100) feet showing:
a. The total area in the project
b. The present zoning of the subject property and all adjacent properties
c. All public and private rights-of-way and easement lines located on or
adjacent to the subject property which are proposed to be continued,
created, enlarged, relocated, or abandoned
d. Existing and proposed topography shown by contour with intervals not to
exceed five (5) feet
e. All existing and proposed housing units on the subject property:
(1) Detached housing – location, arrangement and number of all lots,
including a typical section(s) identifying approximate lot sizes and
dimensions, and setbacks and height of buildings
(2) Attached housing – location, height, and arrangement of all
buildings, number of units within each building and all lot lines
with approximate dimensions where applicable
f. Location, arrangement, height and identification of all existing and
proposed nonresidential buildings and uses on the subject property
g. The amount of area proposed for common open space, including the
location and arrangement of recreational facilities, identification of unique
natural features to be retained and a statement indicating the means of
maintaining all common areas
h. Location of proposed pedestrian walkways, identifying type of surfacing
and approximate dimensions
i. Location of proposed streets identifying approximate dimensions of
pavement and right-of-way widths, type of surfacing and approximate
grades
j. Location of off-street parking, loading and/or unloading and driveway
areas, identifying the number of off-street parking spaces to be provided,
type of surfacing and approximate dimensions
k. Location of all existing and proposed water, sanitary sewer and storm
drainage lines, indicating approximate pipe sizes and grades. Indication
should also be given regarding the provision of electric and telephone
service
Article X Zone Regulations 10-37
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
l. Certification form appropriate water and sewer agencies that services will
be available
m. Landscaping features, including identification of planting areas and the
location, type, and approximate height of fences and walls
n. Location of signs, indicating their orientation and approximate size and
height
o. Identification of soil types and geologic formations on the subject
property, indicating anticipated problems and proposed methods of
handling said problems
p. A schedule of development, including the staging and phasing of:
(1) Residential areas, in order of priority, by type of dwelling unit
(2) Streets, utilities, and other public facility improvements, in order of
priority
(3) Dedication of land to public use or set aside for common
ownership
(4) Nonresidential buildings and uses, in order of priority
The information required in items a though p, may be combined in any suitable
and convenient manner so longs as the data required is clearly indicated. A
separate plan or drawing for each element is not necessary, but may be provided
at the option of the applicant.
E. STAGE II – DEVELOPEMNT PLAN AND RECORD PLAT REQUIREMENTS: The
Stage II development plan and record plat shall conform to the following requirements:
1. Stage II Development Plan: The applicant shall submit a Stage II development
plan, in conformance with the Stage I approved development plan, at a scale not
smaller than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet, that identifies and
provides the following information:
a. The existing proposed finished topography of the subject property shown
by contours with intervals not to exceed five (5) feet. Where conditions
exist that may require more detailed information on the proposed
topography, contours with intervals of less than five (5) feet may be
required by the Planning Commission
b. All housing units on the subject property:
(1) Detached housing – location, arrangement and number of all lots,
including exact lot dimensions and setbacks, and maximum height
of all buildings
(2) Attached housing – location, height, and arrangement of all
buildings indicating the number of units in each building, and
where applicable, location and arrangement of all lots with exact
lot dimensions
Article X Zone Regulations 10-38
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
c. Location, height, arrangement and identification of all nonresidential
buildings and uses on the subject property and, where applicable, location
and arrangement of all lots with exact lot dimensions
d. All common open space areas, including accurate lot dimensions and the
location and arrangement of all recreational facilities
e. Landscaping features, including identification of planting areas an the
location, type, and approximate height of fences and walls
f. Location of signs indicating their orientation and size and height
g. All utility lines and easements:
(1) Water distribution systems including line sizes, width of
easements, type of pipe, location of hydrants and valves, and other
appurtenances
(2) Sanitary sewer systems, including pipe sizes, width of easements,
gradients, type of pipes, invert elevations, location and type of
manholes, the location, type, size of all lift or pumping stations,
capacity and process of any necessary treatment facilities, and
other appurtenances
(3) Storm sewer and natural drainage system, including pipe and
culvert sizes, gradients, location of open drainage courses, width of
easements, location and size of inlets and catch basins, location
and size of retention and/or sedimentation basins, and data
indicating the quantity of storm water entering the subject property
naturally from areas outside the property, the quantity of flow at
each pickup point (in-let) the quantity of storm water generated by
development of the subject area, and the quantity of storm water to
be discharged at various points to areas outside the subject
property
(4) Other utilities (e.g., electric, telephone, etc.) including the type of
service and width of easements
h. Location of all off-street parking, loading and/or unloading, and driveway
areas, including typical cross sections, the type of surfacing, dimensions,
and the number and arrangement of off-street parking, and loading and/or
unloading spaces
i. Circulation system:
(1) Pedestrian walkways, including alignment, grades, type of
surfacing and width
(2) Streets, including alignment, grades, types of surfacing, width of
pavement and right-of-way, geometric details, and typical cross
sections
Article X Zone Regulations 10-39
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
j. Provisions for control of erosion, hillside slippage and sedimentation,
indicating the temporary and permanent control practices and measures
which will be implemented during all phases of clearing, grading, and
construction
k. The schedule of development staging and phasing in accordance with the
requirement in Subsection D, 3, and as approved in the Stage I
development plan
The information required by Section E, items a through k, may be combined in
any suitable and convenient manner so long as the data required is clearly
indicated.
2. Record Plat: The applicant shall submit a record plat, in conformance with Stage
II approved development plan, at a scale not smaller than one (1) inch equals fifty
(50) feet. If the record plat is submitted in sections, an index shall be developed
showing the entire RCD. The particular number of the section, and the
relationship of each adjoining section shall be clearly shown by a small key map
on each section submitted. The record plat shall conform to the applicable
requirements of the Subdivision Regulations, unless specifically waived by the
Planning Commission, and in addition thereto, the following:
a. All areas reserved for common ownership with an indication of the
properties the owners will share in common
b. Such lot or parcel lines indicating tracts which are now in separate
ownership or which may be transferred to other ownership during or after
development. (Resubdivision of large lots containing several buildings
may be accomplished ay a later date upon application and approval.)
c. Indication of areas to be developed for residential (by type of housing
unit), commercial, public and semi-public uses
F. RESIDENTIAL USES AND DENSITIES: Attached and detached single family
dwellings may be permitted within a RCD overlay zone. The density of dwelling units in
a RCD shall be determined by the density (dwelling units per net acre) as calculated from
the residential (R-1) Zone superimposed by the RCD Overlay Zone. This density shall be
applied to the total project area excluding that land denoted to streets (private and public).
G. PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC USES: Public and semi-public structures and uses may
be permitted in the RCD. These uses shall be delineated on the Stage I development plan
and shall be limited to one or more of the following uses:
1. Churches
2. Community centers, including day care facilities
3. Country clubs
4. Fire or police stations
5. Libraries
Article X Zone Regulations 10-40
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
6. Schools (nursery, elementary and secondary)
H. AREA REQUIREMENTS: No RCD Overlay Zone shall be permitted on less than five
(5) acres of land. However, development of a smaller tract adjacent to an existing RCD
Overlay Zone, may be permitted, if the proposed development conforms to all extends
the original development as if the new area had been part of the original development.
I. HEIGHT, YARD, AND SETBACK REGULATIONS: Requirements shall be as
approved in the Stage I Development Plan.
J. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING AND/OR UNLOADING: Off-street
parking and, when applicable, loading and/or unloading shall be provided in accordance
with Articles XII and XIII of this ordinance.
K. FENCES, WALLS, AND SIGNS: The location, height, and type of all fences, walls, and
signs, shall be as approved in the Stage I Development Plan.
L. EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL: Effective erosion and sediment
controls shall be planned and applied in accordance with Section 9.7 of this ordinance.
M. COMMON OPEN SPACE - RECREATION AREA: At least twenty percent (20%) of
the total acreage of the proposed RCD shall be retained as common open space and
recreation area, and dedicated to a public and/or private entity for operation and
maintenance. Such open space and recreation areas shall be physically situated so as to
be readily accessible, available to and usable by all the residents of the RCD. Common
open space and recreation areas shall be that part of the total project exclusive of
dwellings, streets, parking areas, single family lots, commercial areas, and other nonopen
space and nonrecreationally oriented facilities.
N. AMENDMENTS: Any amendments to plans, except for the minor adjustments which
may be permitted by the Planning Commission, shall be made in accordance with the
procedure required by this ordinance, subject to the same limitations and requirements as
those under which such plans were originally approved.
O. EXPIRATION: Any amendment to RCD Overlay Zone shall be subject to the time
constraints, as noted below. Upon expiration of said time period, and any extensions
thereto, the legislative body may initiate a request for a public hearing by the Planning
Commission, in accordance with the requirements of KRS Chapter 100, for the purpose
of determining whether said RCD Overlay Zone should revert to its original zoning
designation. A public hearing may be initiated if either of the following conditions
apply:
1. Stage II Development Plan has not been approved by the Planning Commission,
within a period of twelve (12) consecutive months from the date of the Stage I
approved Development Plan and RCD Overlay Zone Amendment by the
Article X Zone Regulations 10-41
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
legislative body; provided that an extension may be permitted upon approval of
the legislative body or their duly authorized representative if sufficient proof can
be demonstration that prevailing conditions have not changed appreciably to
render the approved Stage I approved development plan obsolete.
2. Substantial construction has not been initiated within a period of twelve (12)
consecutive months from the date of approval of the Stage II Development Plan
by the Planning Commission; provided that an extension may be permitted upon
approval by the legislative body or their duly authorized representative if
sufficient proof can be demonstrated that the construction was delayed due to
circumstances beyond the applicant’s control, and that prevailing conditions have
not changed appreciably to render the Stage I approved development plan
obsolete. The amount of construction constituting initiating substantial
construction shall be as approved in the Stage I approved development plan.
Article X Zone Regulations 10-42
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
SECTION 10.14 SC SHOPPING CENTER ZONE:
A. USES PREMITTED: The following retail and service businesses:
1. Advertising agencies
2. Animal clinic
3. Antique shops
4. Apparel shops
5. Art supplies
6. Automobile laundry
7. Automotive parts and accessories store, new
8. Automotive service and repair
9. Bakery and bakery goods store, provided the products are sold exclusively on the
premises
10. Banks and other financial institutions including savings, loan, and finance
companies, with drive-in windows
11. Barber shops
12. Beauty shops
13. Billiard or pool hall
14. Book, stationary or gift shops
15. Bowling alley
16. Bus station
17. Business or professional college
18. Camera and photographic supplies
19. Candy store, soda fountain, ice cream store
20. Carpet and rug store
21. Clinics – medical or dental
22. Clubs (including businessmen’s, YMCA-YWCA)
23. Computer store - retail
24. Delicatessen store
25. Department store
26. Drug store
27. Dry cleaning and laundry pickup station
28. Eating and drinking places
29. Employment agencies
30. Florist shop
31. Food store and supermarket
32. Furniture store
33. Garden supplies
34. Glass, china, or pottery store
35. Haberdashery
36. Hardware store
37. Health clinics and health spas
38. Hobby shop
39. Home Improvement Center Use/General Building Supplies
Article X Zone Regulations 10-43
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
40. Household and electrical appliance store including incidental repair
41. Interior decorating store
42. Jewelry store including repair
43. Laboratories, medical and dental
44. Laundromats, self service washing and drying
45. Leather goods and luggage store
46. Library
47. Locksmith shop
48. Nursery school
49. Office appliances and supplies
50. Offices
51. Off-street, parking lots and/or garages
52. Opticians and optical goods
53. Package liquor and wine store
54. Paint and wallpaper store
55. Pet shop excluding boarding and outside runs
56. Police and fire stations
57. Post office
58. Radio and television store including repair
59. Shoe store and shoe repair
60. Sporting goods
61. Studios for professional work on teaching of any form of fine arts, photography,
music, drama, or dance
62. Tailor shops
63. Theaters, excluding drive-ins
64. Toy stores
65. Travel bureau
66. Variety stores including notions and “Five and Ten” stores
B. ACCESSORY USES:
1. Customary accessory uses
2. Fences and walls as regulated by Article XI of this ordinance
3. Signs as regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance
C. CONDITIONAL USES: No building or occupancy permit shall be issued for any of the
following, nor shall any of the following uses or any customary accessory buildings or
uses be permitted until and unless the location of said use shall have been applied for and
approved of by the Board of Adjustment as set forth in Section 9.14 of this ordinance.
1. Service stations (including auto repairing, providing all repair except that of a
minor nature (e.g., change of fan belt, minor carburetor adjustment, tire removal
and/or replacement, windshield wiper replacement, etc.) is conducted wholly
within a completely enclosed building and providing further that such service
Article X Zone Regulations 10-44
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
station is located adjacent to an arterial street as identified in the city’s adopted
comprehensive plan
D. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS: No building shall be created or structurally
altered except in accordance with the following regulations:
1. Minimum Building Site Area – Ten (10) acres. (In the case of this zone (SC) more
than one principal building, as defined herein, may be permitted to be constructed
within the minimum building site area.)
2. Minimum Yard Requirements – Fifty (50) feet for each front, side (on each side
of the building site) and rear yards
3. Maximum Building Height – Forty (40) feet or three (3) stories, unless such
building is set back from the street right-of-way a distance of not less than onehalf
(1/2) its height and is set back from all other property lines a distance of
fifteen (15) feet from side yard and twenty-five (25) feet from rear yard plus two
(2) feet on each side and rear yard for each foot of height in excess of forty (40)
feet. In addition to the above requirement any such building shall provide a pad to
support a fire truck within twenty (20) feet of said building
E. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS:
1. Off-street parking and loading and/or unloading shall be provided in accordance
with Articles XII and XIII of this ordinance
2. No outdoor storage of any material (useable or waste) shall be permitted in this
zone except within enclosed containers
3. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street,
road, highway, deeded right-of-way, or into any residential zone
4. Screening areas and additional setbacks shall be provided in accordance with
Section 9.17 of this ordinance and as approved by the Planning Commission
5. No use producing objectionable odors, noise, or dust shall be permitted within
five hundred (500) feet from the boundary of any residential zone
6. All business activities permitted within this zone shall be conducted within a
completely enclosed building with the exception of off-street parking and loading
and/or unloading areas, provided that lawn and garden, and landscape materials
and seasonal merchandise may be displayed and sold in specific designated areas
other than in a completely enclosed building as depicted on the Development
Plan, as approved by the Planning Commission
7. A development plan, as regulated by section 9.19 of this ordinance, shall be
required for any use in this zone. Such development plan shall include the layout
of the entire area of the shopping center and shall take into consideration good
shopping center design including internal and external pedestrian and vehicular
access, and functional relationship of uses within the shopping center
Article X Zone Regulations 10-45
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
SECTION 10.15 NSC NEIGHBORHOOD SHOPPING CENTER ZONE:
A. USES PERMITTED: The following retail sales or service businesses:
1. Apparel shop
2. Art supplies
3. Bakery and bakery goods store, provided the products are sold exclusively on the
premises
4. Banks and other financial institutions including savings, loan, and finance
companies
5. Barber and beauty shop
6. Beauty shops
7. Billiard or pool hall
8. Book, stationary, or gift shop
9. Camera and photographic supplies
10. Candy store, soda fountain, ice cream store, excluding drive–ins
11. Computer store – retail
12. Computer store - service
13. Delicatessen
14. Drug store
15. Dry cleaning and laundry pick–up station
16. Eating and drinking places, excluding drive–ins
17. Florist shop
18. Food store and supermarkets
19. Furniture store
20. Garden supplies
21. Glass, china, or pottery store
22. Haberdashery
23. Hardware store
24. Health spas
25. Hobby shop
26. Household and electrical appliance store, including incidental repair
27. Interior decorating studio
28. Jewelry store, including repair
29. Laundromats and self service washing and drying
30. Leather goods and luggage store
31. Library
32. Locksmith shop
33. Music, musical instruments and records store, including incidental repair
34. Nursery School
35. Offices
36. Off–street parking lots and garages
37. Opticians and optical goods
38. Package liquor and wine store
39. Paint and wallpaper store
Article X Zone Regulations 10-46
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
40. Pet shop, excluding boarding and outside runs
41. Police and fire stations
42. Post office
43. Radio and television store, including repair
44. Shoe store and shoe repair
45. Sporting goods
46. Studios for professional work or teaching of any form of fine arts, photography,
music, drama, or dance
47. Tailor shop
48. Toy store
49. Variety store, including notions and "Five and Ten" stores
B. ACCESSORY USES:
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses
2. Fences and walls as regulated by Article XI of this ordinance
3. Signs as regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance
C. CONDITIONAL USES: No building or occupancy permit shall be issued for any of the
following, nor shall any of the following uses or any customary accessory buildings or
uses be permitted until and unless the location of said use shall have been applied for and
approved of by the Board of Adjustment as set forth in Section 9.14 of this ordinance.
1. Service stations (including auto repairing, providing all repair except that of a
minor nature (e.g., change of fan belt, minor carburetor adjustment, tire removal
and/or replacement, windshield wiper replacement, etc.) is conducted wholly
within a completely enclosed building and providing further that such service
station is located adjacent to an arterial street as identified in the city’s adopted
comprehensive plan
D. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS: No building shall be erected or structurally
altered except in accordance with the following regulations:
1. Minimum Building Site Area – Eight (8) acres and shall abut a deeded right-ofway.
In the case of this zone (NSC) more than one principal building, as defined
herein, may be permitted to be constructed within the minimum building site area
2. Minimum Yard Requirements – Fifty (50) feet for each front, side (on each side
of the building site) and rear yards except where the lot abuts a major arterial, as
identified in the adopted comprehensive plan, then there shall be a minimum yard
requirement of one hundred (100) feet
3. Maximum Building Height – Forty (40) feet or three (3) stories
E. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS:
Article X Zone Regulations 10-47
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
1. Off–street parking and loading or unloading shall be provided in accordance with
Articles XII and XIII of this ordinance
2. No outdoor storage of any material (usable or waste) shall be permitted in this
zone except within enclosed containers
3. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street,
road, highway, deeded right-of-way or into any adjacent property
4. Where any yard of any use permitted in this zone abuts land in any residential
zone, a ten (10) foot wide screening area, as regulated by Section 9.17 of this
ordinance shall be provided
5. A development plan, as regulated by Section 9.19 of this ordinance shall be
required for any use in this zone
6. No use producing objectionable odors, noise, or dust shall be permitted within
five hundred (500) feet from the boundary of any residential zone
7. All business activities permitted within this zone shall be conducted within a
completely enclosed building with the exception of off-street parking and loading
and/or unloading areas
Article X Zone Regulations 10-48
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
SECTION 10.16 GC GENERAL COMMERCIAL ZONE:
A. PURPOSE: The purposes of the General Commercial (GC) Zone are to: provide those
retail businesses and services oriented to meeting the needs of the residents in the area
and the surrounding neighborhood(s), and to promote the development of a local
commercial area as part of a total design concept coordinating the uses provided, offstreet
parking and vehicular and pedestrian access.
B. PERMITTED USES:
1. Advertising agencies
2. Apparel shop
3. Art supplies
4. Bakery and bakery goods store providing that the products are sold exclusively on
the premises
5. Banks and other financial institutions including savings, loan, and finance
companies with drive-in windows
6. Barber and beauty shops
7. Book, stationary or gift shop
8. Bowling Alley
9. Camera and photographic supplies (including incidental repair)
10. Candy store, soda fountain, ice cream store, excluding drive-ins
11. Computer store – retail
12. Computer store - service
13. Delicatessen
14. Drug store
15. Dry cleaning establishments
16. Eating and drinking places, excluding drive-ins
17. Family dining style restaurants, which may include a drive-through facility,
provided that a drive-through facility may be permitted in the case of “family
dining style restaurants” which serves meals for breakfast, lunch and dinner, with
waiter/waitress tableside service, and not serve alcoholic beverages.
18. Florist shop
19. Food stores and supermarkets
20. Furniture store
21. Garden supplies
22. General building supply
23. Glass, china or pottery store
24. Haberdashery
25. Hardware store
26. Health clinics and health spas
27. Hobby shop
28. Household and electrical appliance store including incidental repair
29. Interior decorating studio
30. Jewelry store, including repair
Article X Zone Regulations 10-49
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
31. Laundromats, self-service washing and drying
32. Leather goods and luggage store
33. Library
34. Locksmith shop
35. Motels
36. Music, musical instruments and record store (inc. incidental repair)
37. Offices
38. Off-street parking lots and/or garages
39. Opticians and optical supplies
40. Package liquor and wine store
41. Paint and wallpaper store
42. Pet shop, excluding boarding and outside runs
43. Photography, music, drama, or dance studio
44. Police and fire stations
45. Post office
46. Radio and television store (including repair)
47. Shoe store and shoe repair
48. Sporting goods
49. Tailor shop
50. Toy store
51. Variety store, including notions and “Five and Ten” stores
C. ACCESSORY USES:
1. Customary accessory uses
2. Fences and walls as regulated by Article XI of this ordinance
3. Signs as regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance
D. CONDITIONAL USES: No building or occupancy permit shall be issued for any of the
following, not shall any of the following uses or any customary accessory building or
uses be permitted until and unless the location of said use shall be permitted until and
unless the location of said use shall have been applied for and approved of by the Board
of Adjustment as set forth in Section 9.14 of this ordinance.
1. Automobile Laundry
2 Emergency Ambulance Vehicle Sales, new vehicles only; outside lot parking for
two (2) such vehicles maximum. Vehicles may be parked outside for no more
than five (5) consecutive days
3. Nursery School
4. Service stations (including auto repairing, providing all repair except that of a
minor nature (e.g. change of fan belt, minor carburetor adjustment, tire removal
and/or replacement, windshield wiper replacement, etc.,) is conducted wholly
within a completely enclosed building
Article X Zone Regulations 10-50
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
E. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS: No building shall be erected or structurally
altered hereafter except in accordance with the following regulations:
1. Minimum Lot Area Per Structure – Fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. In the
case of this zone (GC) City Council, upon recommendation of the Planning
Commission, may permit more than one principal building, as defined herein, to
be constructed on one lot provided the density requirements of this zone are not
exceeded
2. Minimum Lot Width at Building Setback – Seventy-five (75) feet
3. Minimum Front Yard Depth – Thirty (30) feet per building, five (5) stories or less
in height. One (1) additional foot of front yard depth shall be required for each
additional story over five (5) stories
4. Minimum Side Yard Width:
a. For buildings five (5) stories or less in height – No restrictions except
when adjacent to a street, road, highway, or other right-of-way when the
required width shall be the same as required for a minimum front yard
depth in this zone. When buildings abut each other, firewall construction,
as required by the Building Code, shall be required. In the event a side
yard is provided it shall never be less than fifteen (15) feet
b. For buildings six (6) stories in height a fifteen (15) foot minimum side
yard width shall be required except where adjacent to a street, road,
highway, or other right-of-way when the required width shall be the same
as required for a minimum front yard depth in this zone
5. Minimum Rear Yard Depth – Fifteen (15) feet for buildings five (5) stories of less
in height. One (1) additional foot of rear yard depth shall be required for each
additional story over five (5)
6. Maximum Percentage of Lot Coverage – No restriction except as required by the
yard requirements of this zone
7. Maximum Building Height – No building shall exceed forty (40) feet or three (3)
stories in height unless such building is set back from the street right-of-way line
a distance of not less than one-half (1/2) its height and is set back form all other
property lines a distance of fifteen (15) feet from side yard and twenty-five (25)
feet from rear yard, plus two (2) feet on each side and rear yards for each foot of
height in excess of forty (40) feet. In addition to the above requirements any such
building shall provide a pad to support a fire truck within twenty (20) feet of said
building
F. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS:
1. Off–street parking and loading or unloading shall be provided in accordance with
Articles XII and XIII of this ordinance
2. No outdoor storage of any material (usable or waste) shall be permitted in this
zone except within enclosed containers
Article X Zone Regulations 10-51
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
3. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street,
road, highway, deeded right-of-way or into any adjacent property
4. Where land in this zone is abutting a residential zone, a minimum yard
requirement of fifty (50) feet for each side and/or rear yard which abuts said zone
shall be provided, ten (10) feet of which shall be maintained by a screening area
as regulated by Section 9.17 of this ordinance
5. A development plan as regulated by Section 9.19 of this ordinance shall be
required for any use in this zone
6. No use producing objectionable odors, noise, or dust shall be permitted within
five hundred (500) feet from the boundary of any residential zone
7. All business activities permitted within this zone shall be conducted within a
completely enclosed building with the exception of off-street parking and loading
and/or unloading areas
Article X Zone Regulations 10-52
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
SECTION 10.17 PO PROFESSIONAL OFFICE BUILDING) ZONE:
A. USES PERMITTED:
1. Animal clinics, excluding outside runs
2. Banks and other financial institutions, including loan, savings, and finance
companies
3. Clinics – medical or dental Offices
4. Computer store – service
5. Florists
6. Massage therapist clinic
7. Offices
8. Off–street parking lots and/or garages
9. Opticians
10. Police and fire Stations
11. Post offices
12. Prescription pharmacy
B. ACCESSORY USES:
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses
2. Fences and Walls as regulated by Article XI of this ordinance
3. Signs as regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance
4. Uses as listed below as a convenience to the occupants thereof, their patients,
clients, or customers provided that the accessory uses shall not exceed fifteen (15)
percent of the gross floor area of each permitted use in the building. The total of
all accessory uses shall not exceed forty-five (45) percent:
a. Barber shop
b. Beauty shop
c. Coffee shops or refreshment stands
d. Eating establishments and taverns
e. Medical of dental laboratory
f. News and confectionary stands
5. Eating and drinking places as an accessory use are permitted to locate outside an
office building within a free standing building, provided all of the following
conditions and other applicable sections of this ordinance are met:
a. The total development, including principal and accessory uses, comprises
a minimum building site of three (3) acres
b. A pedestrian and vehicular circulation plan, in accordance with Section
12.0. L. of this ordinance is submitted and approved by the Zoning
Administrator. Said plan shall provide for the safe movement of vehicular
and pedestrian traffic to and from within the site
Article X Zone Regulations 10-53
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
c. Such an accessory use shall be developed only in conjunction with a
principally permitted use (except off-street parking lots and/or acres) and
shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the gross floor area of the
permitted use(s)
d. Signs are provided in accordance with the requirements of Section 1.7, as
it applies to the General Commercial Zone
e. Where such an accessory use is abutting a residential zone, a minimum
yard requirement of fifty (50) feet for each side and/or rear yard which
abuts said zone shall be provided, ten (10) feet of which shall be
maintained by a screening area as regulated by Section 9.17 of this
ordinance
C. CONDITIONAL USES: No building or occupancy permit shall be issued for any of the
following, not shall any of the following uses or any customary accessory building or
uses be permitted until and unless the location of said use have been applied for and
approved by the Board of Adjustment as set forth in Section 9.14 of this ordinance.
1. Barber Shop and Beauty Salon
2. Consignment shop
3. Drug Store
4. Dry Cleaning and Tailor shop, (drop off and pick up only)
5. Interior decorator – studio and design services
6. Medical and Dental Laboratory
7. Nursery School
8. Photography Studio
D. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
1. Minimum Lot Area – Fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet
2. Minimum Lot Width at Building Setback Line – One hundred (100) feet
3. Minimum Front Yard Depth - Thirty (30) feet
4. Minimum Side Yard Width - Fifteen (15) feet
5. Minimum Rear Yard Depth - Twenty-five (25) feet
6. Maximum Building Height – No building shall exceed forty (40) feet or three (3)
stories in height unless such building is set back from the street right-of-way line
a distance of not less than one-half (1/2) its height and is set back from all other
property lines a distance of fifteen (15) feet from side yard and twenty-five (25)
feet from rear yard, plus two (2) feet on each side and rear yards for each foot of
height in excess of forty (40) feet. In addition to the above requirements any such
building shall provide a pad to support a fire truck within twenty (20) feet of said
building
E. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS:
Article X Zone Regulations 10-54
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
1. Off–street parking and loading and/or unloading shall be provided in accordance
with Articles XII and XIII of this ordinance
2. No outdoor storage of any material (usable or waste) shall be permitted in this
zone except within enclosed containers
3. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street,
road, highway, deeded right-of-way, or into any adjacent property
4. Screening areas and additional setbacks shall be provided in accordance with
Section 9.17 of this ordinance
5. A development plan, as regulated by Section 9.19 of this ordinance shall be
required for any use in this zone
6. No use producing objectionable odors, noise, or dust shall be permitted within
five hundred (500) feet from any building of any residential zone
7. All business activities permitted within this zone shall be conducted within a
completely enclosed building with the exception of off-street parking and loading
and/or unloading areas
Article X Zone Regulations 10-55
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
SECTION 10.18 LSC LIMITED SERVICE COMMERCIAL ZONE:
A. PURPOSE: The purpose of the Limited Service Commercial (LSC) Zone is to provide
for a specialized neighborhood oriented services, with a variety of office, business, and
commercial uses which relate to the existing and planned development and require
maximum restriction to avoid conflicts with circulation and adjacent land uses.
B. PRINCIPLE PERMITTED USES: The permitted uses are generally small in floor area
and because of their hours of operation, traffic generation, appearance, etc., are more
compatible with residential uses than other type of retail operations. These uses may be
free-standing, but are usually part of a shopping center.
1. Business and cleaning services including, but not limited to, packaging and
mailing; building maintenance; blue printing and photo copying; office equipment
rental and leasing; carpet and upholstery cleaning; business supply services and
other similar establishments engaged in rendering services to businesses or
households on a fee or contract basis
2. Computer store – retail
3. Computer store – service
4. Financial establishments including banks with drive-in windows, savings and loan
association; credit unions; finance companies, loan offices, and safe deposit
companies
5. Food store and supermarkets including grocery stores and drug stores
6. Home furnishings; home improvements; and miscellaneous materials and
equipment stores; including, but not limited to, appliance and appliance repair
stores; auto accessory stores, with no on premises installation; bicycle shops;
business machine shops; carpeting and floor covering stores; curtain and drapery
stores; fabric stores; hardware stores; glass shops; sewing shops; lawnmowers and
snow blower sales; music, record, and musical instruments stores; glass and wall
paper stores; sporting goods stores; stereo, radio, and telephone stores; and video
stores. This category does not include lumberyards; building material sales,
motorcycle shops or lawnmower repair
7. Offices, including medical or dental clinics, opticians, and massage therapist
clinics
8. Personal services including, but not limited to, beauty and barber shops; laundry
and dry cleaning establishments’ photo studios and photo finishing; shoe repair;
tailoring, watch, clock and jewelry repair; clothing rental; and other services
performed for person or their apparel
9. Post office
10. Restaurant eating and drinking places provided that such use is conducted within
a completely enclosed building and is at least two hundred (200) feet from any
residential district. This category does not include fast food service restaurants
and drive through facilities
11. Specially food stores specializing in any special type or class of food, including,
but not limited to, bakeries; candy, nut and cheese shops; confectionary store;
Article X Zone Regulations 10-56
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
coffee and tea shops; dairy and ice cream stores; delicatessens; fruit and vegetable
stores; international food stores; nutritional health foods; and wine shops. These
uses do not include restaurants or carry-outs or convenient food stores. These uses
do not include stores with drive-up or drive through facilities
12. Specially retail commercial establishments and boutiques including but not
limited to antique stores; apparel stores; art galleries, art supplies, book and
magazine stores; card and stationary shops; cosmetic stores; craft and hobby
stores; camera and photo supply stores; florist; furriers; gift shops; toy shops;
interior decorating accessories; leather goods stores; picture framing shops; and
tobacco shops. These uses do not include stores with drive-in or drive through
facilities
C. CONDITIONAL USES: No building or occupancy permit shall be issued for any of the
following, nor shall any of the following uses or customary accessory buildings or uses
be permitted until and unless the location of said use shall have been applied for and
approved of by the Board of Adjustments, as set forth in Section 9.14 of this ordinance.
1. Nursery school
D. ACCESSORY USES:
1. Customary accessory uses
2. Fence and walls as regulated by Article XI of this ordinance
3. Signs as regulated by Article XIV of this ordinance
E. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS: No building shall be erected or structurally
altered hereafter except in accordance with the following regulations:
1. Minimum Lot Area – Twenty-two thousand five hundred (22,500) square feet
2. Minimum Lot Width at Setback Line – One hundred (100) feet
3. Minimum Front Yard Depth – Thirty (30) feet
4. Minimum Side Yard Width – Fifteen (15) feet
5. Minimum Rear Yard Depth – Twenty-five (25) feet
6. Maximum Building Height - No building shall exceed forty (40) feet or three (3)
stories in height unless such building is set back from the street right-of-way line
a distance of not less than one-half (1/2) its height and is set back from all other
property lines a distance of fifteen (15) feet from side yard and twenty-five (25)
feet from rear yard, plus two (2) feet on each side and rear yards for each foot of
height in excess of forty (40) feet. In addition to the above requirements any such
building shall provide a pad to support a fire truck within twenty (20) feet of said
building
F. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS:
Article X Zone Regulations 10-57
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
1. Off-street parking and loading and/or unloading shall be provided in accordance
with Articles XII and XIII of this ordinance
2. Parking for floor area specifically allocated for general and/or medical office use
within the development shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of
Article XII and XIII of these uses
3. Outdoor storage of any material (useable or waste) shall be permitted in this zone
within enclosed container with proper solid screening and landscaping
4. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street,
road, highway, deeded right-of-way, or onto any adjacent property
5. Screening areas and additional setbacks shall be provided in accordance with
Section 9.17 of this ordinance
6. When a structure directly abuts a residential district, side and rear yard set backs
shall be used as yard space only, free from loading areas, driving aisles, parking
and anything else associated with the operation of the development, including any
mechanical equipment associated therewith
7. Structures directly abutting residence districts shall be made as possible
architecturally compatible with the character of the adjoining residences through
facade improvements, screening, fencing, and landscaping. All mechanical
equipment on the roof of buildings shall be screened from view of adjacent
residential districts
8. No use producing objectionable odors, noise, or dust shall be permitted within
five hundred (500) feet from the boundary of any residential zone
9. All business activities permitted within this zone shall be conducted within a
completely enclosed building with the exception of off-street parking and loading
and/or unloading areas
10. A development plan, as regulated by Section 9.19 of this ordinance shall be
required for any use in this zone
Article X Zone Regulations 10-58
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
SECTION 10.19 MLU MIXED LAND USE ZONE:
A. PURPOSE: The purpose of the Mixed Land Use (MLU) Zone is to provide for the
combining of offices, hotels and motels and residential uses with secondary retail and
service uses within a planned development. Such development is intended to be designed
to provide for an internally oriented group of activities which are functionally integrated
relative to land uses, vehicular and pedestrian circulation and the arrangement of
structures. In addition, the intent of the zone is to promote flexibility in design and
planned diversification in the relationships between location of and types of uses and
structures; promote the advantages of modern large scale site planning for community
development through the efficient use of land, facilitating a more economic arrangement
of buildings, circulation systems, land uses, and utilities; preserve, to the greatest extent
possible, the existing landscape features and amenities, and to utilize such features in a
harmonious fashion; provide for more usable and suitably located open space facilities
and common facilities than would otherwise be provided under conventional land
development procedures, but always with the intention of furthering the public health,
safety, and general welfare.
B. GENERAL: A Mixed Land Use Zone may be permitted provided that all conditions or
provisions of this section of the ordinance, the applicable requirements of the subdivision
regulations, and any additional requirements as may be determined necessary to provide
for the most efficient layout of the MLU Zone and its proper integration with the
surrounding development are met; and a public hearing is held on the MLU application.
C. APPLICATION AND PROCESSING: Applications for a Mixed Land Use Zone shall be
processed as follows in two stages:
1. Stage I - Applications for a map amendment to zone an area for Mixed Land Use
(MLU) shall be accompanied by a development plan, in accordance with the
Stage I Plan requirements, provided for within paragraph (B) Section 10.13D
Stage I Development Plan. If an area, however, is zoned MLU at the time the
original zoning for the area is established (through annexation) the submission of
the Stage I development plan for review by the planning commission, shall not be
required until the area is proposed to be developed.
a. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed
application (development plan Stage I and where applicable, the zoning
map amendment), in accordance with the requirements of KRS Chapter
424, and review said application with regard to its compliance with the
stated purposes of the MLU Zone, the required elements of the Stage I
Plan and other applicable requirements of this section.
2. Stage II - Plan And Record Plat - A Stage II Plan and record plat shall be
developed in conformance with the Stage I approved plan and in accordance with
the requirements of Section 10.12, E, 1 F2, and submitted to the planning
Article X Zone Regulations 10-59
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
commission, or its duly authorized representative for its review and approval.
Except for the manner of submission and processing, the subdivision regulations
may be waived, where applicable, and the requirements of Section 10.12, E. 1 and
2 shall be substituted therefore. Those requirements not specifically waived by
the planning commission shall conform with the subdivision regulations.
a. The planning commission shall review the submitted Stage II
Development Plan with regard to its compliance with the required
elements of Section 10.12, E, 1 and 2 for Stage II plans, other applicable
elements of this ordinance and other applicable regulations, and its
conformity with the Stage I approved plan. Minor adjustments from the
Stage I approved plan may be permitted, provided that the adjustments do
not change land uses, increase overall density, significantly alter
circulation patterns (vehicular and pedestrian) or decrease the amount
and/or usability of open space or recreation areas, or conflict with other
applicable requirements of this ordinance (e.g., parking requirements).
b. Upon approval of the Stage II plan by the Planning Commission, a copy of
said plan shall be forwarded to the zoning administrator, who shall grant
permits only in accordance with the Stage II approved plan and other
regulations, as may be required by this ordinance.
c. Upon approval of the Stage II plan, the planning commission shall review
the submitted record plat, if applicable, with regard to its compliance with
the required elements of Section 10.12, E.1 and 2 for record plats, the
applicable requirements of the subdivision regulations and its
conformance with the Stage II approved plan.
Upon planning commission approval of the record plat, copies of said plat,
certified by the planning commission, and suitable for recording shall be
forwarded by the planning commission to the office of the county clerk to
be recorded.
D. PERMITTED USES: One or more of the following uses may be permitted. Said uses
shall be clearly delineated on the Stage I and II Plans:
1. Hotels and Motels
2. Learning for continuing education programs
3. Manufactured, assembly and storage of electronic and radio frequency equipment
and related products which are, in part, related to a cooperative program with an
accredited college or university and located on a single tract of land not less than
twenty (20) acres
4. Offices and research laboratories
5. Restaurants (sit down only)
6. Residential – Including single family attached and detached, two family and
multi-family
Article X Zone Regulations 10-60
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
E. ACCESSORY USES:
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses
2. Retail and service uses, as listed below, may be included as part of the
development, provided said uses are entered from within any of the permitted
uses listed above or are developed as an integral part of the proposed
development. Said uses shall be internally oriented to the development and shall
serve as a convenience to any of the occupants thereof, their patients, as a
convenience to the client or customers, and further provided that no exterior
advertising signs shall be visible from outside the area of the approved
development:
a. Apparel shop
b. Art and art supplies
c. Bakery and bakery goods store, provided the products are sold exclusively
on the premises
d. Banks and other financial institutions, including savings, loan and finance
companies
e. Barber and beauty shops
f. Book, stationary or gift shops
g. Camera and photographic supplies
h. Candy store, soda fountain, ice cream store, excluding drive-ins
i. Drug store
j. Eating and drinking places, including entertainment facilities
k. Florist shop
l. Glass, china
m. Haberdashery
n. Health spas
o. Hobby shop
p. Interior decorating studio
q. Jewelry store, including repair
r. Leather goods, and luggage store
s. Music, musical instruments and records, including incidental repair
t. Opticians and optical goods
u. Package liquor and wine store
v. Post office
w. Shoe store with incidental shoe repair
x. Sporting goods, studios for professional work or teaching of any form of
fine arts, photography, music, drama, or dance
y. Toy store
F. PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC USES: Public and semi-public structures and uses may
be permitted in the MLU Zone. These uses shall be delineated on the plan and shall be
limited to one or more of the following uses:
Article X Zone Regulations 10-61
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
1. Churches
2. Community centers, including day care facilities
3. Country clubs
4. Fire or police stations
5. Government offices
6. Libraries
7. Open space/recreation areas
8. Schools (elementary and secondary)
G. AREA REQUIREMENTS: No MLU Zone shall be permitted on less than 5 acres of
land. However, development of a small tract adjacent to an existing MLU Zone may be
permitted, if the proposed development conforms to and extends the original
developments as if the new area had been a part of the original development.
H. ACCESS REGULATIONS: Access shall be provided to the site via a major arterial or
collector street, as identified within the locally adopted comprehensive plan.
I. HEIGHT, YARD AND SETBACK REGULATIONS: Requirements shall be as
approved in the plan except that no building shall exceed forty (40) feet or three (3)
stories in height unless such building is set back from the street right-of-way line a
distance of not less than one-half (1/2) its height and is set back from all other property
lines a distance of fifteen (15) feet from side yard and twenty-five (25) feet from rear
yard, plus two (2) feet on each side and rear yards for each foot of height in excess of
forty (40) feet. In addition to the above requirements any such building shall provide a
pad to support a fire truck within twenty (20) feet of said building.
J. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING AND/OR UNLOADING: Off-street
parking and when applicable, loading and/or unloading facilities, shall be provided in
accordance with Articles XII and XIII of this ordinance.
K. FENCES, WALLS, AND SIGNS: The location, height, and type of all fences, walls, and
signs shall be approved in the plan.
L. EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL: Effective erosion and sedimentation
controls shall be planned and applied in accordance with Section 9.6 of this ordinance.
M. OPEN SPACE/RECREATION AREA: At least 20% of the total acreage of the proposed
MLU development shall be retained as open space or recreation areas. Such open
space/recreation areas shall be physically situated so as to be readily accessible, available
to, and usable by all activities within the MLU development. Open space and recreation
areas shall be that part of the total project exclusive parking areas, access drives and
streets.
Article X Zone Regulations 10-62
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
N. AMENDMENTS: Any amendments to plans, except for the minor adjustments which
may be permitted by the planning commission, shall be made in accordance with the
procedure required by Subsection C of this section.
O. EXPIRATION: Development plans within the MLU Zone shall be subject to the time
constraints, as noted below. Upon expiration of said time period and any extensions
thereto, the legislative body may initiate a request for a public hearing by the planning
commission, in accordance with the requirements of KRS Chapter 100, for the purpose of
determining the appropriateness of the approved development plan. A public hearing
may be initiated if either of the following condition apply:
1. Stage II Plan has not been approved by the planning commission within a period
of 24 consecutive months from the date of the Stage I approved plan, except as
agreed upon for the phasing of development by the legislative body; provided that
an extension may be permitted upon approval of the legislative body or their duly
authorized representative if sufficient proof can be demonstrated that prevailing
conditions have not changed appreciably to render the Stage I approved plan
obsolete.
2. Substantial construction has not been initiated within a period of 12 consecutive
months from the date of approval of the Stage II plan by the planning
commission; provided that an extension may be permitted upon approval of the
legislative body or its duly authorized representative if sufficient proof can be
demonstrated that the construction was delayed due to circumstances beyond the
applicant's control, and that prevailing conditions have not changed appreciably to
render the Stage I approved plan obsolete. The amount of construction
constituting initiating substantial construction shall be as approved in the Stage II
approved plan.
Article X Zone Regulations 10-63
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
SECTION 10.20 I INDUSTRIAL ZONE:
A. USES PERMITTED: The following industrial uses are permitted:
1. Contractors offices, equipment repair shop, materials storage and accessory
storage yards, including the storage of general construction equipment and
vehicles
2. Warehousing or wholesaling
B. ACCESSORY USES:
1. Customary accessory buildings and uses including operations required to maintain
or support any use permitted in this zone on the same lot as the permitted use,
such as maintenance shops, power plants, and machine shops. An accessory
building shall have a floor area of less than twenty-five (25) percent of the
principle building
2. Fences and walls as regulated by Article XI of this Ordinance
3. Signs as regulated by Article XIV of this Ordinance
4. Uses, as listed below, included within and entered from within any use permitted
in this zone as a convenience to the occupants thereof, and their customers
providing such accessory uses shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the gross floor
area of the permitted uses in the building and no exterior advertising displays
shall be visible from outside the building.
a. Cafeterias
b. Coffee shops or refreshment stands
c. Soda or dairy bars
C. AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS: No building shall be erected or structurally
altered hereafter except in accordance with the following regulations:
1. Minimum Lot Area Per Principal Building: Fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet.
The Planning Commission may permit more than one principal building, as
defined herein, to be constructed on one lot provided the density requirements of
this zone are not exceeded
2. Minimum Lot Width at Building Setback Line: Seventy-five (75) feet
3. Minimum Side Yard Width:
a. No restrictions except when adjacent to a street, road, highway, or other
right-of-way when the required width shall be the same as required for a
minimum front yard depth in this zone. When buildings abut each other,
firewall construction, as required by the Building Code, shall be required.
In the event a side yard is provided, it shall never be less than fifteen (15)
feet
Article X Zone Regulations 10-64
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
4. Minimum Rear Yard Depth: Fifteen (15) feet
5. Maximum Percentage of Lot Coverage: No restrictions except as required by the
yard requirement of this zone
6. Maximum Building Height: Forty (40) feet or three (3) stories
D. OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROL:
1. Off-street parking and loading or unloading shall be provided in accordance with
articles XII and XIII of this Ordinance
2. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street,
road, highway, deeded right-of-way, or into any adjacent property
3. Where any yard of any use permitted in this zone abuts a residential zone, a
minimum requirement of fifteen (15) feet for each side and/or rear yard which
abuts said zone shall be provided, ten (10) feet of which shall be maintained by a
screening area as regulated by Section 9.17 of this ordinance
4. A development plan as regulated by Section 9.19 of this ordinance shall be
required for any use in this zone
Article X Zone Regulations 10-65
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
SECTION 10.21 CTO CORRIDOR TRANSITIONAL OVERLAY DISTRICT ZONE:
A. PURPOSES: The purpose of the Corridor Transitional Overlay Zone is to implement the
land use policies of the Comprehensive Plan with respect to development along U.S.
Route 27. This highway Corridor Transitional Overlay Zone is intended to promote
economic development and reinvestment, as well as, purposeful community design.
B. GENERAL:
1. The Corridor Transitional Overlay Zone replaces Section 9.25 in its entirety
2. The Corridor Transitional Overlay Zone covers only those properties designated
as, “Corridor Transitional’ on the Comprehensive Plan Land Use Map. Property
abutting a Corridor Transitional Overlay Zone which is held in common
ownership with adjoining CTO property may be included in the CTO zone
provided that the proposed development of such property is consistent with the
purpose and intent of the CTO district, and is in accord with the district’s
development standards and design criteria as determined by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and does not adversely impact on neighboring residential
properties
C. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES: Uses permitted in the Corridor Transitional Overlay
Zone include:
1. Uses permitted in the underlying zone
2. Uses permitted in Section 10.17 PO, Professional Office Zone
3. Uses permitted in Section 10.18 LSC, Limited Service Commercial Zone
D. CONDITONAL USES: Higher density residential development within the Corridor
Transitional Overlay Zone, may be appropriate and may be permitted, provided that such
building and use is compatible for the particular area and site, as determined by the Board
of Adjustments, pursuant to Section 9.14 of this Ordinance. This following conditional
uses may be permitted when the Board of Adjustments finds the proposed development
as depicted on a submitted site development plan is appropriate for the site relative to its
compatibility with present and future development conditions and is consistent with the
development standards and design of the CTO district:
1. Two-family duplex dwellings, provided that it meets the area requirements of
Section 10.5 R-1E zone
2. Four-family apartment buildings, provided that it meets the area requirements of
Section 10.10 R-2 zone
E. APPLICATION AND PROCESSING: Under the Corridor Transitional Overlay Zone a
property owner may submit a site development plan, in accordance with Section 9.19 of
this Ordinance as part of a rezoning application, to develop or redevelop property for a
CTO zone use which otherwise would not be permitted in the underlying zone.
Article X Zone Regulations 10-66
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
1. The site development plan shall meet the relevant district requirements of area
size and setback dimensions for the proposed use
2. Planning and Zoning Commission approval of a proposed site development plan
shall be in accordance with Section 9.30 of this ordinance, and shall meet the
performance standards established in subsection F, herein, as well as, other
applicable requirements of this ordinance
3. The Commission must find the proposed site development plan is consistent with
the intent of the Comprehensive Plan with regard to the US 27, highway corridor
4. The Planning Commission shall make a finding of whether the proposed
development meets the performance standards of this zone and is a permitted use
under the CTO, and make appropriate recommendations to the legislative body
5. The legislative body shall, within forty-five (45) days after receiving the
recommendations of the Planning Commission, review said recommendations and
take action to approve, approve with changes, or disapprove said CTO application
F. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS: The following standards are in addition to the distinct
requirements of this ordinance, and are established as a means of improving the economic
viability and environmental quality of the US 27 Highway Corridor.
1. A landscape buffer along the highway right-of-way, for non-residential properties
should be developed as a means of unifying the area and soften the visual clutter
of vehicular parking, and to help define individual driveway entrances
a. The depth of the landscape buffer should have a minimum width of five
feet measured from the abutting edge of the sidewalk
b. In cases where parking is in the front of a building the landscape buffer
should be mounted to partially hide parked automobiles without
impending visibility or traffic safety
2. A landscape plan is required as part of a site development plan for all CTO zone
uses. The landscape plan should address measures to improve the environmental
design quality of the site and the corridor
3. The landscape plan should also address measures to – screen and/or buffer any
adverse impact associated with the site relative to neighboring properties
4. Conversion of an existing residential building for a non-residential use must
nevertheless preserve the residential character and appearance of the building
5. All new buildings should be designed to enhance the image of the corridor, in a
manner compatible with its surroundings
6. Commercial signage for a non-residential structure shall be as approved on the
Site Development Plan
7. When a non-residential use directly abuts a residential district, side yard setbacks
shall be used as yard space provided that driveways shall be permitted. Parking in
rear yard shall be permitted, provided adequate screening and buffering is
provided to minimize any adverse impact to abutting residential property
Article X Zone Regulations 10-67
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
SECTION 10.22 ROD REDEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT ZONE:
A. PURPOSES: The Redevelopment Overlay District (ROD) Zone is designed to foster the
development of four (4) strategically located redevelopment areas in Highland Heights.
These four redevelopment areas are designed on the Comprehensive Plan, Land Use Plan
Map (figure 11) as gateway East and gateway West, and Park Plaza East and Park Plaza
West. The intended purpose of the Redevelopment Overlay District is to effect the
redevelopment of each of the four areas individually in a manner consistent with the land
use development policies of the Comprehensive Plan.
B. GENERAL: The rezoning of a development area shall be predicted upon the approval of
a unified Site Development Plan for that area. Because of the degree of difficulty and
complexity in redeveloping these four areas, the City of Highland Heights may wish to
assist in the development process to the extent necessary and feasible in order to foster
the implementation of its land use and community development objectives. The
implementation steps that may be required in carrying out the economic development of
these four proposed redevelopment areas are outlined in the Comprehensive Plan.
C. PROCESS AND PROCEDURES FOR ZONE CHANGE: Application for zoning
amendment to ROD Zone shall be processed in two stages in accordance with Section
10.13 C, of this ordinance.
1. The Redevelopment Overlay District (ROD) Zone is applicable only to the four
redevelopment areas depicted on the Comprehensive Plan, Land Use Plan Map
(figure 11)
2. The rezoning of a development site shall be contingent upon the following
requirements:
a. That a Stage I Unified Site Development Plan for the redevelopment area
ahs been formulated by the applicant and submitted for approval
b. That in accordance with Section 9.30 of this ordinance, notification shall
be given to owners of property that abut a proposed ROD zone for which a
Stage I Unified Site Development Plan & Rezoning application has been
submitted to the Planning & Zoning Commission for consideration
c. The Stage I Unified Development Plan is of sufficient detail to satisfy the
requirements of Section 10.13 D & E of this ordinance
d. The proposed uses depicted on the Unified Site Development Plan are
appropriate for the site and consistent with the land use development
guidelines outlined in the Comprehensive Plan
e. The proposed Unified Site Development Plan has to the extent possible,
been formulated by an interdisciplinary design team comprising such
discipline as architecture and landscape design, engineering design, and
urban planning
Article X Zone Regulations 10-68
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
f. The proposed Stage I Unified Site Development Plan has adequately
addressed the development issues raised in the Comprehensive Plan in a
manner that will enhance the image of Highland Heights
3. The applicants’ Stage I Unified Site Development Plan shall be first referred to
the City Planner, the City Engineer and the City Zoning Administrator and other
relevant departments for review. The reviewers shall submit written reports to the
Planning and Zoning Commission within fifteen (15) working days of the
applicants’ submittal. Such reports shall be made available to the applicant, and to
adjoining property owners upon request
4. The Stage I Unified Site Development Plan shall be considered for approval by
the Planning and Zoning Commission pursuant to Section 10.13 C and D of this
Ordinance
5. The Stage I Unified Site Development Plan shall establish how the redevelopment
site shall be developed, indicating the type of uses, specifying the types of
building, and design features including layout, architecture, signage, drainage, and
placement of utilities; provided that all utilities, for which the developer is
responsible, are placed underground
6. The Stage I Unified Site Development Plan shall include a schedule indicating
when various site improvements are anticipated to be started and completed over
the life of the development project. If the development is to be carried out in
phases, then the development scheduled shall include a performance schedule for
each phase
7. Rezoning of a redevelopment site to a ROD zone shall be carried out in
accordance with Section 16 of this ordinance
8. Changes may not be made to an approved Site Development Plan except for
minor changes as determined by the Zoning Administrator without resubmitting a
revised Site Development Plan to the Planning and Zoning Commission pursuant
to Section 9.30 and Section 10.13 C & D of this ordinance
9. Following approval of a Stage I Unified Site Development Plan, the applicant
shall:
a. Submit a Stage II Site Development Plan(s) in accordance with Section
10.13 E of this ordinance within six months following Stage I Site
Development Plan approval
b. And shall commence construction within nine months following Stage II
Site Development Plan approval
10. Should the applicant fail to meet the specified time deadline(s) the Site
Development Plan shall become null and void and the zoning on site shall revert
back to its original classification. The Planning and Zoning Commission may
grant the applicant one, nine-month time extension provided the applicant can
show good cause for an extension
Article X Zone Regulations 10-69
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance February 2012 NKAPC
D. PERMITTED USES: The following permitted uses in a Redevelopment Overlay District
Zone shall be as approved on the Stage I Site Development Plan, provided that such uses
are consistent with the purpose and intent of the Comprehensive Plan for the area in
question. Uses permitted in the Redevelopment Overlay District Zone may include mixed
uses including:
1. Uses permitted in Section 10.16 General Commercial Zone
2. Uses permitted in Section 10.17 Professional Office Building Zone
3. Uses permitted in Section 10.11 Residential Three Zone
E. ACCESSORY USES: Customary accessory buildings and uses shall be as approved on
the Stage I Site Development Plan.
F. LAND COVERAGE, DENSITY AND INTENSITY OF USE: The placement of
buildings, land coverage and land use intensity shall be as approved on the Stage I Site
Development Plan, provided that the development plan is consistent with the purpose and
intent of the Comprehensive Plan relative to the redevelopment plan is consistent with the
purpose and intent of the Comprehensive Plan relative to the redevelopment area in
question.
1. The placement of buildings and other features of the built environment shall be as
approved on the Stage I Site Development Plan
2. Building height and setback requirements shall be as approve don the Stage I Site
Development Plan
G. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING: Off-Street parking and loading
requirements shall be as approved on the Stage I Site Development Plan, in accordance
with Articles XII & XIII of this ordinance.
H. OPENSPACE AND LANDSCAPE FEATURES: Open space and landscape features are
important and integral elements of the site, and shall be as approved on the Site
Development Plan.
I. EROSION & SEDIMENTATION CONTROLS: Effective erosion and sedimentation
controls shall be planned and applied in accordance with Section 9.7 of this ordinance.
J. AREA REQUIREMENTS: No redevelopment Overlay District Zone shall be established
for only a portion of a redevelopment site that is smaller than three (3) acres in size. It is
the intent that each redevelopment area is developed in accordance with a unified
development plan for the entire development area. Piecemeal and disjointed development
of such areas are not to be permitted.
Article XI Fences, Walls, And Obstruction To View Regulations 11-1
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
ARTICLE XI
FENCES, WALLS, AND OBSTRUCTION TO VIEW REGULATIONS
SECTION 11.0 VISION CLEARANCE AT CORNERS AND RAILROAD CROSSINGS:
No fence, wall, hedge or other structure or other obstruction about a height of thirty-six (36)
inches as measured about the curb level shall be erected, placed, maintained or continued in any
zone within that triangular portion of a corner lot formed by measuring fifty (50) feet from the
intersection of the rights-of-way line or two (2) streets or the right-of-way line of a street
intersection of the rights-of-way line and joining these points with a straight line of a street
intersection with a railroad right-of-way line and joining these points with a straight line. No type
of tree or planting or other obstruction shall be planted, placed, maintained, or continued in such
a manner which would obstruct the vision clearance at corners and railroad crossings.
SECTION 11.1 CLASSIFICATION OF FENCES AND WALLS:
A. The following shall be the classification of fences and walls for this Ordinance:
1. Masonry walls
2. Ornamental iron (eighty percent (80%) open)
3. Woven wire (eighty percent (80%) open)
4. Wood or other materials (more than fifty percent (50%) open)
5. Solid fences-wood; or other materials (less than fifty percent (50%) open)
6. Hedges
7. Barbed wire or sharp pointed fences
8. Earthen or concrete walls intended to contain or redirect flooding waters
SECTION 11.2 CONSERVATION ZONES:
A. Fences and/or walls within the conservation zone shall conform to the following
requirements:
1. Section 11.0 except that in front yards class 2 or 3 fences may be erected up to
maximum height of ninety-six (96) inches
2. Side and rear yard, class 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, or 7 fences and/or walls may be erected
up to a maximum height of ninety-six (96) inches
3. Class 8 walls shall be permitted but shall conform to requirements of the Corps of
Engineers and/or City Engineer, whichever is applicable
SECTION 11.3 RESIDENTIAL ZONES:
A. Fences and/or walls within the conservation zone shall conform to the following
requirements:
Article XI Fences, Walls, And Obstruction To View Regulations 11-2
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
1. The requirements for the Residential (R) Zones for residential uses only, are set
forth and depicted on Figure I of this ordinance
2. The location, height and type of all fences and/or walls within any area zoned
with a PUD or RCD Overlay shall be approved by the Planning Commission
3. For all nonresidential uses conditionally permitted in any residential zone herein,
the requirements are as follows:
a. Fences of class 2 or 3 only shall be permitted in front yards including the
front yard of corner lots as governed by Section 11.0. Said fences may be
erected up to a maximum height of seventy-two (72) inches
b. Classes 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6 fences and/or walls may be erected in side or rear
yards up to a maximum height of seventy-two (72) inches; provided,
however for the following exceptions:
(1) General purpose recreational areas may be enclosed with fences or
walls of class 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, or 7 up a maximum height of ninetysix
(96) inches
(2) Class 2 fences (or a combination of 3 and 7) may be erected to
enclose tennis courts or as backstops for baseball and/or softball
fields up to a maximum height of one hundred forty-four (144)
inches
(3) In the case of corner lots, as governed by Section 11.0, fences of
class 2 or 3 only may be erected as regulated by the applicable
provisions of this section
SECTION 11.4 COMMERCIAL ZONE: Fences and/or walls within all commercial zones
including those permitted with all conditionally permitted uses in these zones shall conform to
the following requirements:
A. Section 11.0, except that in front yards of commercial zones class 2 or 3 fences may be
erected up to a maximum height of seventy-two (72) inches. In the GC zone no fences or
walls shall be permitted in the front yard.
B. Side and rear yard, class 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6 fences and/or walls may be erected up to a
maximum height of seventy-two (72) inches, except that Section 11.0 shall prevail at all
intersections.
C. All dumpsters located within the city limits and within the general public’s view,
excluding compactor style dumpsters, shall be enclosed by a structure, (of minimum
construction) consisting of galvanized chain-link fencing with red-wood slats with three
(3) foot clearance on all sides and shall totally enclose the dumpster and be at least one
(1) foot higher than said dumpster. Each enclosure shall have a latch of four feet form the
ground on the gate and to be secured at all times. All alternative material for construction
of the above, shall be approved in writing by the Chief Administrative Officer.
Article XI Fences, Walls, And Obstruction To View Regulations 11-3
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
SECTION 11.5 MEASUREMENT OF ALL FENCE AND/OR WALL HEIGHTS
AND/OR LOCATIONS:
A. All fences and/or wall heights shall be measured along the fence or wall locations.
B. All locations for distance measurements shall be measured from lot lines.
SECTION 11.6 HEIGHT OF ANY BARBED WIRE OR SHARP POINTED FENCES: In
zones, where permitted, barbed wire or sharp pointed fences shall not be less than a height of
seventy-two (72) inches.
SECTION 11.7 HEIGHT OF FENCES ATOP RETAINING WALLS: A combination
fence and retaining wall may be erected. The retaining wall portion may be erected up to the
level of the higher finished grade. The fence portion must be of the class and height permitted
within this ordinance for the applicable zone. Said measurement shall be made at and along the
location of the fence and retaining wall.
SECTION 11.8 ELECTRIFIED FENCES: No fence carrying an electrical charge shall be
permitted in any zone except when such fence is used in conjunction with an agricultural use and
provided the fence is not located along the perimeter with adjacent property or street.
SECTION 11.9 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR ERECTION OF FENCES: No fence shall be
erected, except as exempted or specified within this ordinance, until all required fees have been
paid to the proper authorities or their agents and the necessary permits have been issued for such
by the Zoning Administrator and the Building Inspector, in accordance with Sections 15.1 and
15.2 of this ordinance.
SECTION 11.10 STRUCTURAL ELEMENTS OF FENCES: Fences shall be constructed
so that all structural members shall be located on the inside of the fence. The inside shall be the
side which faces the property owned by the person building the fence.
SECTION 11.11 DILAPIDATED FENCES: If thirty percent (30%) or more of the fence is
gone or in disrepair the entire fence must be removed or repaired.
Article XI Fences, Walls, And Obstruction To View Regulations 11-4
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
Article XII Off-Street Parking Regulations 12-1
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
ARTICLE XII
OFF–STREET PARKING REGULATIONS
In all zones, off–street parking facilities for the storage of parking of motor vehicles for use of
occupants, employees and patrons of the building hereafter erected, altered or extended, and all
uses of the land after the effective date of this ordinance, shall be provided and maintained as
herein prescribed. However, where a building permit has been issued prior to the date of
adoption of this ordinance and provided that construction has not begun within ninety (90)
consecutive calendar days of such effective date, off–street parking facilities in the amounts
required by this ordinance shall prevail.
SECTION 12.0 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Computation of Parking Spaces - In determining the number of parking spaces required,
if such spaces result in fractional parts thereof, the number of said spaces required shall
be construed to be the next highest whole number.
B. Addition to Buildings - Whenever the intensity of use of any building, structure or
premises shall be increased through addition of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating
capacity, or other units of measurement specified herein additional parking spaces shall
be provided in the amounts hereafter specified for that use, if the existing parking space is
inadequate to serve such increase in intensity of use.
C. Location of Off-Street Parking Facilities:
1. Off-street parking facilities (subject to additional restrictions according to
screening requirements in Section 9.17, and other requirements of this ordinance)
shall be located as follows:
a. Single family Residential Zones (R-RE and R-1): Off-street parking may
be permitted in driveways in the minimum required front and side yards
and in the rear yards, provided that all off-street parking facilities are set
back a minimum of ten (10) feet from the rear lot line, and meet all other
requirements of this ordinance. No off-street parking area located in the
front or side yards of a single family residential zone may exceed four
hundred (400) square feet (two (2) parking spaces) except; however, the
Zoning Administrator may allow additional off-street parking spaces to be
located thereon provided that:
(1) A plan of the proposed parking area is submitted and approved by
the Zoning Administrator; and
(2) All other requirements of this ordinance are met.
Article XII Off-Street Parking Regulations 12-2
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
b. Multi-Family Zones (R-2, R-3, R-4): Off-street parking shall be permitted
only in side or rear yards, provided that off-street parking facilities shall
be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from the rear lot line. Off-street
parking may be permitted in required front yards if approved by the
Planning Commission according to the development plan as required in
Section 9.19.
c. PUD and RCD Zones: Off-street parking shall be permitted according to
approval of a final development plan.
d. GC, LSC, SC, NSC, PO, and I Zones: Off-street parking may be permitted
in minimum required front, side, and rear yards, Provided that all off-street
parking facilities shall be set back a minimum of five (5) feet from street
right-of-way lines.
2. All off-street parking facilities shall be located on the same lot as the building
served, except for the following:
a. Multi-family dwellings, where permitted in this ordinance, and any use
permitted in an industrial zone, may supply off-street parking within three
hundred (300) feet from such lots or zoning lot served, upon approval of
the Planning Commission, providing that such off-street parking is located
within the same zone as the establishment being served and that such offstreet
parking is located within the same zone as the establishment being
served and that off-street parking requirements of this ordinance are
complied with at all times. Further, the applicant must also show sufficient
proof that such off-street parking space, as required herein, on the same lot
or zoning lot or contiguous to the same lot or zoning lot as the building
being served.
b. Where single, two or multi-family dwellings which are permitted herein
and are existing at the time of adoption of this ordinance, occupy a lot of
such size that off-street parking could not be provided on the same lot as
the use being served, said off-street parking may be permitted to locate
within a distance not to exceed three hundred (300) feet from said
dwelling or dwellings upon approval of the Zoning Administrator. In
addition, said off-street parking lot shall be located in the same zone as the
use being served and constructed in accordance with other applicable
requirements of this ordinance.
c. Off-street parking, as required for “conditional use” permitted in the
residential (R) zones, may be permitted to locate on another lot or zoning
lot than the building or use being served is located, when approved by the
Board of Adjustment, provided that said parking is located within
reasonable walking distance of the use or building being served and
available at all times without restrictions for said purposes.
Article XII Off-Street Parking Regulations 12-3
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
D. Collective Parking Facilities - Collective off-street parking facilities may be provided,
however, such facilities shall be no less than the sum of such facilities as would otherwise
be individually required.
E. Driveway Provisions – Except for residential (R-RE and R-1) zones, parking lots or areas
adjacent to streets, roads, highways, or deeded rights-of-way shall have driveways or
openings not less than twelve (12) feet in width and no more than forty-eight (48) feet in
width at the curb, excluding curb radius. These curb cuts shall be so located as to
minimize traffic hazards and congestion. All such parking lots or areas shall have a
protective wall or bumper block around each parking lot and said parking lots shall be so
designed that all vehicles leaving the facility will be traveling forward to approaching
traffic.
No single family residential driveway width at street, road, highway, or deeded rights-ofway
junctions shall be less than nine (9) feet nor more than twenty (20) feet, excluding
curb radius, providing that this width may be increased if sufficient proof can be
demonstrated after review and approval of the Zoning Administration.
F. Approval or Modification of Curb Cuts Required – Detailed plans shall be submitted to
the Planning Commission, or its duly authorized representative, in the form of a
development plan as regulated by Section 9.19 of this ordinance, for approval of all curb
cuts, driveway openings, including modifications thereto, before a permit may be
obtained therefore.
For the purpose of minimizing the interference of traffic and congestion on the major
street system as identified in the city’s comprehensive plan, the Planning Commission
shall limit the number of curb cuts along said streets. The number of curb cut
intersections with major streets shall be spaced at a distance of not less than eight
hundred (800) feet apart. Access to abutting properties fronting on said major streets shall
be provided by a frontage or service road connecting to the curb cut intersection. If the
developer can show sufficient proof in the form of a development plan that spacing of
curb cuts less than eight hundred (800) feet apart will not impede the movement of traffic
flow along said major street, then the Planning Commission may vary these requirements
accordingly.
G. Driveways Not Computed As Part of Required Parking Lot - Entrances, exits, or
driveways shall not be computed as any part of a required parking lot or area.
H. Off-Street Parking Space and Access Drives Defined – For the purpose of this ordinance,
one (1) parking space shall be a minimum of one hundred eighty (180) square feet in
area, exclusive of access drives or aisles, and shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet in width
and twenty (20) feet in length. In the case of hairpin striping of parking spaces, the width
of parking spaces shall be measured from centerline (between hairpin stripes) and
centerline. Such parking space shall have a vertical clearance of at least seven (7) feet.
Article XII Off-Street Parking Regulations 12-4
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
Each parking space shall be appropriately dimensioned for automobile parking. All
parking lots shall be laid out with the following minimum aisle or access drive widths.
1. Ninety (90) degree (perpendicular) parking. Twenty-four (24) feet (either one (1)
or two (2) way circulation).
2. Sixty (60) degree (angle) parking. Eighteen (18) feet (one-way circulation),
twenty (20) feet (two-way circulation).
3. Forty-five (45) degree (angle) parking. Thirteen (13) feet (one-way circulation),
twenty (20) feet (two-way circulation).
4. Thirty (30) degree (angle) parking. Eleven (11) feet (one-way circulation), twenty
(20) feet (two-way circulation).
5. Zero (0) degree (parallel) parking. Twelve (12) feet (one-way circulation).
When any combination of these types of parking is used (facing the same aisle) the most
restricted aisle or access drive width requirement shall prevail.
I. Off-Street Parking Space to be Used for Parking Only - Any vehicle parking space shall
be used for parking only. Any other use of such space, including repair work or servicing
of any kind other than in an emergency, or the requirement of any payment for the use of
such space, shall be deemed to constitute a separate commercial use in violation of the
provisions of this Ordinance.
J. No Building Shall Be Erected in Off-Street Parking Space – No building of any kind
shall be erected in any off-street parking lot except a parking garage containing parking
spaces equal to the requirements set forth in this section of the Ordinance or a shelter
house for a parking attendant providing the number of spaces required are not reduced.
K. Off-Street Parking Space Shall Not be Reduced – The required parking area on any lot, as
set forth and designated in this Ordinance, shall not be reduced or encroached upon in
any manner.
L. Parking Plan Approval Required – Plans for all parking lot facilities including parking
garages shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for review and for compliance,
with the provisions of this Ordinance and such other pertinent ordinances of the city of
Highland Heights. Such plans shall show the number of spaces and arrangements of
parking aisles, location of shelters for parking attendant, location of signs, typical cross
sections of pavement, bade and sub-base in accordance with Article XII Section 12.0 M,
of this Ordinance, proposed grades of storm drainage facilities, location of lighting
facilities and such other information or plans as the circumstances may warrant.
M. Surfacing of New, Off-Street Parking – All new off-street parking facilities shall be
surfaced with asphalt concrete or Portland cement concrete and shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the standards and procedures herein established. Pavers
may be permitted when installed in accordance with industry standards and approved by
the City’s Zoning Administrator. The Planning Commission may approve gravel parking
Article XII Off-Street Parking Regulations 12-5
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
lots or staging areas for Industrial, Commercial or Maintenance department uses when
the lots are not used for public parking purposes.
1. Asphalt Concrete Pavement:
a. General Design Requirements:
(1) Asphalt concrete pavements shall consist of specified thickness of
asphalt concrete surface course and a base course, or courses, all
constructed on prepared sub-grade. Pavement thickness required
shall be determined from Table 1 of this Ordinance for the
appropriate sub-grade soil and traffic use.
(2) Paved areas shall be so designed and constructed that water will
quickly drain from the surface and be conducted away from the
area through approved systems. Transverse and/or longitudinal
slopes of not less than 5/8-inch in 10 feet shall be provided. For
large paved areas, approved catch basins and storm drainage
systems shall be provided.
(3) When the pavement includes a granular base, and the pavement is
not constructed over granular sub-grade, perimeter sub-surface
drainage shall be provided to prevent lateral flow of water into the
base course and to provide for removal of seepage water that may
enter the base.
(4) Successive layers of the pavement shall be offset from the edge of
the underlying layer a distance equal to the course thickness of the
lower layer except when abutting existing construction. When the
asphalt layers of the Pavement abut a building foundation, barrier
curb or similar vertical surface, the abutting surface shall be
heavily painted with asphalt prior to construction of the asphalt
course. The surface course shall be finished ¼ inch above adjacent
flush construction to permit proper compaction.
b. Construction Materials and Procedures:
(1) Subsurface Drainage:
(a) Drainage tile, 6-inch perforated tile or other approved types
of similar capacity, here required by the Planning
Commission, or its duly authorized representative, shall be
bedded at a depth of not less than 12 inches below the
bottom elevation of the granular base course. Aggregate for
bedding and backfill shall all pass a 3/8-inch sieve and have
not more than 5 percent passing a No. 200 sieve. The slope
of subsurface drains shall be not less than 6 inches per 100
Article XII Off-Street Parking Regulations 12-6
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
feet. All such drains shall be properly connected to outlet
drains or to open ditches.
(b) All the catch basins, in pavement with granular base, shall
be constructed with weep holes, at sub-base level, to
provide for drainage of seepage water from the granular
layer. Weep holes shall be constructed of pipe, or other
material, having an opening not less than 1.5 inches clear
opening. Suitable provision shall be made to prevent
clogging of the opening. Three or more, weep holes shall
be suitably located around the perimeter of each catch
basin.
(2) Base courses shall consist of one or more of the following
materials. Construction procedures shall conform to the
requirements applicable to the base course selected.
(a) Asphalt Concrete Base Course – Materials and construction
shall conform to the current requirements of the Kentucky
Department of Highways: Specifications for Asphalt
Concrete Base Course, Class 1 except as noted herein:
(aa) Composition requirements of the mixture shall
conform to the gradation limits for Asphalt
Concrete base Course I or II set forth in Table 2 of
this Ordinance. Asphalt content used shall fall
within the range shown, and shall be approved by
the Planning Commission, or its duly authorized
representative.
(bb) Uncrushed gravel and natural sand may be used as
aggregate provided all other requirements of the
specification are compiled with.
(b) Asphalt Treated Base Course – Materials and construction
procedures shall conform to the following requirements:
(aa) Aggregates may be crushed or uncrushed material
conforming to the gradation requirements, shown in
Table 2 or this Ordinance for either Base III or Base
IV. The aggregate shall be composed of hard
durable particles and shall contain no more than a
total of 5 percent deleterious substances. In
addition, the sand equivalent of the aggregate shall
not be less than twenty-five (25) when tested in
accordance with AASHO Designation: T 176-56.
The contractor shall set a single gradation and
Article XII Off-Street Parking Regulations 12-7
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
asphalt content, within the specified limits, as the
Job Mix Formula to be used on the project. This
formula must be approved by the Planning
Commission, or its duly authorized representative,
prior to use. Gradation and asphalt content may
vary during construction within the following
tolerances:
% Passing ¾” or 3/8” Sieve -+ 10%
% Passing No. 8 Sieve -+ 8%
% Passing No. 50 Sieve -+ 6%
% Passing No. 100 Sieve -+ 3%
% Asphalt -+ .4%
(bb) Other construction requirements shall conform to
those specified by the Kentucky Department of
Highways for Asphalt Concrete except that a
gradation unit on the plant shall not be required
provided the aggregate can be controlled by other
means to produce a consistency uniform gradation.
(c ) Crushed Stone Base Course:
(aa) Crushed Stone Base Course shall conform to all the
current requirements of the Kentucky Department
of Highways for Dense Graded Aggregate Base
Course.
(3) Asphalt Concrete Surface Course – Materials and construction
shall conform to the current requirements of the Kentucky
Department of Highways for Asphalt Concrete Surface, Class I.
Surface Course mixture composition may conform to requirements
of either Surface Course I or II as set forth in Table 2 of this
Ordinance. Minimum course thickness shall be as stated in Table 1
of this Ordinance.
(4) Asphalt Prime and Tack Coat:
(a) Asphalt Prime shall conform to the Kentucky Department
of Highways requirements for Cutback Asphalt Emulsion
Primer Type L. Prime shall be applied to the surface of
granular base course at a rate of 0.20 to 0.40 gallons per
square yard, as directed by the city engineer, in
conformance with requirements of the referred to
specification.
Article XII Off-Street Parking Regulations 12-8
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
(b) Tack Coat shall consist of SS-1h, meeting the current
requirements of the Kentucky Department of Highways, it
shall, when directed by the Planning Commission, or its
duly authorized representative, be diluted with equal parts
of water. Application equipment and procedure shall
conform to the requirements of the Kentucky Department
of Highways for Tack Coats. Tack Coats shall be applied,
upon direction of the Planning Commission, or its duly
authorized representative, to the surface of asphalt courses
that have become dusty or dry from traffic use before the
subsequent course could be place, or in other circumstances
when the Planning Commission, or its duly authorized
representative, so directs.
2. Soil-Cement Base Course (with Asphalt Concrete Surface):
a. Description: Soil-Cement base course shall consist of soil and cement
uniformly mixed, moistened, compacted, finished and cured in accordance
with the specifications herein, and it shall conform to the lines, grades,
thickness and typical cross section shown on the plans.
b. Materials:
(1) Cement: Cement shall comply with the latest specifications for
cement, AASHO, M85, M134, M151; or ASTM C150, C175,
C205; of Federal SS-C-192B, SS-C-120 for the type specified. One
cubic foot or Portland cement shall be considered to weigh 94 lbs.
And 1 bbl. Of cement shall be considered to weigh 376 lbs.
(2) Water: Water shall be free from substances deleterious to the
hardening of the soil-cement.
(3) Soil: Soil shall consist of the material existing in the area to be
paved, of approved selection soil, or of a combination of these
materials proportioned as directed. The soil shall not contain gravel
or stone retained on a 3-inch sieve or more than 45 percent retained
on a No. 4 sieve.
c. Construction Methods:
(1) Preparation: Unsuitable soil or material shall be removed and
replaced with acceptable soil.
The subgrade shall be firm and able to support, without
displacement, the construction equipment and the compaction
hereinafter specified. Soft or yielding subgrade shall be corrected
and made stable, before construction proceeds.
Article XII Off-Street Parking Regulations 12-9
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
(2) Pulverization: The soil shall be so pulverized that, at the
completion of moist-mixing. 100 percent by dry weight passes a 1-
inch sieve, and a minimum of 80 percent passes a No. 4 sieve,
exclusive of gravel or stone retained on these sieves.
(3) Cement Application, Mixing, and Spreading: Mixing of the soil,
cement and water shall be accomplished either by the mixed-inplace
or the central-plant-mixed method.
No cement or soil-cement mixture shall be spread when the soil or
subgrade is frozen or when the air temperature is less than 40
degrees F. in the shade.
The percentage of moisture in the soil, at the time of cement
application, shall not exceed the quantity that will permit a uniform
and intimate mixture of soil and cement during mixing operations;
and it shall not exceed the specified optimum moisture content for
the soil-cement mixture. Any soil-and-cement mixture that has not
been compacted and finished shall not remain undisturbed for
more than 30 minutes. The soil-cement base course shall have a
thickness of not less than six (6) inches.
(4) Compaction: At the start of compaction, the percentage of moisture
in the mixture and in unpulverized soil lumps, based on oven-dry
weights, shall not be below me than two percentage points above
the specified optimum moisture content, and shall be less than that
quantity, which will cause the soil-cement mixture to become
unstable during compaction and finishing. The specified optimum
moisture content and density shall be determined in the field by a
moisture-density test, AASHO T134-57 or ASTM D550-57, on
representative samples of soil-cement mixture obtained from the
area being processed.
Prior to the beginning of compaction, the mixture shall be in a
loose condition for its full depth. The loose mixture then shall be
uniformly compacted to the specified density within two hours.
During compaction operations, shaping may be required to obtain
uniform compaction and required grade and cross section.
(5) Finishing: After compaction the surface of the soil-cement shall be
shaped to the required lines, grades and cross section. If necessary,
during shaping operations, the surface of the base shall be lightly
scarified to remove any tire imprints or smooth surfaces left by
equipment. The resulting surface shall then be compacted to the
specified density. Rolling shall be supplemented by broomdragging
if required.
Article XII Off-Street Parking Regulations 12-10
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
The moisture content of the surface material must be maintained at
lot less than its specified optimum moisture content during
finishing operations. Surface compaction and finishing shall be
done in such a manner as to produce, in not longer than two hours,
a smooth, dense surface free of compaction planes, cracks, ridges
or loose material.
Any portion of the soil-cement that has a density of 5 lbs. Or more
below that specified shall be corrected or replaced to meet these
specifications.
(6) Curing: After the soil-cement has been finished as specified herein,
it shall be protected against drying for 7 days by the application of
bituminous material.
The curing material shall be applied as soon as possible but not
later than 24 hours after the completion of finishing operations.
The finished soil-cement shall be kept continuously moist until the
curing material is placed.
The bituminous material specified shall be uniformly applied to the
surface of the completed soil-cement at the rate of approximately
0.2 gal. per square yard with approved heating and distributing
equipment.
At the same time the bituminous material is applied the soilcement
surface shall be dense, shall be free of all loose and
extraneous material, and shall contain sufficient moisture to
prevent penetration of the bituminous materials. Water shall be
applied in sufficient quantity to fill the surface voids of the soilcement
immediately before the bituminous curing material is
applied.
The curing material shall be maintained by the contractor during
the seven day protection period so that all of the soil-cement will
be covered effectively during this period.
Sufficient protection from freezing shall be given the soil-cement
for 7 days after its construction and until it has hardened.
(7) Surfacing: Asphaltic Concrete shall be applied to the soil-cement
base course as regulated in Section 12.0 M Subsection 1 b. of this
Ordinance.
Article XII Off-Street Parking Regulations 12-11
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
3. Concrete Parking Areas:
a. General Requirements – Thickness of Concrete Parking shall be:
(1) A minimum of five (5) inches for passenger cars and panel or pickup
truck parking.
(2) A minimum of six (6) inches for driveways accommodating light
trucks and for light truck parking.
(3) A minimum of seven (7) inches for heavier commercial or
industrial needs.
b. General Requirements – Concrete Mix (for areas subject to freeze-thaw
condition):
(1) Minimum cement content – 564 lbs./cu. yd. (6 U.S. bags).
(2) Maximum size of aggregate – 1-1/2 inches.
(3) Maximum water content – 0.49 lb./1 lb. Of cement (5.5 gal./bag).
(4) Maximum slump – Four (4) inches.
(5) Air entrainment – Maximum Size Entrained Air
Aggregate (Inches) (Percent )
1-1/4 5 +- 1
¾, 1 6 +- 1
3/8, ½ 7-1/2 +-1
c. Construction Procedures:
(1) All soft and yielding material and other portions of the subgrade
which will not compact readily when rolled or taped shall be
removed and replaced with suitable material placed and
compacted. The subgrade shall be thoroughly compacted with
suitable equipment so as to have uniform density at moisture
contents of not less than standard optimum (AASHO-T98).
(2) Longitudinal joint spacing shall not exceed 12.5 feet.
(3) Transverse joint spacing shall be at regular intervals of twenty (20)
feet.
(4) All transverse construction joints shall have a depth equal to oneforth
of the pavement thickness.
(5) Form offsets at radius points shall be at least two (2) feet.
(6) Pavement joints must be continuous through the curbs.
(7) Where curbs are required they shall be cast integrally.
(8) The pavement shall be struck-off, consolidated, and finished to the
grades shown on the plans. All catch basins and manhole castings
shall be boxed out and separated from the pavement with
expansion joint material. All except premolded or sawed joints
Article XII Off-Street Parking Regulations 12-12
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
shall be edged with a tool having a maximum radius of 1/8 inches.
Sawed and formed joints shall be cleaned and sealed before
opening to traffic. Final surface texture shall be that obtained with
a burlap drag. Curing shall be that obtained with a uniform
coverage of white membrane curing compound or by seven (7) day
coverage with white polyethylene of water-proof paper. The
completed pavement shall be closed to traffic for seven (7) days.
N. Design and Maintenance:
1. Screening and Landscaping: All open automobile parking areas containing more
than four (4) parking spaces shall be effectively screened on each side adjoining
or fronting on any property situated in a residential zone by a solid wall, fence or
densely planted compact hedge as regulated by Section 9.17 of this ordinance.
Ground cover, shrubs and trees shall be located and maintained so as not to
interfere with vehicular and pedestrian traffic on the property or with sight
distance clearance at entrances and exits.
2. Lighting: Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas shall be directed
away from property in any residential zone in such a way as not to create a
nuisance.
3. Ingress and egress to parking areas shall be limited to driveway entrances and
exits specified in parking area plans as approved by the Zoning Administrator.
Each required parking space shall be connected with a deeded right-of-way (by
means of adequate aisles as required by Section 12.0, H) which offers adequate
ingress and egress for automobiles.
4. Parking lots, garages and storage areas shall be so designed and constructed so
that all maneuvering into and out of each parking space takes place entirely within
property lines of lots, garages and/or storage areas.
SECTION 12.1 SPECIFIC OFF–STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS: The amount of
required off–street parking space required for uses, buildings, or additions thereto shall be
determined according to the following requirements, and the space, so required, shall be stated in
the application for zoning and building permit and shall be reserved for such use. Where more
than one use is located in the same building, each individual use shall be in accordance with the
off-street parking requirements of this section of the ordinance.
TYPE OF USES REQUIRED NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES
A. Airport, railroad passenger stations One (1) parking space per each four (4) seating
and bus terminals accommodations for waiting passengers, plus one
(1) parking space for each two employees on shift
of largest employment.
B. Automobile laundry One (1) parking space for each employee plus one
(1) space per owner or manager and reservoir
Article XII Off-Street Parking Regulations 12-13
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
space equal to five (5) times capacity of laundry.
TYPE OF USES REQUIRED NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES
C. Automobile service stations One (1) space for each gas pump island, plus two
(2) spaces for each working bay, plus one (1)
parking space for each employee at largest shift.
D. Beauty parlors and barber shops Two (2) parking spaces per barber and/or beauty
shop operator.
E. Bowling establishments Five (5) parking spaces for each lane; plus one (1)
space for each two employees on shift of largest
employment.
F. City, county, and federal One (1) parking space foe each two hundred (200)
government office building square feet of gross floor area.
G. Commercial or trade schools One (1) parking space for each two (2) students
based on design capacity of school, plus one (1)
parking space for each employee.
H. Convalescent homes, nursing One (1) parking space for each two (2) beds, plus
homes, rest homes, homes for one (1) space for each two (2) employees or staff
the aged and orphanages members, including nurses, on the shift of largest
employment, plus one (1) parking space per doctor.
I. Dance halls, pool and billiard One (1) parking space for each one hundred (100)
halls and exhibition halls square feet of floor area used for dancing or
without fixed seats assembly, or one (1) space for each four (4)
persons, based on design capacity, whichever is
greater, plus one (1) space for each two (2)
employees on shift of largest employment.
J. Dormitories, fraternities, sorority One (1) parking space per each two (2) residents
houses and other group plus one (1) parking space per owner or operator,
housing plus one (1) parking space per employee; or one (1)
parking space for each two (2) seats for membership
meetings, whichever is greater based on design
capacity.
K. Dwellings: One-family Two (2) parking spaces.
Two-Family Four (4) parking spaces, with individual access for
each dwelling unit, or a joint access in which no
parking is permitted on the access drive.
Article XII Off-Street Parking Regulations 12-14
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
TYPE OF USES REQUIRED NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES
L. Dwellings: Multi-family Two (2) parking spaces per unit, except in
developments with forty (40) total units or more,
one and one-half (1-1/2) parking spaces for one
bedroom units only, if approved by the Planning
and Zoning Commission.
M. Establishments for sale and One (1) parking space per each: two (2) employees
consumption on the premises on shift of largest employment plus one parking
of alcoholic beverages, food space for each:
and refreshments, or for carry A. One hundred forty (140) square feet of gross
out services floor area in a carry-out restaurant.
B. Forty (40) square feet of net floor area or two
(2) seating accommodations, based on
maximum seating capacity, whichever is
greater, in any restaurant with a bar.
C. Sixty-five (65) square feet of net floor area or
two and one-half (2-1/2) seating
accommodations based on maximum seating
capacity, whichever is greater, in a combination
restaurant.
D. Sixty (60) square feet of gross floor area for any
Fast Service Restaurant.
N. Fire Stations One (1) parking space per each person on duty on
largest shift.
O. Hospitals One (1) parking space for each two (2) beds, plus
one (1) space for each two (2) employees or staff
members, including nurses, on the shift of largest
employment, plus one (1) parking space per doctor.
P. Laundromat One (1) parking space for each two (2) washing
machines.
Q. Libraries, museums and art One (1) parking space per each four (4) seats in
galleries rooms for public assembly or one (1) parking space
for each fifty (50) square feet of gross floor area for
use by the public, whichever is greater, plus one (1)
space for each two (2) employees on shift of largest
employment.
Article XII Off-Street Parking Regulations 12-15
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
TYPE OF USES REQUIRED NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES
R. Medical and dental offices Five (5) parking spaces per each practitioner, plus
and clinics one (1) parking space per each two (2) employees
or one (1) parking space per each two hundred
(200) square feet of gross floor area in the building,
plus one (1) parking space for each two (2)
employees, whichever is greater.
S. Mortuaries or funeral homes One (1) parking space for each four (4) seats in the
main chapel or public assembly area based on
maximum seating capacity,
plus one (1) parking space for each funeral vehicle and
employee, or in the case of no fixed seats, one (1)
parking space for each fifty (50) square feet of floor
area in parlors or service rooms, or one (1) parking
space for each four (4) persons based on designed
capacity of building, whichever is greater, plus one
(1) parking space for each funeral vehicle and
employee.
T. Offices for professional, business One (1) parking space for each two hundred (200)
and financial, real estate and square feet of gross floor area.
business purposes other than
medical offices and/or clinics
U. Post Offices One (1) parking space for each four hundred (400)
square feet of gross floor area, plus one (1) parking
space for each two (2) employees on the shift of
largest employment.
V. Private clubs, boarding houses, One (1) parking space for each guest sleeping room,
and lodge halls or one (1) parking space per each four (4) fixed
seats in the main assembly area, whichever is
greater, plus one (1) parking space for each two(2)
employees, or in the case of no fixed seats, one (1)
parking space for each two (2) employees.
W. Retail and personal service stores One (1) parking space foe ach two hundred (200)
square feet of gross leasable area.
Article XII Off-Street Parking Regulations 12-16
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
TYPE OF USES REQUIRED NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES
X. Schools – Elementary, junior high One (1) parking space per teacher and administrator
and equivalent private or or one (1) space for four (4) seats in the auditorium,
parochial schools stadium, and other places of assembly or facilities
available to the public based on the maximum
seating capacity, whichever is greater.
Y. Schools – senior high, trade and Six (6) spaces per each room to be used for class
vocational, college and instructions or administrative offices of one (1)
universities, and equivalent space for each four (4) seats in the auditorium,
private and parochial schools stadium, and other places of assembly or facilities
available to the public based on the maximum
seating capacity, whichever is greater.
Z. Shopping centers Five and one-tenth (5.1) parking spaces for each
1,000 square feet of gross leasable area. One
parking space for each 182 square feet of gross
leasable area.
AA. Stadium and sports arenas One (1) parking space for each four (4) seats based
on a maximum seating capacity, plus one (1) space
for each two (2) employees on shift of largest
employment.
BB. Theaters, churches, auditoriums, One (1) parking space for each four (4) seats based
and places of assembly on a maximum seating capacity, plus one (1) space
with fixed seats for each two (2) employees on shift of largest
employment.
CC. Theaters, auditoriums, churches One (1) parking space for each four (4) people in
and places of assembly designed capacity of building, or one parking space
without fixed seats per one hundred (100) square feet in main
auditorium or assembly area, whichever is greater,
plus one (1) parking space for each two (2)
employees on shift at largest employment.
DD. Tourist homes, cabins, motels, One (1) parking space for each sleeping room or
or hotels suite, plus one (1) space per each two (2) employees
on shift of largest employment.
Article XII Off-Street Parking Regulations 12-17
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
TYPE OF USES REQUIRED NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES
EE. Industrial establishments, Two parking spaces for each three (3) employees
including manufacturing, the total number of parking spaces being the total
research and testing number of employees on any two (2) consecutive
laboratories shifts having the largest number of employees based
on design capacity, plus one (1) parking space for
each company vehicle operating from the premises.
FF. Wholesale establishments, One (1) parking space for each employee, plus one
warehouse and storage (1) parking space for each company vehicle
buildings operating from the premises.
Article XII Off-Street Parking Regulations 12-18
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
TABLE 1
THICKNESS REQUIREMENTS OF SURFACE AND BASE COURSES
FOR AUTOMOBILE AND TRUCK PARKING FACILITY PAVEMENTS1
Type of
Vehicle
Soil
Classification2
Thickness of Surface and Base - Inches
ASPHALT BASE
Type I or II Type III or IV GRANULAR BASE
Automobile
Parking
Facilities
Truck
Parking
Facilities
A
B
C
A
B
C
1-4
1-5
1-6
1-6
1-7
1-8
2-4
2-5
2-6
2-6
2-7
2-8
3-4
3-6
3-8
4-6
4-8
4-10
1 Thickness of surface and base is shown for each soil classification and street
classification. The first number indicates the minimum thickness of Asphalt Concrete
which may be comprised of Asphalt Concrete Surface Course, Type I or II, if the surface
course does not exceed two (2) inches. Then surface thickness is, more than 2 inches,
Asphalt Concrete Base I or II, as specified in Table 2, may be used for all but the upper 1
inch wearing course which must be Asphalt Concrete Surface Course I or II, as specified
in Table 2. The second figure indicated the thickness of base course of the type indicated.
For example 1-4 indicates 1 inch surface and 4 inches base.
2 Soils are classified into three (3) groups indicating their relative effectiveness s subgrade.
A. – Granular soils that drain well; sand, gravel or combination of sand and gravel.
B. – Silty clays, or lean clays, that retain considerable strength when wet. These are
average subgrade soils.
C. – Heavy clay soils that lost most of their strength when wet.
Article XII Off-Street Parking Regulations 12-19
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance June 2011 NKAPC
TABLE 2
COMPOSITION LIMITS FOR ASPHALT MIXTURES
Sieve
Size
PERCENT PASSING BY WEIGHT
Asphalt Concrete Asph. Treated base
Base I Base II Surface I Surface II Base III Base IV
1 ½”
1”
¾”
½”
3/8”
No. 4
No. 8
No. 16
No. 50
No. 100
No. 200
Asphalt
100
85-100
50-80
30-50
25-45
15-35
5-20
3-10
3.5-6.0
100
80-100
54-76
37-57
25-45
15-35
5-20
3-10
4.0-7.0
100
80-100
55-75
35-60
25-50
9-21
5-14
3-7
5.0-8.0
100
75-95
60-85
45-70
15-40
5-25
4-10
6.0-9.0
100
70-100
40-80
25-60
5-30
3-15
3.5-6.0
100
70-100
40-100
15-50
5-25
4.0-8.0
Article XIII Off-Street Loading And/Or Unloading Regulations 13-1
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
ARTICLE XIII
OFF–STREET LOADING AND/OR UNLOADING REGULATIONS
SECTION 13.0: For all buildings and structures erected, altered or extended, and all uses of
land established as specified herein, after the effective date of this Ordinance, off–street loading
and/or unloading facilities shall be provided as required by the regulations herein. However,
when a building permit has been issued prior to the date of the adoption of this Ordinance, and
provided that construction has not begun within ninety (90) days of such effective date, off-street
loading and/or unloading facilities in the amounts required by this ordinance shall prevail.
SECTION 13.1 OFF-STREET LOADING AND/OR UNLOADING – USE AND BULK
REGULATIONS: Off-street loading and/or unloading facilities shall be provided in
accordance with the following regulations:
A. SPACES REQUIRED – Every building structure, or part thereof, erected and occupied
for manufacturing, storage, warehousing, department stores, wholesale stores, retail
stores, market, hotel, hospital, laundry, dry cleaning, dairy, mortuary and other uses
similarly involving the receipt of distribution of vehicles, materials, or merchandise and
having up to 5,000 square feet of gross floor area shall be provided with at least one
loading and/or unloading space. One additional loading and/or unloading space shall be
provided for every additional 10,000 square feet, or fraction thereof, of gross floor area in
the building.
If sufficient proof can be shown that less than these requirements (only that part which
has to do with over five thousand (5,000) square feet) will be satisfactory for the
operation in question, the Planning Commission may reduce these requirements.
B. Size of Off-Street Loading and/or Unloading Space – Each off-street loading and/or
unloading space shall be at least twelve (12) feet in width and at least forty-eight (48) feet
in length, exclusive of aisle and maneuvering space, and shall have a vertical clearance of
at least fourteen (14) feet; provided, however, that when it is demonstrated that a
particular loading and/or unloading space will be used by shorter trucks, the Planning
Commission may reduce the minimum length to thirty-five (35) feet.
C. Location – All required loading and/or unloading spaces shall be located on the same
zoning lots as the use served. No loading and/or unloading space for vehicles over twoton
capacity shall be closer than fifty (50) feet to any property in a residential zone unless
completely enclosed by a fence, wall or screen as regulated by Article XI of this
Ordinance. No loading and/or unloading space shall be located in any required yards
except as herein provided.
Article XIII Off-Street Loading And/Or Unloading Regulations 13-2
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
D. Access – Each required off-street loading and/or unloading space shall be designed with
direct access via an approved access drive, to a deeded right-of-way which offers
satisfactory ingress and egress for trucks. Access drives or aisles shall be laid out with a
width of at least twelve (12) feet for one-way circulation and at least twenty-four (24)
feet for two-way circulation.
Off-street loading and/or unloading space shall be so designed and constructed so that all
maneuvering for loading and/or unloading can take place entirely within the property
lines of the premises. Such off-street loading and/or unloading space shall be located as
not to hinder the free movement of pedestrians and vehicles over a sidewalk, street, road,
highway or deeded right-of-way.
E. Enlargement of Building – The off-street loading and/or unloading requirements, as listed
in this article of the Ordinance, shall apply at any time any building is enlarged or
increased in capacity by adding floor area.
F. Design and Maintenance:
1. Surfacing – All open off-street loading and/or unloading spaces shall be paved
subject to the provisions in Article XII Section 12.0 M., 3, of this Ordinance.
2. Lighting – Any lighting used to illuminate off-street loading and/or unloading
areas shall be directed away from property in any residential zone in such a way
as not to create a nuisance.
3. Space allocated to any off street loading and/or unloading space – shall not be
used to satisfy the space requirements for any off-street parking facilities or
portion thereof.
G. Off-Street Loading and/or Unloading Plan Approval Required – Plans for all loading
and/or unloading facilities shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for review and
for compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance and such other pertinent ordinances
of the city of Highland Heights. Such plans shall show the exact proposed layout of all
loading and/or unloading space, drives and accessories, entrances and exists, type of
surface to be used, typical cross sections of pavement, base and subbase, location of
lighting facilities, storm drainage facilities, proposed grade of off-street loading and/or
unloading area, and such other information or plans as the circumstances may warrant.
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-1
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance October 2011 NKAPC
ARTICLE XIV
SIGN REGULATIONS
SECTION 14.0 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS: The regulations set forth herein shall apply
and govern signs in all zones except as otherwise specifically provided within this ordinance.
SECTION 14.1 GENERAL RULES, REGULATIONS, AND LIMITATIONS:
A. All business and identification signs, shall be deemed accessory uses and all advertising
signs, shall be deemed non accessory uses, as defined in Section 7.0 of this Ordinance.
B. No sign shall be erected, maintained or continued unless it is in full compliance with the
regulations for the zone in which it is located, all applicable provisions and regulations of
this ordinance or any other applicable laws, codes or ordinances of the city. The Zoning
Administrator shall have the duty and authority to remove or cause to have removed any
sign not in full compliance with all applicable provisions and regulations of this
ordinance or any other applicable laws, codes, or ordinances of the city when the owner
or agent has failed to comply within the time specified by the Zoning Administrator to
make said sign comply. Said owner or agent shall bear full costs of such removal and
shall be billed accordingly.
C. No signs shall be erected, maintained, replaced, relocated, repaired, or restored within a
distance of six hundred sixty (660) feet of the right-of-way or any interstate highways,
limited access highway of turnpike except as provided for in KRS 177.830-177.890 and
approved by the Kentucky State Highway Department District Office Number 6.
D. Time Schedule for Compliance of Sign Regulations: Compliance with the provisions of
this Article of the ordinance shall be according to the following time schedule.
1. All new signs shall comply when erected.
2. All signs becoming nonconforming due to this ordinance shall be registered by
owner or agent with the Zoning Administrator within six (6) consecutive calendar
months of the effective date of this ordinance. The owner or agent of any sign
legally erected but which has become nonconforming because of this ordinance
and not registered within the prescribed time, shall be dealt with as specified in
Section 15.9 of this ordinance.
E. No sign constituting a nuisance, because of light, glare, focus, noise, animation, flashing,
intensity of illumination as to unduly disturb the use of surrounding properties, as
determined by the Zoning Administrator, or causing a traffic hazard, shall be erected,
maintained, or continued in any zone.
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-2
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance October 2011 NKAPC
F. No radio, phonograph, tape recorder, whistle, bell, gong, siren, or other sound or noise–
making or transmitting device or instrument shall be allowed, permitted, or continued in
connection with any sign or may it be used separately for advertising purposes in any
zone.
G. No sign shall be erected, maintained, or continued which covers any window, doorway,
or any other opening which provides ventilation or exit facilities.
H. No sign shall be erected, maintained, or continued which is misleading, fraudulent,
obscene, immoral, indecent, or unsightly in character as determined by the Zoning
Administrator.
I. No sign, except those of a governmental entity, shall be erected, maintained or continued
unless the following provisions are complied with; and said provisions shall go into effect
ninety (90) consecutive calendar days after the effective date of this ordinance.
1. The name of the company or person owning, maintaining or erecting said sign is
plainly displayed thereon when said company or person is registered with the
Zoning Administrator.
2. The name and address of the company or person owning, maintaining or erecting
said sign is plainly displayed thereon when said company or person is not
registered with the Zoning Administrator.
J. No sign shall be erected, maintained or continued over or into any street, public way or
alley, unless specifically provided for within this ordinance.
K. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this ordinance for any person to fasten, place, paint
or attach in any way any sign, handbill, poster, advertisement, or notice of any kind,
whether political or otherwise or cause the same to be done in or upon any curbstone,
lamp post, telephone pole, telegraph pole, electric light or power pole, hydrant, bridge,
culvert, public drinking fountain, public trash container, courtesy benches, rest station
building, tree, or in or upon any portion of any public sidewalk, street or sign except as
specifically permitted within this Ordinance.
L. No sign shall be erected, maintained, or continued upon the inside of a curve of a street
which causes any interference to sight distance in the opinion of the Zoning
Administrator.
M. No sign shall be erected, maintained or continued which displays flashing or intermittent
lights, or lights changing degrees or intensity, with changes alternating on less than a five
(5) second cycle.
N. No sign shall be erected, maintained, or continued in any zone which does not comply
fully with Section 11.0 of this ordinance except as specifically permitted within this
ordinance.
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-3
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance October 2011 NKAPC
O. No sign shall be erected, maintained or continued unless the sign complies with all of the
following regulations:
1. Is erected and maintained to advertise a use specifically permitted in the zone in
which the sign is located, or for a nonconforming use subject to the limitations
contained in Section 9.12, Subsection C, 2 of this ordinance regarding
nonconforming uses.
2. Is clearly incidental, customary to and commonly associated with the operation of
the use being advertised.
3. Is established and controlled under and by the same ownership as the use being
advertised.
4. Is limited in location to the premises on which the use being advertised is located.
5. Is limited in subject matter to the name, design, picture or phone number and
address of owner, operator, builder, sales agent, managing agent, lessor, lessee, of
the premises or of the activities (including merchandise handled or services
rendered) on the premises on which such sign is located and does not include any
general commercial advertising unrelated to or extending in substantial degree
beyond the specifically permitted subject.
6. Compliance with the exemptions listed in Section 14.2 of this Article of the
ordinance.
P. When any sign becomes defective or dangerous as determined by the Building Inspector,
the Zoning Administrator shall have the power and the authority to remove or cause to
have removed such sign when the owner or agent has failed to comply within the time
specified by the Zoning Administrator to repair or make said sign safe or has failed to
satisfy the Building Department that the sign is not defective or dangerous. The owner or
agent of said sign shall bear the full costs of such removal and shall be billed accordingly.
If the Building Department determines that said sign is of possible immediate danger to
persons or vehicles, which may be passing nearby, the Zoning Administrator shall place
or cause to have placed, signs or barriers indicating such danger.
Q. Whenever any sign which does not comply with the provisions and regulations of this
ordinance collapses, burns, or if said sign is removed from its location, except of normal
maintenance, said sign shall not be replaced or reconstructed, except in full compliance
with all of the provisions and regulations of this ordinance.
R. The Zoning Administrator shall have the power and authority to remove or cause to be
removed any and all signs which the City Engineer determines to be a traffic hazard,
when the owner or agent responsible for the maintenance of said sign has failed to
eliminate such traffic hazards within two (2) weeks from the date that the written notice
is mailed by the Zoning Administrator. Said owner or agent shall bear the full costs of
such removal and shall be billed accordingly.
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-4
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance October 2011 NKAPC
S. Except as otherwise specified in this ordinance, signs shall be in conformance with the
City’s Building Code where applicable and shall be subject to the inspection and
approval by the Building Inspector.
T. Except as herein provided, signs shall be permanently attached to the ground or on the
building which the sign is to serve. Signs located on portable type vehicles shall not be
permitted or continued in any zone, except that portable or temporary signs may be
permitted to advertise public, semi-public, charitable or religious fund raising programs
or events. Said sign may be erected thirty (30) consecutive calendar days prior to the day
of the program or event and removed by the owner or agent within two (2) consecutive
days following the day of the program. Said portable or temporary signs may also be
permitted to advertise the opening of a new business for a period not to exceed thirty (30)
consecutive days. All such signs shall not be located closer than five (5) feet from any
property line, exceed a height of eight (8) feet, nor exceed a total area of thirty-two (32)
square feet.
U. A temporary banner type sign attached to the building may be used to advertise special
sales or changes in operation. A banner type sign shall meet the requirements of Section
14.5, F (class 6) except that the total area of the temporary and permitted permanent class
5 and 6 signs shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) percent of the area allowed for a
class 5 or 6 sign. Temporary banner signs shall not be displayed for more than total of
ninety (90) days per year for any business. A permit is required for each temporary
business sign.
V. A permit for a temporary or promotional sign may be issued for a period not to exceed
thirty (30) days. A period of ninety (90) days must elapse before another such permit is
issued for the same business, agency, or to the same individual. The maximum size of
temporary or promotional sign is thirty two (32) square feet.
The City Clerk shall, upon payment of the required permit fee, affix a numbered permit
to the sign. Upon return by the applicant of the sign to the city offices within fourteen
(14) days of the date of expiration of the permit, the City Clerk shall refund to the
applicant five ($5.00) dollars, and shall cancel the temporary sign permit. If the applicant
does not return the sign to the city offices within fourteen (14) days of the date of
expiration of the permit, no refund will be made and the refundable portion of the fee
shall be retained as minimum charges for the removal of the sign incurred by the City.
The Zoning Administrator shall have the power and authority to remove or cause to have
removed any and all signs under this section for which the temporary sign permit has
expired.
The applicant shall bear the full costs of such removal and shall be billed accordingly.
W. Advertising and directional signs on vehicles or trailers.
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-5
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance October 2011 NKAPC
No supplemental advertising or directional signs shall be displayed on any vehicles or
trailers located on (or off) the property. This section is directed towards the practice of
attaching signs to vehicles or trailers that are parked in a location that will provide
signage that is additional to what is permitted by the sign ordinance. This shall not be
construed to prevent or restrict the use of delivery or service vehicles.
X. Electronic message signs shall be allowed only by approval of the Planning Commission
under the following conditions. The Commission may permit such a sign only when the
Commission finds that it would not detract from adjoining and nearby properties and the
public welfare, and when the following design standards are met:
1. Electronic message signs may be permitted only Class 7, Class 8 and Class 9
signs.
2. No portion of the electronic message display or board including the color or other
background elements shall be permitted to change more than once per minute.
3. That not more than seventy-five percent (75%) of the sign area may be devoted to
electronic message display of board area.
4. Any apparent motion of visual message, caused by, but not limited to, the illusion
of moving objects, moving patterns or board of light, expanding, contracting, or
rotating shapes or other similar animated effects shall not be permitted, including
running or scrolling messages.
5. Only one electronic message sign may be permitted per zoning lot for each public
street on which the development fronts.
6. All electronic message signs shall have automatic dimming capability that adjusts
the brightness to the ambient light at all times of the day and night.
SECTION 14.2 EXEMPTIONS:
A. The following signs shall be exempted from all the provisions and regulations of this
section except for Section 14.3 and 14.4 of this ordinance and shall be permitted in any
zone without a fee. This exemption shall not be constructed as relieving the owner or
agent of the sign form the responsibility of its erection, maintenance and its compliance
with all applicable provisions and regulations of this ordinance of any other applicable
laws, codes or ordinances regulating same.
1. One (1) real estate sign per net acre not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet in
outside area; single of double faced; maximum height of eight (8) feet, which
advertises the sale, rental or lease of the premises on which said sign is located.
Said sign shall not be animated; may be illuminated by only be concealed
lighting, and only until 10:00 p.m. Such signs shall be removed by the owners or
agents within ten (10) consecutive calendar days after the sale, rental, or lease of
the premises.
2. Professional name plates not exceeding one (1) square foot in outside area, single
of double faced, shall not be animated or illuminated.
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-6
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance October 2011 NKAPC
3. Bulletin board not over twelve (12) square feet in outside area; single or double
faced; maximum height of eight (8) feet, for public, charitable or religious
institutions when the same is located on the premises of said institutions. Said
sign shall not be animated; may be illuminated but only by concealed lighting,
and only until 10:00 P.M.
4. Signs not over twenty (20) square feet in outside area; single or double faced;
maximum height of eight (8) feet; denoting the (person-firm) architect, engineer
or contractor when placed upon the premises where construction work is being
performed. Said sign shall be removed by owner or agent within ten (10)
consecutive calendar days after completion of project of that (person-firms) part
of project.
5. Memorial signs or tablets, containing the name of the building and date or
erection when built into the walls of the building and constructed of bronze, brass,
marble, stone or other incombustible materials.
6. Traffic signs, provided that said signs are designed and located in accordance with
the “Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices” as prepared by the National
Joint Committee on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, U.S. Department of
Commerce, Bureau of Public Roads and other governmental single house number,
name plates and other legal notices railroad crossing signs and other signs
indicating danger and/or aid to service or safety.
7. Temporary signs where permitted or required by the Zoning Administrator, to
fulfill requirements of this ordinance or other resolutions or regulations imposed
by a governmental entity.
8. Awnings shall be supported without posts by an iron bracket, or be an iron
framework attached firmly to the building. The frames and supports for all such
awnings shall be securely attached to the walls of the building upon which such
awnings shall be placed, and no such awning shall project more than ten (10) feet
beyond the building lines. The lower most point of the frame of such awning shall
not be less than eight (8) feet about the sidewalk and the lowest part of the curtain
scallop or valence shall be at least seven (7) feet above the sidewalk when in use.
The bracket or other devices, frames and supports for the Purpose used in the
method of attaching same to the building shall be such as to clear the heads of
pedestrians at the building line. The sidewalk and walkway must be left wholly
unobstructed to insure the safety of pedestrians and shall be subject to the
approval of the Zoning Administrator.
9. Signs on awning structures or awnings other than canopy or marquees, provided,
however, that such signs shall not be animated not illuminated and may contain
no lettering or advertising other than the name of the building, the name of the
owner or occupant of said building and the street address.
10. Repainting or cleaning of an advertising structure or the changing of the
advertising copy or message thereon, unless a structural change is made.
11. Sign inside a building, but shall not include signs within open malls or open
courts.
12. Portable or temporary signs may be permitted to advertise charitable or religious
fund raising programs. Said sign may be erected fourteen (14) consecutive
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-7
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance October 2011 NKAPC
calendar days prior to the day of the program and removed by the owner or agent
within two (2) consecutive days following the day of the program.
13. Short term temporary sings: Short-term temporary signs may be erected in the
public right-of-way, but not into or over the street. Short-term temporary sings
may only be erected for not more than four (4) days in a thirty (30) day period. No
permit is required for a short-term temporary sign. Examples of short-term
temporary sings are real estate open houses and yard sale. Maximum size of shortterm
temporary sign is nine (9) square feet.
14. Off site directional signs for any business located and operated in Highland
Heights are permitted provided they are included as part of the Streetscape Plan
for the US 27 Corridor and are approved by the Planning Commission and City
Council. All off site directional signs shall comply with any sign ordinances or
regulations applicable to signs located on or adjacent to state highways. Signs not
proposed on the original Streetscape Plan will require approval of an amendment
to the existing Streetscape Plan.
SECTION 14.3 SIGN PERMIT REQUIRED FOR ERECTION OF SIGNS:
A. No sign shall be erected, except as exempted or specified within this ordinance, until all
required fees have been paid to the proper authorities or their agents and a permit has
been issued for such by the Building Department.
1. Before any sign receives a permit for the Building Department, the Planning
Commission shall have first reviewed and approved the sign for compliance with
City comprehensive planning and zoning standards and controls.
2. If any sign is removed and a new sign is erected in its place, a permit shall be
obtained the same as if a new sign were erected at a new location subject to all
requirements enumerated herein.
3. If any sign is removed for maintenance and replaced on the same supports, a new
permit will not be deemed necessary if the size or type of sign is not changed.
4. If the sign is removed from one location and erected at a new location, a new
permit shall be obtained.
5. Alteration or enlargement of any signs shall require a permit the same as for a
new sign.
6. No permit shall be granted until after an application has been filed with the
Building Inspector showing the plans and specifications, including dimensions,
materials, and details of construction of proposed structure not until all provisions
herein have been met.
SECTION 14.4 APPLICATION FOR SIGN PERMIT:
A. Application for a sign permit shall be made and submitted at the office of the Zoning
Administrator on the appropriate forms furnished by said Administrator.
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-8
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance October 2011 NKAPC
B. If any information is left off of the application or if any of the submitted information is
misrepresented on the application, the permit shall be denied or shall become null and
void if already issued, regardless of actual construction being started or completed.
C. Any sign not erected or constructed as represented on the application upon which the
permit was issued shall not be construed as a hardship case, but shall be construed as a
misrepresentation of facts on the application and a violation of this ordinance and the
owner or agent shall be given a two (2) week notice to remove said sign or correct the
error.
SECTION 14.5 SIGN PERMIT FEES: Sign permit fees shall be as determined by the
legislative body.
SECTION 14.6 PERMITTED USE AND LOCATION OF SIGNS: The following classes
of signs may be erected and maintained in the following zone district:
A. Residential development/uses: All residential zones (R-RE through R-3):
1. Permitted signs: Ground mounted sign: Class 8 sign, but not to exceed five feet in
height to identify the name of the residential development, subject to Planning
Commission approval.
B. Residential building/use: Including all retail zones (except SC-Shopping Center) GC,
LSC, MLU and ROD District:
1. Permitted Signs:
a. Freestanding signs: Class 7
b. Building sign: Class 5, or Class 6
C. Shopping Center – SC Zone:
1. Permitted signs:
a. Freestanding signs: Class 9, Pole or Ground Mounted
b. Building sign: Class 5
D. Office Building/use: In all PO, MLU, ROD or Commercial retail zones:
1. Permitted signs:
a. Freestanding signs: Class 8
b. Building sign: Class 5 or Class 6, relating to office building use
E. Manufacturing of Industrial Use – MLU, or I-Zone:
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-9
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance October 2011 NKAPC
1. Permitted signs:
a. Freestanding signs: Class 8
b. Building sign: Class 5 or Class 6
F. Planned Development: PUD, MLU, or ROD District Zones: The Planning Commission
may make modifications to the sign applications in a PUD, MLU, or ROD district per the
commissions Stage Two Development Plan approval process provided that any
modification shall further the purpose and intent of the district and improve the overall
design integrity of the development building or site in question.
SECTION 14.7 CLASSIFICATION OF SIGNS: The following classification of signs shall
be deemed toe include all signs permitted in any zone unless other signs are specifically listed
and provided for. Classification of all signs shall be determined by the zoning administrator.
(Permitted use and location of signs – See Section 14.6).
A. Class 1:
B. Class 2: The following signs meeting the following specifications shall constitute Class 2
and shall be only business or identification signs, as defined herein.
Advertising sale material as specified in Section 14.2 may be placed in the windows of
retail business establishments, provided that not more than 50% of any window area may
be occupied, or covered up by advertised material. Non permanent advertising sale
materials displayed in windows may be exhibited for a period of not more than 30 days.
Business proprietors and/or store managers shall be responsible for maintaining
compliance with, and the timely removal of advertisement materials in accordance with
the above standard and time limitation. The commercial advertising and sales materials
shall not be displayed on any building, structure, or premises except as provided in these
regulations.
C. Class 3: Parking and directional signs as approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission per the site development plan approval process.
D. Class 4:
E. Class 5: The following building mounted signs meeting the following specifications shall
constitute Class 5 and shall be primarily business or identification signs, as defined
herein.
1. Structural type – flat wall sign, single faced only
2. Maximum size of individual sign –
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-10
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance October 2011 NKAPC
a. One-half square feet for each linear foot of building wall upon which the
sign or signs are to be located.
b. Maximum size of letters shall not exceed 32 inches in height. Business
logos may exceed the 32 inches height restriction provided that its size
shall be governed by what is considered an appropriate scale and harmony
for the building as approved by the Planning Commission, and provided
further that the permitted overall maximum sign area is not exceeded.
c. The total size for individual letter signs shall be computed by taking the
area enclosed within a rectangle that is needed to completely encompass
each letter or insignia of the sign and including the area necessary for
proper spacing of individual letters.
3. Maximum height above grade at top of sign – attached flat to building, but shall
not exceed above or beyond any wall of the building as defined in Section 7.0 of
this Ordinance.
4. Limitation on number of signs – only one sign for each lot on which the primary
permitted use is located except that where a building has more than one store front
as in an attached shopping complex or an attached group of buildings only one
such sign shall be permitted for each individual separate business. Separate
business shall be construed to mean space allotted to the operation of one firm,
company, or corporation having separate ownership, if separate rental or lease,
except in a case where a business occupies more than one store front within a
single building, the Planning Commission may permit an additional sign for each
store front access provided that the applicant can show to the satisfaction of the
Commission that additional business signage is appropriate for the type of
business activities planned for the retail space. The overall impact, or number of
signs should not exceed what would otherwise be permitted if each store front
were leased to separate owners or businesses. A professional office, or
manufacturing building with interior access to each business within such a
complex shall not be considered as containing separate business for this purpose,
but shall have only one such sign regardless of how many firms, companies or
corporations having separate ownership, rental or lease within said building. A
Class 5 sign may be utilized to identify special service service/entrance of any
business activity (i.e., garden store, auto service) provided that such signs do not
exceed 12 inches in height.
5. Other limitations –
a. Shall neither be flashing or animated; however it may include the ability to
change the message
b. May be illuminated, but only from a concealed light source
c. In all shopping complex of unified buildings, small tenant signs must be
similar in height and construction. Major tenants shall be permitted unique
signs – provided they are compatible with the style and character of other
signs of the complex
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-11
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance October 2011 NKAPC
F. Class 6: The following building mounted signs meeting the following specifications shall
constitute a Class 6 sign, and shall be primarily business or identification signs, as
defined herein.
1. Structural type – flat sign, single faced only
2. Maximum size of single sign –
a. One-half (1/2) square feet of area for each linear foot of building wall
upon which the sign or signs are to be located
b. Maximum size of letters shall be 32 inches in height
3. Maximum height above grade at top of sign – attached flat to building but shall
not extend or beyond any wall of any of the building as defined in Section 7.0 of
this Ordinance
4. Limitation on number of signs – one wall mounted sign for each lot on which the
primary permitted use is located, except when a building has more than one street
frontage a second wall mounted sign may be permitted by the Planning
Commission when demonstrated to the Commission that the additional sign
would not adversely impact neighboring properties. Where a building has more
than one such sign shall be permitted for each individual separate business.
Separate business shall be constructed to mean space allotted to the operation of
one firm, company, or manufacturing building with interior access to each
business within such a complex shall not be considered as containing separate
businesses for this purpose, but shall have only one such sign regardless of how
many firms, companies or corporations having separate ownership, rental or lease
within said building. A Class 5 sign may be utilized to identify special
service/entrance of any business activity (i.e., garden store, auto service) provided
that such letters do not exceed 12 inches in height as approved per development
plan approval by the planning and zoning commission.
5. Other limitations –
a. Shall neither be flashing nor animated; however may include the ability to
change the message
b. May be illuminated, but only from a concealed light source
c. In all shopping complex of unified buildings, small tenant signs must be
similar in height and construction. Major tenants may be permitted unique
signs provided that such signs are compatible with the style and character
of other signs in the complex and with the design of the building
G. Class 7: The following free standing monument signs meeting the following
specifications shall constitute a Class 7 sign and shall be primarily business or
identification sign, as defined herein.
1. Structural type – Monument, ground mounted sign; single or double face. A pole
mounted sign may be permitted by the Planning Commission in place of a
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-12
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance October 2011 NKAPC
monument sign when visibility would otherwise be impaired or restricted relative
to traffic safety, per Section 11.0 provided that such signs shall not exceed 14 feet
in height, while maintaining a minimum ground clearance of 8 feet.
2. Maximum size of single sign - 40 square feet.
3. Maximum height above grade at top of sign – Eight (8) feet above finished grade.
The height of a ground sign shall be measured from the finished grade of the lot,
and may not be elevated by mounding or berming, or other structural means to
otherwise increase the height of said sign. Provided that when the base of a sign is
below the elevation of the abutting street, the Planning Commission may allow an
adjustment of the height of the sign per site development approval.
4. Limitations – Only one free standing sign may be erected for each lot or building
site upon which the primary uses are located regardless of the number of
buildings on the site or lot, except when a building has more than one street
frontage having not less than 75 feet of frontage on a second street a second sign
may be permitted by the Planning Commission when demonstrated to the
satisfaction to the Commission that a second monument sign is necessary for the
convenience and safety of the general public.
5. Other limitations –
a. Such a sign may neither by flashing nor animated; however, may include
the ability to change the message.
b. No part of any pole or ground sign shall be closer than five (5) feet from
any property line.
c. All signs shall be located in such a manner that they are wholly visible
from the centerline of the abutting street which the sign faces from a
minimum distance of 250 feet. No sign shall be located in such a manner
that it partially or wholly obstructs adjacent signs, as viewed from the
centerline of the abutting street from a minimum distance of 250 feet.
d. May be illuminated but only from a concealed light source.
H. Class 8: The following signs meeting the following specifications shall constitute Class 8
and shall be only business or identification signs, as defined herein.
1. Structural type monument, ground mounted sign, single or double faced, a pole
mounted sign may be permitted by the Planning Commission in place of a
monument sign when visibility would otherwise be impaired or restricted relative
to traffic safety, provided that such signs shall not exceed 11 feet in height, with a
minimum ground clearance of 8 feet.
2. Maximum size of a single sign. Thirty-five (35) square feet.
3. Maximum height above grade at top of sign. Seven (7) feet above finished grade.
The height of a ground mounted sign shall be measured from the finished grade of
the lot, and may not be elevated by mounding or berming, or other structural
means to otherwise increase the height of said signs; provided that when the base
of a sign is below the elevation of the abutting street, the Planning Commission
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-13
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance October 2011 NKAPC
may allow an adjustment to the height of the sign per site development plan
approval.
4. Limitations –
a. One (1) monument type sign per business lot or building site regardless of
the number of buildings, provided a secondary sign having frontage on a
secondary street may be permitted by the Planning Commission in
conjunction with the stage two site development plan when it has been
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Commission that a secondary sign
is necessary and appropriate for the convenience and the safety of the
general public and/or consistent with the urban design principals and
objectives of the comprehensive plan.
b. One (1) sign may be permitted for identification purposes of a residential
development in accordance with an approved Stage II site development
plan.
5. Other limitations –
a. Shall neither be flashing nor animated
b. May be illuminated, but only from a concealed light source
c. No part of any ground sign shall be closer than 5 feet from any public
right-of-way or 20 feet from any property line
I. Class 9: The following free standing signs meeting the following specifications shall
constitute Class 9, and shall be permitted only in a shopping center district, shall be a
business identification sign as defined herein.
1. Structural type – pole or ground signs, single or double faced.
2. Maximum size of single sign. One hundred fifty square feet, except that each
major business located within a shopping center may be permitted one ribbon sign
(identification sign) attached to a Class 9 sign, provided that said signs are
uniform in size and appearance. Maintaining their required 8 feet of ground
clearance; and provided further that each such sign does not exceed a maximum
size of 25 square feet; or that the total sign area of the sign does not exceed 280
square feet per sign face.
3. Maximum height above grade at top of sign.
a. Twenty-two feet – pole sign. The height of a pole mounted sign shall not
exceed 22 feet above ground level as measure from the center line of the
abutting arterial street where the said sign is to be located.
b. Fourteen feet above finished grade for a ground mounted monument sign.
The height of a ground mounted sign shall be measure from the finished
grade of the lot, any may not be elevated by mounding or berming, or
other structural means to otherwise increase the height of said sign.
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-14
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance October 2011 NKAPC
4. Limitations – One class 9 sign may be located along each abutting arterial street
identifying the shopping center, provided that the second sign at the secondary
point of access does not exceed 150 total square feet in area size (per sign face).
5. Other limitations –
a. Shall be neither flashing nor animated; however, may include the ability to
change the message
b. May be illuminated, but only from a concealed light source
c. No Class 9 sign shall be placed closer than 10 feet from any property line
d. No pole sign shall be at its lowest point, less than eight (8) feet from the
ground
e. All signs shall be located in such a manner that they are wholly visible
from the centerline of the abutting street from a minimum distance of 250
feet. No sign shall be located in such a manner that it partially or wholly
obstructs adjacent signs, as viewed from the centerline or the abutting
street from a minimum distance of 250 feet
J. Class 10:
K. Class 11: The following signs meeting the following specifications shall constitute Class
11 and shall be only business or identification signs, as defined herein:
1. Structural type – Canopy (marquee) and canopy sign.
2. Maximum height above grade at sign – No such canopy (marquee) or canopy sign
shall be less than ten (10) feet between the ground level and the lowest point or
bottom edge of said canopy (marquee) or canopy sign, and there may be placed an
illuminated facia sign with may extend the entire length and width of the canopy
provided such sign does not extend more than four (4) feet above nor more than
one (1) foot below such canopy but, under no circumstances, shall the sign or
signs in single face be over one hundred fifty (150) square feet in outside area.
3. Other limitations – The Building Inspector shall not issue any permit for the
erection or maintenance of a canopy or canopy sign until after an application has
been filed with the department for such a permit, which the application shall set
forth in detail the plans and specifications and location of said canopy or canopy
sign. When required by the Zoning Administrator, said applicant shall furnish
complete proof, in the form of engineering calculations, stress diagrams, etc., that
the building to which the canopy (marquee) or canopy sign is to be attached is so
built that the addition of the canopy (marquee) or canopy sign to the building will,
in no case, stress the building supporting said canopy (marquee) or canopy sign
beyond the limits of safety, as defined by the Building Code. Canopies may
extend outward from the building to within two (2) feet of the property line.
L. Class 12: Off-premises signs: The following signs meeting the following specifications
shall constitute Class 12 and shall only be business or identification signs, as defined
herein.
Article XIV Sign Regulations 14-15
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance October 2011 NKAPC
1. Structural type – ground monument sign
2. Limitations –
a. Class 12 off-premises sings may be permitted only in cases where a
business area has been adversely affected by the opening of 1-471, or the
realignment of US 27.
b. An off-premises sign(s) shall be for the purpose of fostering the
commercial revitalization of a business area where traffic volumes have
been reduced by highway realignment.
c. All off-premises signs shall be jointly developed by the City of Highland
Heights and participating businesses.
d. All off-premises signs shall be designed by a professional graphic designer
and landscape architect.
e. The location and placement of a proposed Class 12 sign shall include a
landscape plan as approved by the Planning Commission.
f. The height, size and other design considerations of a Class 12 sign shall be
as approved by the Planning Commission per a detailed site plan, provided
that the sign plan is found to be aesthetically pleasing and compatible with
its surroundings, in a manner that promotes the design intent of the
Comprehensive Plan with respect to the I-471/US 27 Gateway and Town
Center image envisioned in the plan.
3. Other limitations –
a. Under certain, unique circumstances, a temporary sign exceeding the
height and size dimensions necessary for compatibility purposes may be
permitted by the Planning Commission for a period not to exceed nine (9)
months, provided that the Commission finds in the affirmative the
following:
(1) That the temporary sign is necessary to bring attention to a new
commercial business venture that is potentially important to the
economy of the city
(2) That all necessary administrative and legal safe guards and
assurances are in place for the timely removal of the temporary
sign at the end of the nine (9) month period time limit
(3) That the Commission shall not extend the time of a Class 12 sign
beyond the original nine (9) month period
Article XV Administration 15-1
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
ARTICLE XV
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION 15.0 ENFORCING OFFICER: A Zoning Administrator (official of officials
appointed by the city of Highland Heights, Commonwealth of Kentucky for carrying out the
provisions and enforcements of this Ordinance) shall administer and enforce this Ordinance. He
may be provided with assistance of such other persons as the city of Highland Heights directs.
If the Zoning Administrator finds that any of the provisions of this Ordinance are being violated,
he shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violation and order the action necessary
to correct it. If within thirty (30) consecutive calendar days, the violation has not been corrected,
a second written notice shall be sent to the person responsible informing him that as of specified
date he shall be considered to be in violation of this Ordinance and liable to be penalized as per
Section 15.9 of this Ordinance.
The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to order discontinuance of illegal use of land,
buildings, structures, signs, fences or additions, alterations or structural changes thereto;
discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by this
Ordinance to insure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions.
It is the intent of this Ordinance that all questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be first
presented to the Zoning Administrator, and that such questions shall be presented to the Board of
Adjustment only on appeal from the decision of the Zoning Administrator, and that recourse
form the decisions of the Board of Adjustment shall be to the courts as provided by State Statues,
Commonwealth of Kentucky.
It is further the intent of this Ordinance that the duties of the Zoning Administrator in connection
with this Ordinance shall not include hearing and deciding questions or interpretation and
enforcement that may arise. The procedure for deciding such questions shall be as stated in
Section 17.2-17.9 of this Ordinance. Under this Ordinance the City Council shall have only the
duties of one (1) considering and adopting or rejecting this Ordinance, proposed amendments or
the repeal of one (1) considering and adopting or rejecting this Ordinance, as provided by law
and two (2) of establishing a schedule of fees and charges as stated in Section 18.0 of this
Ordinance.
SECTION 15.1 ZONING PERMITS: Zoning permits shall be issued in accordance with the
following provisions:
A. ZONING PERMIT REQUIRED: No public or private building or other structure shall be
erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered or changed from one permitted use to
another nor shall any grading take place on any lot or parcel of ground without a permit
issued by the Zoning Administrator. No zoning permit shall be issued except in
Article XV Administration 15-2
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance, except after written orders from the
Board of Adjustment.
B. APPLICATION FOR ZONING PERMITS: All applications for zoning permits shall be
accompanied by:
1. A completed application form, provided by the Zoning Administrator (In
triplicate – See Appendix “A”)
2. The required fee for a zoning permit as provided in Section 18.0 of this Ordinance
3. A development plan, if required by this Ordinance
4. A plot plan in triplicate, drawing at a scale of not less than one (1) inch to one
hundred (100) feet showing the following information as required by this
Ordinance:
a. The location of every existing and proposed building with the number of
floors and gross floor area, the use or uses to be contained therein, the
number of structures including dimensions, height, and number, size, and
type of dwelling units
b. All property lines, shape, and dimensions of the lot to be built upon
c. Lot width at minimum building setback line
d. Minimum front and rear yard depths and side yard widths
e. Existing topography, with a maximum of two (2) foot contour intervals.
Where existing ground is on a slope of less than two (2) percent, either
one (1) foot contours or spot elevations not more than fifty (50) feet apart
shall be required
f. The proposed finished grade of the development area shown by contours
with intervals not larger than two (2) feet, supplemented, where necessary
by spot elevations
g. Total lot area in square feet
h. Location and dimension of all curb cuts, driving aisles, parking and
loading and/or unloading spaces including number of spaces, angle of
stalls and illumination facilities
i. Layout, type of surfacing, cross sections and drainage plans for off-street
parking facilities
j. A drainage plan of the lot area including provisions for the adequate
control of erosion and sedimentation, indicating the proposed temporary
and permanent control and practices and measures which will be
implemented during all phases of clearing, grading, and construction
k. All walks, malls, and open spaces
l. Location, type and height of all walls, fences and screen plantings
m. Location, size, height, class and orientation of all signs
n. Location of all existing and proposed streets including rights-of-way and
pavement widths
o. All existing and proposed water and sanitary sewer facilities, indicating all
pipe sizes, types and grades
Article XV Administration 15-3
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
p. And such other information as may be required by the Zoning
Administrator to determine conformance with and provide for
enforcement of this Ordinance and State Statutes of the Commonwealth of
Kentucky
C. ISSUANCE OF ZONING PERMIT: After thorough study of the submitted information
the Zoning Administrator shall either approve or disapprove the application (when
required by this Ordinance (e.g., Development Plan submitted required) Planning
Commission approval or disapproval shall also be required). If disapproved two (2)
copies of the submitted plans shall be returned to the applicant marked "Disapproved"
and shall indicate the reasons for such disapproval thereon. Such disapproval shall be
attested by the Zoning Administrator's signature. The other copy, similarly marked, shall
be retained by the Zoning Administrator.
If approved two (2) copies of the submitted plans shall be returned to the applicant
marked "approved". Such approval shall be attested by the Zoning Administrator's
signature. The other copy, similarly marked, shall be retained by the Zoning
Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall also issue a zoning permit to the
applicant at this time and shall retain a duplicate copy for his records.
D. FAILURE TO COMPLY: Failure to obtain a zoning permit shall be a violation of this
Ordinance and punishable under Section 15.9 of this Ordinance.
E. EXPIRATION OF ZONING PERMIT: If a building permit, as required herein, has not
been obtained within ninety (90) consecutive calendar days from the date of issuance
thereof, said zoning permit shall expire and be canceled by the Zoning Administrator and
a building permit shall not be obtainable until a new zoning permit has been obtained.
F. ZONING PERMITS ISSUED PRIOR TO THE ADOPTION OF THIS ORDINANCE:
Zoning permits issued in conformance with the Zoning Ordinance of the city of Highland
Heights prior to the date of adoption of this Ordinance, whether consistent or inconsistent
with this Ordinance, shall be valid for a period of ninety (90) consecutive calendar days
from the time of issuance of the permit. If a building permit has not been obtained within
such ninety (90) consecutive calendar day period, the zoning permit shall be void and a
new permit, consistent with all provisions of this ordinance shall be required.
SECTION 15.2 BUILDING PERMITS: Building permits shall be issued in accordance with
the following provisions:
A. BUILDING PERMITS REQUIRED: No public or private building or other structure
shall be erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered without a permit issued by the
Building Inspector. No building permit shall be issued except in conformity with the
provisions of this Ordinance, except after written orders from the Board of Adjustment.
Article XV Administration 15-4
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
B. APPLICATION FOR BUILDING PERMITS: All applications for building permits shall
be accompanied by:
1. A completed application form provided by the Building Inspector
2. An approved zoning permit
3. The required fee for a building permit as provided for in Section 18.0 of this
Ordinance
4. A development plan, if required by this Ordinance
5. Plans in duplicate approved by the Zoning Administrator and including any
additional information required by the Building Code and/or Building Inspector,
as may be necessary to determine conformance with and provide for the
enforcement of the building code and the State Statutes of the Commonwealth of
Kentucky
C. ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMIT: After thorough study of the submitted
information, the Building Inspector shall either approve or disapprove the application. If
disapproved, one (1) copy of the submitted plans shall be returned to the applicant
marked “Disapproved” and shall indicate the reasons for such disapproval thereon. Such
disapproval shall be attested by the Building Inspector’s signature. The second copy
similarly marked, shall be retained by the Building Inspector.
If approved, one (1) copy of the submitted plans shall be returned to the applicant marked
"approved". Such approval shall be attested by the Building Inspector's signature. The
second copy, similarly marked, shall be retained by the Building Inspector. The Building
Inspector shall also issue a building permit to the applicant at this time and shall retain a
duplicate copy for his records.
D. COMPLIANCE: It shall be unlawful to issue a building permit or occupancy permit, to
build, create, erect, change, alter, convert, or occupy any building or structure hereafter,
unless a zoning permit has been issued in compliance with this Ordinance.
E. BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED PRIOR TO THE ADOPTION OF THIS ORDINANCE:
Building Permits issued in conformance with the Building Code of the city of Highland
Heights prior to the date of adoption of this Ordinance, whether consistent or inconsistent
with this Ordinance, shall be valid for a period of ninety (90) consecutive calendar days
from the time of issuance of the permit. If construction in connection with such a permit
has not been started within such a ninety (90) consecutive calendar day period, the permit
shall be void and a new permit, consistent with all provisions of this ordinance and the
Building Code shall be required. For purposes of this section, construction shall be
deemed to have been started at the time of completion of the foundation.
F. EXPIRATION OF BUILDING PERMIT: If the work described in any building permit
has not begun within ninety (90) consecutive calendar days form the date of issuance
thereof, said permit shall expire and be cancelled by the Building Inspector and no
construction shall be permitted until a new building permit has been obtained.
Article XV Administration 15-5
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
G. CONSTRUCTION AND USE: To be as provided in application, plans, and permits,
zoning permits and building permits issued on the basis of plans and applications,
approved by the Zoning Administrator and/or Building Inspector, authorize only the use,
arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no
other use, arrangement, or construction. Use, arrangement or construction at variance
with that authorized shall be deemed in violation of this ordinance and punishable as
provided in Section 15.9 of this ordinance.
SECTION 15.3 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY: It shall be unlawful for an owner to
use or permit the use of any building or premises or part thereof, hereafter created, changed,
converted or enlarged, wholly or partly, until a certificate of occupancy, which shall be a part of
the building permit, shall have been issued by the Building Inspector. Such certificate shall
show that such building or premises or part thereof and the proposed use thereof are in
conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to
issue a certificate of occupancy provided that he has checked and is satisfied that the building
and the proposed use thereof conform with all the requirements of this ordinance and the
Building Code. No permit for excavation or construction shall be issued by the Building
Instructor before he is satisfied that the plans, specifications and intended use conform to the
provisions of this ordinance.
SECTION 15.4 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY FOR EXISTING BUILDING: Upon
written request from the fee owner, the Building Inspector shall issue a certificate of occupancy
for any building or premises existing at the time of enactment of this ordinance, certifying, after
inspection, the extent and kind of use made of the building or premises, and whether such use
conforms with the provisions of this ordinance.
SECTION 15.5 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY FOR LAWFUL
NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES: A certificate of occupancy shall be
required of all lawful nonconforming uses of land or buildings created by this ordinance. A fee
as provided for in Section 18.0 of this ordinance shall be charged for said certificate.
Applications for such certificates of occupancy for non-conforming uses of land and buildings
shall be filed with the Building Inspector by the owner or lessee of the land or building occupied
by such nonconforming uses within twelve (12) consecutive calendar months of the effective
date of this ordinance. Failure to apply for such certificate of occupancy will place upon the
owner and lessee the entire burden of proof that such use of land or buildings lawfully existed on
the effective date of this ordinance.
It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to issue a certificate of occupancy for lawful
nonconforming uses upon application and such certificate shall identify the extent to which the
nonconforming use exists at the time of issuance of such certificate.
SECTION 15.6 DENIAL OF CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY: Except as herein stated,
a certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless the proposed use of a building or land
Article XV Administration 15-6
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
conforms to the applicable provisions of this ordinance and to plans for which the building
permit was issued.
SECTION 15.7 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY RECORDS: A record of all certificates
of occupancy shall be kept on file in the offices of the Building Inspector and copies shall be
furnished, for a normal charge, on request to any person having a proprietary building affected
by such certificate of occupancy.
SECTION 15.8 COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS: Whenever a violation of
this ordinance occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint.
Such complaint stating fully the causes and basis thereof shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall record properly such complaint, immediately
investigate, and take action thereon as provided by this ordinance and the State Statutes,
Commonwealth of Kentucky.
SECTION 15.9 PENALTIES: Any person or entity who violates any of the provisions of this
ordinance shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than ten (10) but no more than five hundred
(500) dollars for each conviction. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
Article XVI Amendment Procedure 16-1
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
ARTICLE XVI
AMENDMENT PROCEDURE
SECTION 16.0 AMENDMENT PROCEDURE:
A. FILING OF AMENDMENT APPLICATION: All applications for amendments to this
ordinance shall be filed, in writing, with the Zoning Administrator, to be transmitted to
the Planning Commission on forms furnished by the Zoning Administrator (in triplicate –
See Appendix “A”). The fee required for applying for such amendment shall be as
provided for in Section 18.0 of this ordinance.
B. PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW REQUIRED: A proposal for an amendment to
this ordinance may originate with the Planning Commission, the legislative body, or with
the owner of the property in question. Regardless of the origin of the proposed
amendment, it shall be referred to the Planning Commission for its action before
adoption.
C. PUBLIC HEARING REQUIRED, NOTICE GIVEN: The Planning Commission shall
hold at least one public hearing on the proposed amendment, at which hearing parties in
interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time and place
of such hearing shall be published at least once, but may be published two or more times
in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, provided that one publication occurs not
less than seven (7) calendar days nor more than twenty-one (21) calendar days before the
occurrence of such hearing.
D. OTHER HEARING REQUIREMENTS, ZONING MAP AMENDMENT: In addition to
the public hearing notice required in Section 16.0, C, above, the following notices shall
also be given when a proposal is submitted to amend the official zoning map:
1. Notice of the hearing shall be posted conspicuously on the property, the
classification of which is proposed to be changed. Said posting shall consist of
one or more signs clearly depicting the following information: current zoning
classification of property; proposed zoning classification; legal description of
proposed zone change area; date and time of public hearing; and address,
including telephone number where additional information regarding hearing may
be obtained; and
2. Notice of the hearing shall be given at least fourteen (14) days in advance of the
hearing by first class mail to the owners of all property adjoining the property, the
classification of which is proposed to change. Where said property adjoins a street
or alley, property abutting the opposite side of such street or alley shall be
considered adjoining property. It shall be the duty of the person or persons
Article XVI Amendment Procedure 16-2
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
proposing the amendment to furnish to the Planning Commission the names and
addresses of the owners of all adjoining property.
E. FINDINGS NECESSARY FOR MAP AMENDMENT: Before any map amendment is
granted, the Planning Commission, or legislative body, must find that the amendment is
in agreement with the adopted comprehensive plan by the Planning Commission for the
city, or in the absence of such a finding, that one or more of the following apply,
including the making of a written report, setting forth explicitly, the reasons and
substantiation as to how each would apply, and such finding and report shall be recorded
in the minutes and records of the Planning Commission or legislative body:
1. That the original zoning classification given to the property was inappropriate or
improper; and
2. That there have been major changes of an economic, physical, or social nature
within the area involved which were not anticipated in the comprehensive plan
and which have substantially altered the basic character of such area.
F. MINIMUM SIZE OF NEW ZONES: No zoning map amendment to this ordinance shall
be adopted whereby the zoning classification of an area is changed in such a manner as to
create a free standing zone of less than five (5) acres, except where specific area
restrictions are stipulated in this ordinance, or as outlined in the adopted comprehensive
plan by the Planning Commission. For the purpose of computing the total size of an area
to be rezoned for compliance herewith, there shall be added to such area:
1. the area of public rights–of–way interior to the area being changed
2. one–half the area of public rights–of–way abutting the area being changed
3. the area of any land which is contiguous to the area being changed (including land
located outside the city but contiguous to the city’s corporation line) and which
land already bears the zoning classification sought for the area being changed
except that in the case of computing the size of an area to be zoned for
commercial, (i.e., LSC, NC, and PO Zones) any of the commercial zones may be
used, interchangeably to compute one contiguous area. For the purpose of this
section, neither continuity nor abutment shall be destroyed by the existence of a
street, alley, or city's corporation line
G. PLANNING COMMISSION ACTION: Following the public hearing held by the
Planning Commission on the proposed amendment, the Commission shall, within sixty
(60) calendar days from the date of its receipt, advise the legislative body whether it
approved or disapproved of the amendment to the zoning regulation, including a
statement setting forth explicitly the reasons an substantiation for such action and, in the
case of a map amendment, the submission of a written report as required in Section 16.0,
E.
H. LEGISLATIVE BODY DISPOSITION: Within forty-five consecutive calendar days
after receipt of the Planning Commission’s recommendations and findings concerning the
Article XVI Amendment Procedure 16-3
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
application and a copy of the application, the legislative body shall act on such
application. A majority of the entire legislative body shall be required to override the
recommendations of the Planning Commission.
I. SUBMISSION OF DEVELOPMENT PLAN AS CONDITION TO COMMERCIAL OR
MULTI–FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONING MAP AMENDMENT: Any request for a
zoning map amendment to any commercial (SC, NSC, GC, MLU, POM, LSC) or multifamily
residential zone (i.e., R-2, R-3,) shall be made in accordance with all applicable
requirements of this ordinance, including the following:
1. APPLICATION AND PROCESSING: Application for a zoning map amendment
shall be processed in two stages:
STAGE I -- Development Plan and Zoning Map Amendment – Application for a
zoning map amendment shall include a development plan in accordance with the
applicable requirements of Section 10.12, D, or this ordinance.
a. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed
application in accordance with the requirements of KRS Chapter 424, and
review said application with regard to the required elements of the
Development Plan, and other applicable requirements of this section.
Upon holding such a hearing, the Planning Commission shall make one of
the following recommendations to the legislative body: approval,
approval with condition(s), or disapproval. The Planning Commission
shall submit, along with their recommendations a copy of the
Development Plan and the bases for their recommendation.
b. The legislative body shall, within forty-five (45) days after receiving the
recommendations of the Planning Commission, review said
recommendations and take action to approve or disapprove the proposed
development plan. Such approval may incorporate any conditions
imposed by the legislative body. However, should the legislative body
take action to impose different conditions than were reviewed and
considered by the Panning Commission, then said conditions shall be
resubmitted to the Planning Commission for further review and
recommendations in accordance with Section 17.0, I, a.
Approval of the zoning map amendment shall require the development be
in accordance with the approved development plan.
The legislative body shall forward a copy of the approved development
plan to the Zoning Administrator of the city’s duly authorized
representative for further processing in accordance with the applicable
requirements for a development plan, as regulated by Section 9.19 of this
ordinance.
Article XVI Amendment Procedure 16-4
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
Zoning Map Amendment – Upon approval of the Zoning Map
Amendment, the official zoning map shall be amended for the are as
shown on the approved development plan.
STAGE II -- Site Plan – Before a permit is issued for constructions, a site plan
shall be developed in conformity with the approved development plan and in
accordance with the applicable requirements of Section 9.19 of this ordinance,
and submitted to the Zoning Administrator of the city’s duly authorized
representative for review and approval. The site plan may be developed and
submitted in sections, in accordance with the phasing identified in the approved
development plan. The Zoning Administrator of the city’s duly authorized
representative may authorize minor adjustments from the approved development
plan, provided that the adjustments do not: affect the spatial relationship of
structures, change land uses, increase overall density, alter circulation patterns
(vehicular and pedestrian), decrease the amount and/or usability of open space or
recreation areas, or affect other applicable requirements of this ordinance.
Amendments - Any amendments to plans, except for the minor adjustments which
may be permitted by the Zoning Administrator as noted above, shall be made in
accordance with the procedure required by this ordinance, subject to the same
limitations and requirements as those under which such plans were originally
approved.
Expiration - The zoning map amendment shall be subject to the time constraint, as
noted below. Upon expiration of said time period and any extensions thereto, the
legislative body may initiate a request for a public hearing by the Planning
Commission, in accordance with the requirements of KRS Chapter 100, for the
purpose of determining whether said zoning map amendment should revert to its
original designation. A public hearing may be initiated if either of the following
conditions apply:
a. A site plan has not been approved by the Zoning Administrator within a
period of twelve (12) consecutive months from the date of final approval
of the zoning map amendment by the legislative body; provided that an
extension may be permitted upon approval of the legislative body or its
duly authorized representative, if sufficient proof can be demonstrated that
prevailing conditions have not changed appreciably to render the approved
development plan obsolete.
b. Substantial construction has not been initiated within a period of twelve
(12) consecutive months from the date of approval of the site plan by the
Zoning Administrator; provided that an extension may be permitted upon
approval of the legislative body or its duly authorized representative, if
sufficient proof can be demonstrated that the construction was delayed due
to circumstances beyond the applicant’s control, and that prevailing
conditions have not changed appreciably to render the approved
Article XVI Amendment Procedure 16-5
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
development plan obsolete. The amount of construction that constitutes
initiating substantial construction shall be as approved in the approved
development plan.
Article XVII Board Of Adjustment 17-1
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
ARTICLE XVII
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
SECTION 17.0 ESTABLISHMENT OF BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT; MEMBERSHIP;
APPOINTMENT; TERMS; VACANCIES; OATHS; COMPENSATION; REMOVAL;
OFFICERS:
A. The Board of Adjustment is hereby established for the Highland Heights.
B. The Board of Adjustment shall consist of either three (3), five (5), or seven (7) members,
all of whom must be citizen members and not more than two (2) of, whom may be citizen
members of the Planning Commission.
C. The mayor shall be the appointing authority of the Board of Adjustment subject to the
approval of the City Council.
D. The term of office for the Board of Adjustment shall be four (4) years, but the term of
office of members first appointed shall be staggered so that a proportionate number serve
one (1), two (2), three (3) and four (4) years respectively.
E. Vacancies on the Board of Adjustment shall be filled within sixty (60) calendar days by
the mayor. If the mayor fails to act within that time, the Planning Commission shall fill
the vacancy. When a vacancy occurs other than through expiration of the term of office,
it shall be filled for the remainder of that term.
F. All members of the Board of Adjustment shall, before entering upon their duties, qualify
by taking the oath of office prescribed by Section 228 of the Constitution of the
Commonwealth of Kentucky before any judge, notary public, clerk of court, or justice of
the peace within the district or county in which he resides.
G. Reimbursement for expenses or compensation or both may be authorized for members on
the Board of Adjustment.
H. Any member of the Board of Adjustment may be removed by the mayor, subject to the
approval by the City Council for inefficiency, neglect of duty, malfeasance, or conflict of
interest. The mayor exercising the power to remove a member from the Board of
Adjustment shall submit a written statement to the Planning Commission setting forth the
reasons and the statement shall be read at the next meeting of the Board of Adjustment
which shall be open to the general public. The member so removed shall have the right
of appeal from the removal to the circuit court of the county in which he resides.
Article XVII Board Of Adjustment 17-2
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
I. The Board of Adjustment shall elect annually a chairman, vice-chairman, and secretary
and any other officers it deems necessary, and any officer shall be eligible for re-election
at the expiration of this term.
SECTION 17.1 MEETINGS OF BOARDS; QUORUM; MINUTES; BYLAWS;
FINANCES; SUBPOENA POWER; ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS:
A. The Board of Adjustment shall conduct meetings at the call of the chairman who shall
give written or oral notice to all members of the Board at least seven (7) days prior to the
meeting, which notice shall contain the date, time, and place for the meeting, which
notice shall contain the date, time and place for the meeting, and the subject of subjects
which will be discussed.
B. A simple majority of the total membership of the Board of Adjustment, as established by
regulation or agreement shall constitute a quorum. Any member of the Board of
Adjustment who has any direct or indirect financial interest in the outcome of any
question before the body shall disclose the nature of the interest and shall disqualify
himself from voting on the question.
C. The Board of Adjustment shall adopt bylaws for the transaction of business and shall
keep minutes and records of all proceedings including regulations, transactions, findings,
and determinations and the number of votes for and against each question, and if any
member is absent or abstains from voting, indicating the fact, all of which shall,
immediately after adoption, be filed in the office of the Board of Adjustment. A
transcript of the minutes of the Board of Adjustment shall be provided if requested by a
party, at the expense of the requesting party, and the transcript shall constitute the record.
D. The Board of Adjustment shall have the right to receive, hold, and spend funds which it
may legally receive from any and every source in and out of the Commonwealth of
Kentucky, including the United States Government.
E. The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to issue subpoenas to compel witnesses to
attend its meetings and give evidence bearing upon the questions before it.
F. The chairman of the Board of Adjustment shall have the power to administer an oath to
witnesses prior to their testifying before the Board on any issue.
SECTION 17.2 PROCEDURE FOR ALL APPEALS TO BOARD: Appeals to the Board
of Adjustment may be taken by any person, or entity claiming to be injuriously affected or
aggrieved by an official action or decision of the Zoning Administrator and with the Board, a
notice of such appeal specifying the grounds thereof, and giving notice of such appeal to any and
all parties of record. A fee, as required by Section 18.0 of this Ordinance shall also shall be taken
within thirty (30) calendar days after the appellant or his agent receives notice of the action to be
appealed from, by filing with said Zoning Administrator and with the Board, a notice of such
appeal specifying the grounds thereof, and giving notice of such appeal to any and all parties of
Article XVII Board Of Adjustment 17-3
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
record. A fee, as required by Section 18.0 of this Ordinance, shall also be given to the Zoning
Administrator at this time. Said Zoning Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Board all
papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken and shall be
treated as and be the respondent in such further proceedings. At any hearing by the Board, any
interested person may appear and enter his appearance, and all shall be given the opportunity to
be heard.
The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing the appeal and give public notice
with KRS Chapter 424, as well as written notice to the appellant and the Zoning Administrator at
least one (1) calendar week prior to the hearing, and shall decide on the appeal within sixty (60)
consecutive calendar days. The affected party may appear at the hearing in person or by
attorney.
SECTION 17.3 APPEALS FROM PLANNING COMMISSION, BOARD OF
ADJUSTMENT, OR LEGISLATIVE BODY: Any appeal from the Planning Commission or
Board of Adjustment action may be taken in the following manner:
A. Any person or entity claiming to be injured or aggrieved by any final action of the
Planning Commission or Board of Adjustment may appeal from the action to the circuit
court of the county in which the land lies. Such appeal shall be taken within thirty (30)
consecutive calendar days after the final action of the Planning Commission or Board of
Adjustment. Final action shall not include the Planning Commission’s recommendations
made to other governmental bodies.
B. All appeals shall be taken in the appropriate circuit court within thirty (30) consecutive
calendar days after the action of decision of the Planning Commission or Board of
Adjustment and all decisions, which have not been appealed within thirty (30)
consecutive calendar days, shall become final. After the appeal is taken, the procedure
shall be governed by the rules of the civil procedure. When an appeal has been filed, the
clerk of the circuit court shall issue a summons to all parties, including the Planning
Commission in all cases, and shall cause it to be delivered for service as in any other law
action.
SECTION 17.4 STAY OF PROCEEDINGS: An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance
of the action appealed from, unless the Zoning Administrator from whom the appeal is taken
certifies to the Board of Adjustment, after the notice of appeal is filed with him, that by reason of
facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and
property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a court of record on
application, or on notice to the Zoning Administrator from whom the appeal is taken and on due
cause shown.
SECTION 17.5 POWERS OF BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT: Upon appeals, the Board of
Adjustment shall have the following powers:
Article XVII Board Of Adjustment 17-4
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
A. To hear and decide on applications for dimensional variances where, by reason of the
exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or unusual shape of a site on the effective date of
this ordinance, or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions, or some other
extraordinary situation or condition of that site, the literal enforcement of the dimensional
requirements (height or width of building or size of yards, but not population density) of
the zoning ordinance would deprive the applicant of reasonable capacity to make use of
the land.
B. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged, by the appellant that there is an error in
any order, requirement, decision, grant or refusal made by a Zoning Administrator in the
enforcement of this Ordinance. Such appeal shall be taken within sixty (60) consecutive
calendar days.
C. To hear and decide applications for conditional use permits to allow the proper
integration into the community of uses which are specifically named herein which may
be suitable only in specific locations in the zone only if certain conditions are met as
specified in Section 9.12 of this Ordinance.
D. To hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, requests for
interpretation of the official zoning map of for decisions upon other special questions
upon which said board is authorized to act upon.
E. To hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and the adoption
of the comprehensive plan for the city, requests for the change from one nonconforming
use to another.
SECTION 17.6 DIMENSIONAL VARIANCES; CHANGE FROM ONE
NONCONFORMING USE TO ANOTHER; CONDITIONS GOVERNING
APPLICATIONS; PROCEDURES:
A. DIMENSIONAL VARIANCES: Before any dimensional variance is granted, the Board
of Adjustment must find all of the following, which shall be recorded along with any
imposed conditions or restrictions in its minutes and records and issued in written form to
the application to constitute proof of the dimensional variance. Such dimensional
variance shall not be granted by the Board of Adjustment unless and until:
1. A written application for a dimensional variance (including the required fee as
specified in Section 18.0 of this ordinance) and a development plan subject to the
applicable requirements of Section 9.19, are submitted demonstrating:
a. That specific conditions and circumstances exist which are unique to the
applicant’s land and do not exist on other land in the same zone;
b. That the manner in which the strict application of the provisions of this
ordinance would deprive the applicant of a reasonable use of the land in
Article XVII Board Of Adjustment 17-5
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
the manner equivalent to the use permitted other land owners in the same
zone;
c. That the unique conditions and circumstances are not the result of actions
of the applicant taken subsequently to the adoption of this ordinance;
d. Reasons that the dimensional variance will preserve, not harm, the public
safety and welfare, and will not alter the essential character of the
neighborhood; and
e. That granting the dimensional variance requested will not confer on the
applicant any special privilege that is not conferred by this ordinance to
other lands, structures or buildings in the same zone. No nonconforming
use of neighboring lands, and structures in the same zone shall be
considered grounds for the issuance of a dimensional variance.
2. Notice of public hearing shall be given in accordance with Section 17.2 of this
ordinance
3. The public hearing shall be held. Any person may appear in person, or by agent or
by attorney
4. Prior to granting a dimensional variance:
a. The Board of Adjustment shall make findings that the requirements of this
section have been met by the applicant for a dimensional variance
b. The Board of Adjustment shall further make a finding that reasons set
forth in the application justify the granting of dimensional variance and
that the dimensional variance is the minimum variance that will make
possible the reasonable use of the land, building, or structure, and under
no circumstances shall the Board of Adjustment:
(1) Grant a dimensional variance which would vary by more than fifty
(50) percent of the applicable regulation when the development is
occurring in newly platted areas; and
(2) Grant a dimensional variance which would vary by more than fifty
(50) percent of the average height, yard, and setback of existing
surrounding development when the proposed construction occurs
on lots or parcels of land already platted and where more than
fifty-one (51) percent of said lots or parcels of land are improved
with structures. If less than fifty-one (51) percent of the
surrounding lots or parcels of land are improved with structures,
then said development shall be governed by the requirements of
Section 17.6, A, 4, b, (1).
c. The Board of Adjustment shall further make a finding that the granting of
the dimensional variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and
intent of this ordinance as well as the adopted comprehensive plan for the
city, and will not be injurious to the neighborhood, or otherwise,
detrimental to the public welfare
Article XVII Board Of Adjustment 17-6
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
5. In granting any dimensional variance, the Board of Adjustment prescribe
appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this ordinance.
Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under
which the dimensional variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this
ordinance and punishable under Section 15.9 of this ordinance
B. DIMENSIONAL VARIANCE CANNOT CONTRADICT ZONING REGULATION:
The Board of Adjustment shall not possess the power to grant a dimensional variance to
permit a use of any land, building, or structure which is not permitted by this ordinance in
the zone in question, or to alter the density of dwelling unit requirements in the zone in
question.
C. DIMENSIONAL VARIANCE RUNS WITH LAND: A dimensional variance applies to
the property for which it is granted and not to the individual who applied for it. A
dimensional variance runs with the land and is transferable to any future owner of the
land, but it cannot be transferred by the applicant to a different site.
D. CHANGE FROM ONE NONCONFORMING USE TO ANOTHER: A nonconforming
use shall not be changed to another nonconforming use without the specific approval of
the Board of Adjustment, as provided herein.
1. The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to hear and decide on applications
to convert or change an existing nonconforming use to another nonconforming
use, subject to the following:
a. A written application for a change from one nonconforming use to another
(including the required fee as specified in Section 18.0 of this ordinance)
and a development plan, if applicable, subject to the applicable
requirements of Section 9.19, shall be submitted to the Board
b. Notice of public hearing shall be given in accordance with Section 17.2 of
this ordinance
c. The public hearing shall be held. Any person may appear in person, or by
agent or by attorney
d. Prior to granting a change from one nonconforming use to another, the
Board of Adjustment shall find that the new nonconforming use is in the
same or more restrictive classification of use as the prior nonconforming
use. In the determination of the same or more restrictive classification of
use, the applicant shall establish and the Board of Adjustment shall find:
(1) That the new nonconforming use shall generate less vehicular
traffic (automobile and truck) than the prior nonconforming use
(2) That the new nonconforming use is of a nature which will emit less
noise and air Pollution than the prior nonconforming use
Article XVII Board Of Adjustment 17-7
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
(3) That the new nonconforming use will be more in character with the
existing neighborhood than the prior nonconforming use, in that it
is more in conformance with the adopted comprehensive plan of
the city, and also, more in conformance with the uses permitted in
the zone in which the use is located than the prior nonconforming
use
e. Any change of nonconforming use granted by the Board of Adjustment
shall conform to the requirements of this ordinance, including, but not
limited to: parking requirements, sign regulations and yard requirements,
and all other pertinent ordinances of the city
f. The Board of Adjustment shall not allow the enlargement or extension of a
nonconforming use beyond the scope and area of its operation at which
time its use became nonconforming
g. The Board of Adjustment, in granting a change of nonconforming uses,
may attach such conditions thereto as it may deem necessary and proper;
and the action, limitations and conditions imposed, if any, shall be in
writing, directed to the applicant, with a copy to be furnished to the
Zoning Administrator
h. The change of nonconforming use as may be granted by the Board of
Adjustment applies to the property for which it is granted and not to the
individual who applied and, therefore, cannot be transferred by the
applicant to a different property
i. In the case where the change of nonconforming use has not occurred
within one (1) year after the date of granting thereof, said use shall be
governed according to the requirements of Section 9.12
SECTION 17.7 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS: Conditional use permits shall not be
issued without the specific approval of the Board of Adjustment, as provided for herein.
A. The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to hear and decide on applications for
conditional use permits, subject to the following:
1. A written application for a conditional use permit (including the required fee, as
specified in Section 18.0 of this ordinance) and a development plan subject to the
applicable requirements of Section 9.19, shall be submitted to the Board
2. Notice of public hearing shall be given in accordance with Sections 17.2 of this
ordinance
3. The public hearing shall be held. Any person may appear in person, or by agent
or by attorney
4. Prior to granting a conditional use permit, the Board of Adjustment shall find that
the application for a conditional use permit meets the requirements of this
ordinance, Section 9.14
SECTION 17.8 DECISIONS OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT:
Article XVII Board Of Adjustment 17-8
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
A. In exercising the aforementioned powers, the Board of Adjustment may, so long as such
action is in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, reverse or affirm wholly or
partly, or may modify the order, requirements, decision, or determination as made by the
Zoning Administrator, from whom the appeal is taken.
B. A simple majority of the total membership of the Board of Adjustment, as established by
regulation or agreement, shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or
determination of the Zoning Administrator, so long as such action is in conformity with
the provisions of this ordinance; or to decide in favor of the applicant on any manner
upon which it is required to pass under this ordinance, or to affect any variation in the
application of this ordinance.
C. The details of the decision of the Board shall be forwarded to the Zoning Administrator.
Article XVIII Fees, Charges, And Expenses 18-1
Highland Heights Zoning Ordinance May 2004 NKAPC
ARTICLE XVIII
FEES, CHARGES, AND EXPENSES
SECTION 18.0 SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES, AND EXPENSES: The schedule of
fees, charges, and expenses shall be as established by separate city ordinances.


Kenton County, Kentucky
Subdivision Regulations
October 1, 2015
Table of Contents
Table of Contents
Table of Contents.........................................................................................................................................................i
Article 1: Application and Authority........................................................................................................................1
Section 1.1: Purpose ........................................................................................................................................................ 1
Section 1.2: Title .............................................................................................................................................................. 1
Section 1.3: Authorization................................................................................................................................................ 1
Section 1.4: Citations of Kentucky Revised Statutes ........................................................................................................ 1
Section 1.5: Citations of these Regulations...................................................................................................................... 1
Section 1.6: Jurisdiction................................................................................................................................................... 1
Section 1.7: Statement of Severability.............................................................................................................................. 1
Section 1.8: Status as Minimum Standards ...................................................................................................................... 2
Section 1.9: Compliance Required................................................................................................................................... 2
Section 1.10: Transitional Rules ........................................................................................................................................ 2
Section 1.11: Penalties....................................................................................................................................................... 4
Section 1.12: Use of Graphics, Illustrations, Figures, and Cross-References................................................................... 4
Section 1.13: Burden of Proof............................................................................................................................................ 4
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation .................................................................................................5
Section 2.1: Purpose ........................................................................................................................................................ 5
Section 2.2: General Rules for Interpretation.................................................................................................................. 5
Section 2.3: Definitions.................................................................................................................................................... 8
Article 3: Administration and Procedures .............................................................................................................31
Section 3.1: Purpose ...................................................................................................................................................... 31
Section 3.2: Review and Decision-Making Bodies......................................................................................................... 31
Section 3.3: Common Subdivision Requirements........................................................................................................... 32
Section 3.4: Guarantees for Improvements.................................................................................................................... 37
Section 3.5: Minor Subdivisions..................................................................................................................................... 38
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions..................................................................................................................................... 44
Section 3.7: Condominium Property Regime Plats........................................................................................................ 60
Section 3.8: Minor Deviations by Staff .......................................................................................................................... 63
Section 3.9: Waivers to the Regulations......................................................................................................................... 63
Section 3.10: Appeal of Staff Actions ............................................................................................................................... 64
Section 3.11: Appeals of Planning Commission Actions.................................................................................................. 64
Section 3.12: Enforcement ............................................................................................................................................... 65
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure..........................................................................................................66
Section 4.1: Streets......................................................................................................................................................... 66
Section 4.2: Lot Layout .................................................................................................................................................. 89
Section 4.3: Public Utilities ........................................................................................................................................... 94
Section 4.4: Pavement Design Method and Required Thicknesses .............................................................................. 100
Section 4.5: Use of Aggregates Within the Right-of-way ............................................................................................. 104
Section 4.6: Portland Cement Concrete (Concrete) Infrastructure ............................................................................. 104
Section 4.7: Asphalt Concrete (Asphalt) Paving Mixture and Construction Specifications ........................................ 113
Section 4.8: Pavement Performance and Design ......................................................................................................... 119
Article 5: Green Infrastructure (GI) Options ......................................................................................................127
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page i
Table of Contents
Section 5.1: Purpose .................................................................................................................................................... 127
Section 5.2: Site Layout Strategies............................................................................................................................... 128
Section 5.3: Elements of Integrated Stormwater Management .................................................................................... 128
Section 5.4: Criteria for Integrated Stormwater Management .................................................................................... 137
Section 5.5: Elements of Integrated Stormwater Management allowed By-Right........................................................ 137
Article 6: Geotechnical Exploration and Earthwork Construction Requirements ..........................................138
Section 6.1: Geotechnical Explorations....................................................................................................................... 138
Section 6.2: Earthwork Specifications, Evaluation, Material Testing and Reporting for Earthwork Within the Public
Street Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements, and Areas Structurally Supporting the Public Street
Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements ............................................................................................ 140
Article 7: Traffic Impact Studies...........................................................................................................................147
Section 7.1: Purpose of the Traffic Impact Study......................................................................................................... 147
Section 7.2: Need for a Traffic Impact Study ............................................................................................................... 147
Section 7.3: Study Area ................................................................................................................................................ 148
Section 7.4: Study Requirements.................................................................................................................................. 149
Section 7.5: Mitigation................................................................................................................................................. 151
Section 7.6: Administration.......................................................................................................................................... 152
Article 8: Access Control Regulations ..................................................................................................................154
Section 8.1: Purpose .................................................................................................................................................... 154
Section 8.2: Applicability ............................................................................................................................................. 154
Section 8.3: Conditions for the Provision of Access Points ......................................................................................... 154
Section 8.4: Traffic Control ......................................................................................................................................... 158
Section 8.5: Provision of Auxiliary Turn Lanes ........................................................................................................... 159
Section 8.6: Provision of Access Easement and Access Drives for Nonresidential Uses............................................. 161
Section 8.7: Pedestrian Access Points ......................................................................................................................... 161
Appendix A: Standard Construction Drawings...........................................................................................162
Appendix B: Surety Templates .....................................................................................................................194
Appendix C: Engineers Committee Final Report........................................................................................200
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page ii
Article 1: Application and Authority
Section 1.1: Purpose
Article 1: Application and Authority
Section 1.1: Purpose
These regulations create the mechanisms, further define the powers and duties, and set forth the standards and
requirements necessary to administer responsibilities granted to local Planning Commissions by Chapter 100 of the
Kentucky Revised Statutes (KRS). In so doing, they assure a necessary component of harmonious, progressive,
and aesthetically-pleasing development while also promoting the health, safety, and general welfare of the Kenton
County public.
Section 1.2: Title
These regulations shall be known as the “Kenton County, Kentucky, Subdivision Regulations,” and may be referred
to as “these Subdivision regulations” or “these Regulations.”
Section 1.3: Authorization
These regulations are adopted pursuant to authority granted to local Planning Commissions by Kentucky Revised
Statutes (KRS) 100.273 through 100.292.
Section 1.4: Citations of Kentucky Revised Statutes
Whenever a provision of these regulations cites a provision of the Kentucky Revised Statutes (KRS), and that
provision is later amended or superseded, these regulations shall be deemed amended to refer to the amended
provision, or the provision that most closely corresponds to the superseded provision.
Section 1.5: Citations of these Regulations
Citations to provisions within these regulations shall be by article, section, subsection, and clause.
Section 1.6: Jurisdiction
These regulations shall be effective throughout Kenton County.
Section 1.7: Statement of Severability
The articles, sections, subsections and clauses of these regulations are severable. If any article, section, subsection,
or clause of these regulations is declared unconstitutional, or otherwise invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction
in a valid judgment or decree, that unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the remaining articles, sections,
subsections, or clauses as they would have been enacted without the incorporation into these regulations of the
unconstitutional or invalid article, section, subsection, or clause.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 1
Article 1: Application and Authority
Section 1.8: Status as Minimum Standards
Section 1.8: Status as Minimum Standards
In their interpretation and application, these regulations shall be viewed as minimum standards or requirements,
adopted for promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. Whenever these regulations conflict with a
requirement of any other lawfully-adopted rule, regulation, ordinance, order, or resolution, then the most restrictive,
or that imposing the higher standards, shall govern.
Section 1.9: Compliance Required
Except as hereinafter specified, no Subdivision of land shall hereafter occur except in conformity with these
regulations.
Section 1.10: Transitional Rules
1.10-1 Effective Date
These regulations shall become effective at 12:01 AM EST on March 11, 2015 and replace any current
Subdivision regulations adopted pursuant to Kentucky Revised Statutes (KRS) 100.273 through 100.292.
1.10-2 Violations Continued
Any violation of the previous Subdivision regulations shall continue to be a violation under these
regulations and any other applicable ordinances, laws, or statutes. Violations of these regulations shall be
subject to the penalties set forth in Section 1.11: Penalties, and any other applicable ordinances, laws, or
statutes.
1.10-3 Completed Application Submittals
(A) Any Applicant that has submitted a complete set of Application requirements that was accepted as
complete before the effective date of these regulations, but are still pending final action as of that
date, shall be reviewed and decided in accordance with the regulations in effect when the complete
Application submittal was accepted.
(B) Complete Application submittals shall be processed in good faith and shall comply with any time
frames for review, approval, and completion as established in the regulations in effect at the time
the submission was accepted.
(C) If any completed Application submission fails to comply with the required time frames, it shall
expire and future development shall be subject to the requirements of these regulations.
(D) An Applicant with a pending Application accepted before the effective date of these regulations
may opt to have the proposed development reviewed and decided under the standards of these
regulations by withdrawing the pending Application and submitting a new Application in
accordance with the standards of these regulations.
(1) If an Applicant chooses to withdraw an Application and submit a new Application under
these regulations, such Applicant shall be subject to these regulations in full and may not opt
to go back to the previous set of standards after the original Application has been withdrawn.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 2
Article 1: Application and Authority
Section 1.10: Transitional Rules
(2) If an Applicant has a Preliminary Plat approval prior to the effective date of these regulations
but only certain phases of the Preliminary Plat have been developed, such Applicant may
request that all of the remaining phases of the Subdivision be reviewed under these new
regulations. In this case, the Applicant shall be required to submit a new Application for a
Major Subdivision review (including a new Preliminary Plat approval) for all of the
remaining phases of the development that have not already been approved and recorded.
Plat 1.10-4 Approvals / Transition Rules
(A) A development for which a Preliminary Plat or Identification Plat approval was granted prior to the
effective date of these regulations may be completed in accordance with the approved plat and any
other approved conditions, even if the development does not comply with the requirements
established in these regulations, subject to the following exceptions:
(1) If during subsequent review, the development subject to the Preliminary Plat fails to comply
with any time frames for review or conditions of approval, the preliminary approval shall
expire and future development shall be subject to the requirements of these regulations.
(2) Improvement Drawing applications submitted after 90 days from the effective date of these
regulations shall be required to comply with the street design and earthwork requirements as
set out in Section 4.4: Pavement Design Method and Required Thicknesses through Section
4.7:Asphalt Concrete (Asphalt) Paving Mixture and Construction Specifications and Section
6.2:Earthwork Specifications, Evaluation, Material Testing and Reporting for Earthwork
Within the Public Street Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements, and Areas Structurally
Supporting the Public Street Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements of these regulations.
(3) Developments containing Streets within Improvement Drawings approved prior to the
effective date of the regulations or within 90 days from the effective date of the regulations,
where Streets have not yet been constructed by December 31, 2016, shall be required to
construct the Streets to comply with the Street design and earthwork requirements as set out
in Section 4.4:Pavement Design Method and Required Thicknesses through Section
4.7:Asphalt Concrete (Asphalt) Paving Mixture and Construction Specifications and Section
6.2:Earthwork Specifications, Evaluation, Material Testing and Reporting for Earthwork
Within the Public Street Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements, and Areas Structurally
Supporting the Public Street Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements of these regulations.
If a development is subject to this condition, revised Improvement Drawings including
review fees shall be submitted and approved by Staff prior to construction of the street(s).
(4) Staff shall have the discretion to approve individual transitional design elements as submitted
by the Applicant on a case by case basis that occur between new Improvement Drawings
designed under these regulations and Improvement Drawings designed under the preceding
regulations.
(B) Any development for which a Final Plat for a Subdivision was approved prior to the effective date
of these regulations shall be permitted to develop, even if such development does not conform to
the provisions of these regulations.
(C) If the development for which the Final Plat for a Subdivision fails to comply with the time frames
for recordation or conditions of approval, such approval shall expire and future development shall
be subject to the requirements of these regulations.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 3
Article 1: Application and Authority
Section 1.11: Penalties
Section 1.11: Penalties
Pursuant to KRS 100.991, any person or entity who violates any of these regulations shall upon conviction, be fined
not less than 10 dollars but not more than 500 dollars. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
Section 1.12: Use of Graphics, Illustrations, Figures, and Cross-
References
1.12-1 Where a conflict may occur between the text and any graphic, illustration, or figure, the text shall control.
1.12-2 In some instances, cross-references between articles, sections, and subsections are provided that include
the article, section, or subsection number along with the name of the referenced article, section, or
subsection. Where a conflict may occur between the given cross-reference number and name, the name
shall control.
Section 1.13: Burden of Proof
The burden of demonstrating that an Application subject to these regulations complies with applicable review and
approval standards is on the Applicant. The burden is not on the Staff, the KCPC, or other parties to show that the
standards have been met by the Applicant or person responsible for the development.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 4
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.1: Purpose
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for
Interpretation
Section 2.1: Purpose
The purpose of this article is to provide an explanation, and where appropriate, illustrations of terms, expressions,
and concepts used throughout this ordinance. It is intended to aid the reader in understanding the intention of the
Planning Commission in using specific terms within these regulations. By providing this explanation, it assures a
necessary component of harmonious, progressive, and aesthetically-pleasing development and promotes the health,
safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Kenton County.
Section 2.2: General Rules for Interpretation
2.2-1 For the purpose of these regulations, certain numbers, abbreviations, terms, words, and phrases shall be
used, interpreted, and defined as set forth in this article. Whenever words and phrases are not defined
here but are defined in Kentucky Revised Statutes (KRS) Chapter 100 and in any amendments to it, the
KRS statutory definition shall apply.
2.2-2 Whenever reference is made to a resolution, statute, regulation, or document, it shall be construed as a
reference to the most recent edition of such regulation, resolution, statute, regulation, or document, unless
otherwise specifically stated.
2.2-3 Additionally, the following rules shall be observed in the application and interpretation of these
regulations, except when the context clearly requires otherwise.
(A) The words “must,” “shall,” or “will” are mandatory. The word “may” is permissive. The word
“should” is suggestive but not mandatory.
(B) Masculine terms shall include the feminine and vice versa.
(C) Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, the following words shall be interpreted as
follows:
(1) “And” indicates that all connected words or provisions apply;
(2) “Or” indicates that the connected words or provisions may apply singularly or in any
combination; and
(3) “Either...or” indicates that the connected words or provisions apply singularly but not in
combination.
(D) The term “written” or “in writing” shall be construed to include any representation of words,
letters, or figures whether by printing or other form or method of writing.
(E) Words used and defined in one tense or form shall include other tenses and/or derivative forms.
(F) Singular words shall include the plural and vice versa.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 5
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.2: General Rules for Interpretation
(G) The word “including,” “includes,” “such as,” “additional,” or “supplemental” is illustrative and not
intended as an exhaustive listing, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.
(H) The words “used” or “occupied” shall include the words “intended or designed to be used or
occupied.”
(I) Any reference to a specific member of Staff may be interpreted to include their designee.
(J) Headings are for convenience only and do not govern, limit, modify, or in any manner affect the
scope, meaning, or intention of any portion of these regulations.
(K) Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the
language, but technical words and phrases that may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
If a term used in these regulations is not defined in this article or 2.2-4 in the KRS, Staff shall have the
authority to provide a definition based upon the definitions used in accepted sources, including but not
limited to, A Planners Dictionary, A Glossary of Zoning, Development, and Planning Terms, and A
Survey of Zoning Definitions, published by the American Planning Association.
2.2-5 Table 2.2-1 identifies common abbreviations used within these regulations and their associated meanings.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 6
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.2: General Rules for Interpretation
TABLE 2.2-1:COMMON ABBREVIATIONS AND MEANINGS
ABBREVIATION MEANING
AASHTO American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials
ACI American Concrete Institute
ASTM American Society for Testing and Materials
CBR California Bearing Ratio
CLSM Controlled Low Strength Material
ESAL Equivalent 18,000 pound Single Axle Load
FTP File Transfer Protocol
GIS Geographic Information Systems
GPM Gallons Per Minute
HCM Highway CapacityManual
HCS Highway Capacity Software
ITE Institute of Transportation Engineers
KAR Kentucky Administrative Regulations
KCPC Kenton County Planning Commission
KRS Kentucky Revised Statutes
KYTC Kentucky Transportation Cabinet
LOS Level of Service
MUTCD Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices
NAD North American Datum
NFPA National Fire Protection Association
NTS Not to Scale
OKI Ohio Kentucky Indiana Regional Council of Governments
PAIKY Plantmix Asphalt Industry of Kentucky
PCA Portland Cement Association
PDS Planning and Development Services of Kenton County
PHF Peak Hour Factor
PLS Professional Land Surveyor
PSI Pounds Per Square Inch
PVI Point of Vertical Intersection
PVT Point of Vertical Tangency
Q Peak StormWater Discharge
RODEL Roundabout Design Software
ROW Right-of-way
RTOR Right Turn on Red
SD1 Sanitation District No. 1
SPCS State Plane Coordinate System
SSEC Street Standards Engineers Committee
SSRBC KY Department of Highways Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction
TIS Traffic Impact Study
TSM Transportation SystemManagement
USGS United States Geodetic Survey
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 7
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-1 1993 AASHTO Rigid Pavement Structural Design
A set of empirical equations used to relate observed or measurable phenomena (pavement characteristics)
with outcomes (pavement performance). Test equations were developed which related loss in
serviceability, traffic, and pavement thickness.
2.3-2 AASHTO (American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials)
A standards setting body which publishes specifications and test protocols and guidelines which are used
in highway design and construction throughout the United States.
2.3-3 Access
Access means any Access Drive, Driveway, Private Street, or other vehicular connection providing for
the movement of vehicles to or from the Public Street system. See Figure 2.3-A.
Figure 2.3-A: Illustration of an Access Drive
2.3-4 Access Drive
An Access Drive is a vehicular way that affords direct access to abutting property from the Street system,
typically from the back or side of the property.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 8
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-5 Access Point
An Access Point is the point at which the centerline of any Access Drive, Driveway, Street, or other
vehicular connection intersects another Street system. See Figure 2.3-B.
Figure 2.3-B: Illustration of an Access Point
2.3-6 Access Point, Full
A Full Access Point is an access point that accommodates all possible turning movements. See Figure
2.3-C.
Figure 2.3-C: Example of a Full Access Point
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 9
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-7 Access Point, Partial
A Partial Access Point is an Access Point that accommodates left and right turn movements into an
Access Point, and right turn movements out of an Access Point but does not allow for left turn
movements out of the Access Point. See Figure 2.3-D.
Figure 2.3-D: Example of a Partial Access Point
2.3-8 Access Point, Restricted
A Restricted Access Point is an Access Point that only accommodates right turning movements into and
out of the Access Point. See Figure 2.3-E.
Figure 2.3-E: Example of a Restricted Access Point
2.3-9 Access Point, Unsignalized
An Unsignalized Access Point is an Access Point where traffic movements are not regulated by a traffic
signal.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 10
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-10 Access Throat
An Access Throat is the Access Drive or Driveway entry onto a private Lot that does not provide further
access to parking spaces or parking drives. See Section 8.3: Conditions for the Provision of Access
Points.
2.3-11 ACI (American Concrete Institute)
An organization involved in the development and distribution of consensus-based standards, technical
resources and educational programs for individuals and organizations involved in concrete design,
construction, and materials.
2.3-12 Applicant
An Applicant is person or entity who is authorized by the provisions of these regulations to file for
approval under these regulations.
2.3-13 Application
An Application is the completed form or forms and all accompanying documents, exhibits, and fees
required of an Applicant by Staff, the Planning Commission, or the applicable Legislative Body as part of
a submission for review.
2.3-14 Asphalt Concrete
Asphalt Concrete (Asphalt) is a composite material commonly used in construction paving projects that
consists of asphalt (used as a binder) mixed with mineral aggregate place in layers and compacted.
2.3-15 ASTM (American Society for Testing and Materials)
An international standards organization that develops and publishes voluntary consensus technical
standards for a wide range of materials, products, systems, and services.
2.3-16 Authorized Agent
An Authorized Agent is a person with express written consent to act upon another person’s behalf.
2.3-17 Bearing Ratio (CBR)
A penetration test for evaluation of the mechanical strength of Roadway Subgrades and basecourses
developed by the California Department of Transportation.
2.3-18 Bicycle Facilities
Bicycle Facilities shall mean bike trails, bike lanes and/or multi-use paths designed for the use of
bicycles.
2.3-19 Bioretention Swale
A Bioretention Swale (or biofiltration trench) is a bioretention system that is located within the base of a
swale and incorporates special types of landscaping and vegetation to enhance water quality and improve
overall stormwater management. See Figure 2.3-F.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 11
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
Figure 2.3-F: Illustration of a Bioretention Swale
2.3-20 Certificate of Occupancy
A Certificate of Occupancy is a certificate that shall be obtained prior to the occupancy of any premises.
2.3-21 Channelization, Traffic
Channelization is the separation or regulation of conflicting traffic movements into definite paths of
travel to facilitate safe and orderly movements of both vehicles and pedestrians. See Figure 2.3-G.
Figure 2.3-G: Illustration of channelizing elements
2.3-22 Commission
See “Planning Commission” (Subsection 2.3-84: Planning Commission).
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 12
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-23 Comprehensive Plan
The Kenton County Comprehensive Plan is a guide for public and private actions and decisions to assure
the development of public and private property in the most appropriate relationships. It shall contain, as
a minimum, the following elements:
(A) A statement of goals and objectives, principles, policies, and standards;
(B) A land use plan element;
(C) A transportation plan element;
(D) A community facilities plan element; and
(E) May include any additional elements such as, without being limited to, community renewal,
housing, Flood control, pollution, conservation, natural resources, regional impact, historic
preservation, and others.
2.3-24 Condominium Property Regime Plat
See “Plat, Condominium Property Regime” (Subsection 2.3-87: Plat, Condominium Property Regime).
2.3-25 Construction Materials Testing Agency
A Construction Materials Testing Agency shall be under the full-time technical direction of a registered
Professional Engineer in the state of Kentucky. The Engineer shall have at least five years’ experience in
construction materials testing. The testing laboratory shall maintain an accreditation for the test methods
performed. Appropriate accreditations are provided by the American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials (AASHTO). Accreditations at an equivalent level by another nationally
recognized organization are also acceptable.
2.3-26 Contractor
A Contractor is a person or firm engaged in construction related to the installation of Improvements and
infrastructure. A Contractor may be an “Applicant” or may be employed by an Applicant to install
Improvements as approved as part of the Subdivision process.
2.3-27 Controlled Low Strength Material
A fluid mixture of Portland Cement, fly ash, sand and water designed to be low strength to allow for
possible removal of the material at a later date.
2.3-28 County
County shall mean Kenton County in the Commonwealth of Kentucky.
2.3-29 County Clerk
The County Clerk is the duly-elected clerk of Kenton County in the Commonwealth of Kentucky.
2.3-30 Cul-de-sac
A Cul-de-sac is a Street having an outlet at one end with a permanent circular turnaround at the other
end.
2.3-31 Curb
A Curb is the concrete boundary at the edge of the pavement of a Street that may also include gutters.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 13
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-32 Curb Extension
A Curb Extension is an extension of the Sidewalk or Curb line into the parking lane to reduce the
effective Street width.
2.3-33 Curb, Integral
An Integral Curb is a Curb system that is constructed as an integrated part of the Street pavement.
2.3-34 Design Speed
Design Speed is the speed to which a Street is being or has been designed.
2.3-35 Developer
A Developer is a person who develops real estate by preparing a site for residential or commercial use.
2.3-36 Drainage
Drainage is the natural or artificial flow of surface and sub-surface water from an area.
2.3-37 Driveway
A Driveway is a privately owned vehicular way.
2.3-38 Easement
An Easement is an interest in real property, distinct from the fee ownership of the land, granting the legal
right to cross property with facilities such as, but not limited to, sewer lines, water lines, and transmission
lines, or the right, distinct from the fee ownership of the land, to reserve and hold an area for
conservation, Drainage or access purposes.
2.3-39 Engineer
An Engineer is a qualified registered Professional Engineer in good standing with the Kentucky State
Board of Licensure for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors.
2.3-40 Final Plat
See “Plat, Final” (Subsection 2.3-88: Plat, Final).
2.3-41 Flag Stem
A Flag Stem is the narrow portion of a Flag Lot that provides the Lot with Frontage along a public or
Private Street.
2.3-42 Flood, Flooding, or Flood Water
The terms “Flood,” “Flooding,” or “Flood Water” reflect a general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual
and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows).
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 14
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
Flood 2.3-43 Plain or Flood Prone Area
Flood Plains and Flood Prone Areas are land areas susceptible to being inundated by Flood Waters from
any source. See Figure 2.3-H.
Figure 2.3-H: Illustration of a Flood Plain
2.3-44 Floodway, 100-year
A Floodway is the channel of a river or other Watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the 100-year Flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than one foot at any point. See Figure 2.3-I.
Figure 2.3-I: Illustration of a Floodway
2.3-45 Freeway
A Freeway or interstate is a controlled-access highway that has grade-separated interchange connections
with intersecting highways and Streets.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 15
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-46 Frontage
Frontage is all the property abutting on one side of the Right-of-way of a Street, measured along the
Right-of-way line of the Street between the intersecting Lot Lines. In no case shall the line along an
Access Drive be considered as acceptable for Frontage. See Figure 2.3-J.
Figure 2.3-J: Illustration of Frontage
2.3-47 Functional Classification
Functional Classification shall mean the categorization of Streets and roads based on their provided
mobility and access to adjacent land.
2.3-48 Guarantee
A Guarantee is a contract guaranteeing the Developer or Applicant’s obligation to the Planning
Commission to complete approved Subdivision Improvements.
2.3-49 Geotechnical Technician
A Geotechnical Technician shall be trained by, and under the full-time technical direction of, a registered
Professional Engineer in the state of Kentucky. The Engineer shall have at least five years’ experience in
construction materials testing.
2.3-50 Identification Plat
See “Plat, Identification” (Subsection 2.3-88:).
2.3-51 Improvement Drawings
See “Improvement Plans” (Subsection 2.3-52: Improvement Plans).
2.3-52 Improvement Plans
Improvement Plans are the engineering plans showing design layout, types of materials, and construction
details for the physical structures and facilities to be installed in, or in conjunction with a Subdivision.
The terms “Improvement Plans” and “Improvement Drawings” can be used interchangeably.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 16
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-53 Improvements
Improvements are physical changes made to raw land, and the structures placed on or under the land’s
surface, in order to make the land more usable for activities. Typical Improvements in these regulations
would be grading, Street pavement, Curbs, gutters, Drainage ditches, storm and sanitary sewers, and
utility lines of all types.
2.3-54 Inlet Grates
An Inlet Grate is an opening in the pavement covered by a type of protective grate that allows for the
passage of stormwater.
2.3-55 Inspector
An Inspector shall be the person(s) responsible for inspecting Improvements pursuant to these
regulations. See also “Staff” (Subsection 2.3-108: Staff).
2.3-56 Joint, Construction
A stopping place in the process of concrete construction usually set to coincide with a Contraction Joint.
2.3-57 Joint, Contraction
A joint, tooled or cut into freshly placed concrete to induce cracking caused by drying and thermal
shrinkage at preselected locations.
2.3-58 Joint, Expansion
A concrete joint designed to allow for the horizontal movement of concrete due to the effects of thermal
expansion and contraction.
2.3-59 Joint, Longitudinal
A joint in concrete pavement running parallel to the centerline of the Street either tooled, sawn or formed.
2.3-60 Kenton County Planning Commission (KCPC)
The 20-member body appointed by the county judge/executive and mayors and their legislative bodies
that pursues and administers provisions of KRS Chapter 100.
2.3-61 Kentucky Transportation Cabinet (KYTC)
An executive branch agency responsible for overseeing the development and maintenance of a safe,
efficient multi-modal transportation system throughout the state of Kentucky.
2.3-62 KYTC Highway Design Manual
A manual that presents detailed or descriptive design information for Kentucky Road Projects based on
common practice and other resources.
2.3-63 Legislative Body
Legislative Body shall mean the elected board or body responsible for adopting law in the applicable
jurisdiction.
2.3-64 Lot
A Lot is a Parcel of land or any combination of several Lots of record occupied or intended to be
occupied by a principal building or group of buildings, as permitted herein, together with their accessory
buildings or uses and such access, Yards, and open spaces required under these regulations.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 17
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-65 Lot Area
Lot Area is the total area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side, and Rear Lot Lines, but not
including any area occupied by rights-of-way. See Figure 2.3-K.
Figure 2.3-K: Illustration of Lot Area (hatched area)
2.3-66 Lot, Corner
A Corner Lot is a Lot situated at the intersection of two Streets or on a curved Street in which the interior
angle of such intersection or curved Streets does not exceed 135 degrees. See Figure 2.3-L.
Figure 2.3-L: Illustration of a Corner Lot
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 18
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-67 Lot, Double Frontage
A Double Frontage Lot is a Lot, other than a Corner Lot, that has Frontage on two Streets. See Figure
2.3-M.
Figure 2.3-M: Illustration of a Double Frontage Lot
2.3-68 Lot, Flag
A Flag Lot is a Lot that does not contain the minimum required Lot Width at the minimum required front
yard setback. See Figure 2.3-N.
Figure 2.3-N: Illustration of a Flag Lot
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 19
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-69 Lot, Triple Frontage
A Triple Frontage Lot is a Lot that has Frontage on three Streets. See Figure 2.3-O.
Figure 2.3-O: Illustration of a Triple Frontage Lot
2.3-70 Lot Line
A Lot Line is a line of record surrounding a Lot that separates one Lot from another Lot, a public Rightof-
way, or any other public or private space. For the purposes of these regulations, a “Lot Line” may also
be called a “property line.”
2.3-71 Lot Line, Front
A Front Lot Line is the common boundary line of a Lot and a Street Right-of-way line. In the case of a
Corner Lot or a Double Frontage Lot, the Front Lot Line is the common boundary line with that Street
Right-of-way line toward which the principal or usual entrance to the principal building faces. In the
case of a Flag Lot, the interior line most parallel to and nearest the Street Right-of-way line. See Figure
2.3-P.
2.3-72 Lot Line, Rear
A Rear Lot Line is the boundary line of a Lot which is most nearly opposite the Front Lot Line of such
Lot. In the case of a triangular or wedge shaped Lot, for measurement purposes only, a line 10 feet in
length within the Lot parallel to and at the maximum distance from the Front Lot Line. See Figure 2.3-P.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 20
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-73 Lot Line, Side
A Side Lot Line is any boundary line of a Lot, other than a Front Lot Line or Rear Lot Line. See Figure
2.3-P.
Figure 2.3-P: Illustration of front, side, and Rear Lot Lines
2.3-74 Lot Width
The Lot Width is the horizontal distance of a Lot measured between the Side Lot Lines along the
building Front Setback line. See Figure 2.3-Q.
Figure 2.3-Q: Illustration of Lot Width
2.3-75 Median
A Median is a form of Channelization that physically separates traffic movements.
2.3-76 Mixed Use
Mixed Use is a single development containing both residential and nonresidential uses.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 21
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
Multi-Family 2.3-77 Residential Dwelling
A building that contains three or more dwelling units that share common walls or floor/ceilings with one
or more units. The land underneath the structure may or may not be divided into separate Lots. Multi-unit
buildings include structures commonly referred to as “apartments” and “condominiums.”
2.3-78 Parcel
See “Lot” (Subsection 2.3-64: Lot).
2.3-79 Parcel, Residual
A Residual Parcel is a piece of land that is leftover after Lots are laid out in a Subdivision that does not
meet the minimum requirements of the applicable zoning and is therefore inadequate for development.
2.3-80 Parking Area
A Parking Area is an open paved area which primarily affords for vehicular parking and corresponding
drive aisles.
2.3-81 PCA Design and Control of Concrete Mixtures
A reference manual developed by the Portland Cement Association that contains design and placement
specifications for concrete pavements.
2.3-82 Pedestrian Walkway
A Pedestrian Walkway is an improved path intended for pedestrian travel.
2.3-83 Permeable Pavement
Permeable Pavement is a pavement material that allows the infiltration of water through it to be
recharged into the ground below.
2.3-84 Planning Commission
The term “Planning Commission” shall mean the Kenton County Planning Commission in the
Commonwealth of Kentucky.
2.3-85 Planning Jurisdiction
The Planning Jurisdiction includes those areas of Kenton County, Kentucky, which fall under the
jurisdictional authority of the Kenton County Planning Commission, as provided by KRS 100.131.
2.3-86 Plat
A Plat is the map or drawing representing a Parcel of land, showing the location and boundaries of
individual Lots and Streets, created and approved through these regulations.
2.3-87 Plat, Condominium Property Regime
A Condominium Property Regime Plat is a drawing representing a proposed Subdivision of a building
into individual units and common areas as defined under Kentucky Condominium Law whereby the
ownership of each unit may be transferred independently of another unit.
2.3-88 Plat, Final
A Final Plat is the final drawing and documents pertaining to a proposed Subdivision of land which is
submitted formally by an Applicant following approval of the Preliminary Plat. Once approved and
recorded, the Final Plat becomes a lawful Subdivision.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 22
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-89 Plat, Identification
An Identification Plat is a drawing representing a proposed Minor Subdivision of land that does not
contain public Improvements as further defined in Section 3.5: Minor Subdivisions.
2.3-90 Plat, Minor
See “Plat, Identification” (Subsection 2.3-89: Plat, Identification).
2.3-91 Plat, Preliminary
A Preliminary Plat is the preliminary drawings and documents pertaining to a proposed Subdivision of
land which is submitted formally by an Applicant for review under these regulations.
2.3-92 Plat, Record
A Record Plat is the Final Plat that is submitted to the Kenton County Clerk for recordation.
2.3-93 Portland Cement Concrete (Concrete)
Portland Cement Concrete is a composite material commonly used in construction paving projects that
consists of coarse aggregate (crushed stone and gravel), fine aggregate (such as sand), Portland cement
and water.
2.3-94 Preliminary Plat
See “Plat, Preliminary” (Subsection 2.3-91: Plat, Preliminary).
2.3-95 Pumping (or deflection)
Pumping is defined as movement or deflection of the Subgrade soil that extends beyond the limits of the
direct wheel load. Unless accompanied by Rutting (which is common), the pumping Subgrade soil may
rebound back to its original position after the wheel load passes. Pumping failures are typically caused
by Subgrade soils with higher than optimum moisture content located within a zone up to several feet
below the Subgrade surface.
2.3-96 Qualified Geotechnical Engineer
A Geotechnical Engineer who individually, or whose firm, has been accepted onto the City of
Cincinnati’s list of Qualified/Recognized Geotechnical Engineers.
2.3-97 Record Drawing
Redrawn Improvement Drawings after construction is complete that verifies the as-built condition of the
site Improvements.
2.3-98 Record Plat
See “Plat, Record” (Subsection 2.3-92: Plat, Record).
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 23
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-99 ReSubdivision
A ReSubdivision is any change to an approved or recorded Plat that affects a Street layout or Lot Line, or
that affects any map or plan legally recorded prior to the adoption of regulations controlling
Subdivisions. See Figure 2.3-R.
Figure 2.3-R: Illustration of a ReSubdivision
2.3-100 Right-of-way
A Right-of-way is a strip of land used, occupied, or intended to be used or occupied by transportation and
public use facilities such as Streets, railroads, and utility lines. See Figure 2.3-S. The term Right-of-way
may be abbreviated as ROW or R/W.
Figure 2.3-S: Illustration of a Right-of-way
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 24
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-101 Roadway
See “Street” (Subsection 2.3-109: Street) and any variation of Street as the terms “Roadway” and
“Street” can be used interchangeably.
2.3-102 Rutting
Rutting is defined as imprints or depressions in the Subgrade caused by direct wheel loads. Rutting
failures are typically caused by inadequate compaction of near surface soils.
2.3-103 Setback
A Setback is the required distance between a side, rear or front property line and the exterior face of the
foundation of a building or structure as regulated by the applicable Legislative Body’s Zoning Ordinance.
2.3-104 Sidewalk
A Sidewalk is a Pedestrian Walkway within a Right-of-way of a Public Street or Access easement of a
Private Street but not on the Street surface.
2.3-105 Sight Distance
Sight Distance is the length of the Street or Roadway ahead that is visible to the driver.
2.3-106 Single-Family Residential Dwelling (Attached)
A single dwelling unit located on its own Lot that shares one or more common or adjacent walls with one
or more dwelling units. An attached house does not share common floor/ceilings with other dwelling
units. An attached house is also called a “townhouse” or a “rowhouse.”
2.3-107 Single-Family Residential Dwelling (Detached)
A detached house is a building containing a single dwelling unit (other than a mobile home or
manufactured housing unit) that is located on its own Lot and that is not attached to any other dwelling
unit. Detached houses are surrounded on all sides by open Yards and Setback areas.
2.3-108 Staff
Staff shall mean the Duly Authorized Staff of the Kenton County Planning Commission.
2.3-109 Street
A Street is a vehicular way that affords a means of transport and access to abutting property. Streets are
further classified by Functional Classification and Street type as defined in these regulations. A Driveway
or Access Drive shall not be classified as a Street.
2.3-110 Street, Arterial
An Arterial Street is a public Street which primarily serves through traffic and most of the trips
entering/leaving large urban areas and major traffic generators.
2.3-111 Street, Collector
A collector street which primarily serves to collect traffic from Local Streets and also connect smaller
urbanized areas and traffic generators. A collector street typically serves greater than 500 Lots.
2.3-112 Street, Local
A Local Street is a paved vehicular way which primarily serves to provide direct access to abutting
properties. Local Streets typically serve no more than 199 Lots.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 25
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-113 Street, Private
A Private Street is a paved vehicular way constructed or intended to be constructed within the boundaries
of a privately owned Parcel of land.
2.3-114 Street, Public
A Public Street is a paved vehicular way constructed or intended to be constructed within the boundaries
of a dedicated and accepted public Right-of-way.
2.3-115 Street, Subcollector
A Subcollector Street is a street which primarily serves to connect Local Streets with Collector Streets. A
Subcollector Street typically serves more than 200 Lots, but less than 500 Lots.
2.3-116 Street Name Sign
A Street Name Sign is a sign that identifies only the applicable Street name, including all prefixes and
suffixes, and which may include a logo of the community.
2.3-117 Subdivider
A Subdivider is the individual(s) or entity subdividing land.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 26
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-118 Subdivision
A Subdivision is the division of a Parcel of land into two or more Lots or Parcels for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of sale, lease, or building development, or if a new Street is involved, any
division of a Parcel of land; providing that a division of land for agricultural use and not involving a new
Street shall not be deemed a Subdivision. The term includes ReSubdivision and, when appropriate to the
context, shall relate to the process of Subdivision or to the land subdivided; any division or redivision of
land into Parcels of less than one acre occurring within 12 months following a division of the same land
shall be deemed a Subdivision within the meaning of these regulations. See Figure 2.3-T.
Figure 2.3-T: Illustration of the development spectrum of Subdivisions
2.3-119 Subdivision, Major
A Major Subdivision is a proposed Subdivision of land that contains public infrastructure Improvements
or the construction of a public or Private Street. See Figure 2.3-U.
Figure 2.3-U: Illustrative example of a Major Subdivision
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 27
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-120 Subdivision, Minor
A Minor Subdivision is a proposed Subdivision of land that does not contain public infrastructure
Improvements. See Figure 2.3-V.
Figure 2.3-V: Illustrative example of a Minor Subdivision
2.3-121 Subgrade
The Subgrade is the layer of soil or soil base that pavement or an improvement is constructed upon.
2.3-122 Surety
See “Guarantee” (Subsection 2.3-48: Guarantee).
2.3-123 Surveyor
A Surveyor is a registered professional Surveyor in good standing with the Kentucky State Board of
Licensure for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors.
2.3-124 Tract
A tract is a Parcel of land identified by letter or number, the boundaries of which are shown on a recorded
Plat. See also “Lot” (Subsection 2.3-64: Lot).
2.3-125 Traffic Control
Traffic Control shall mean signs or devices that regulate traffic movement.
2.3-126 Traffic Impact Study (TIS)
A traffic impact study is a study analyzing existing and anticipated Street conditions to determine traffic
impacts associated with potential development. See Article 7: Traffic Impact Studies.
2.3-127 Treelawn
A planting strip typically between the Sidewalk and the edge of the Street.
2.3-128 Watercourse
A permanent channel designed to carry concentrated stormwater flows without causing erosion.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 28
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-129 Yard
A Yard is a space on the same Lot or Parcel with the main building, open, unoccupied, and unobstructed
by structures, except as otherwise provided in these regulations. See Figure 2.3-W, Figure 2.3-X, Figure
2.3-Z, and Figure 2.3-Y.
Figure 2.3-W: Illustration of yard areas (hatched area) on a typical Lot
2.3-130 Yard, Front
A Front Yard is an area between the front building line and the Front Lot Line, as defined herein,
extending from Side Lot Line to Side Lot Line. See Figure 2.3-X.
Figure 2.3-X: Illustration of a front yard (hatched area)
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 29
Article 2: Definitions and Rules for Interpretation
Section 2.3: Definitions
2.3-131 Yard, Rear
A Rear Yard is an area between the rear building line and the Front Lot Line, as defined herein,
extending from Side Lot Line to Side Lot Line. See Figure 2.3-Y.
Figure 2.3-Y: Illustration of a rear yard (hatched area)
2.3-132 Yard, Side
A Side Yard is an area between any building and the Side Lot Line, as defined herein, extending from the
front to the Rear Yard or on through Lots or building sites from one Front Lot Line to the other Front Lot
Line. See Figure 2.3-Z.
Figure 2.3-Z: Illustration of side yards (hatched areas)
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 30
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.1: Purpose
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.1: Purpose
3.1-1 This article fulfills the administration requirements of Kentucky Revised Statutes (KRS) 100.273 through
100.292. It shall be the responsibility of Staff to administer these regulations, including performance of
all inspections on behalf of the Kenton County Planning Commission as provided for in these
regulations.
3.1-2 This article also fulfills the procedural requirements of Kentucky Revised Statutes (KRS) 100.273
through 100.292. By establishing these procedures, it assures a necessary component of harmonious,
progressive, and aesthetically-pleasing development. Furthermore, these procedures promote the health,
safety, and general welfare of the public in Kenton County. To further these more general purposes, this
article:
(A) Assures that land is divided according to policies set forth in the Comprehensive Plan;
(B) Promotes the coordination of existing and proposed Streets, utilities, and community facilities;
(C) Assures each Plat conforms to the principles, design standards, and construction standards set forth
in these regulations; and
(D) Provides methods for making changes to recorded Plats and assures the changes conform to the
purposes and requirements of these regulations.
Section 3.2: Review and Decision-Making Bodies
3.2-1 Authority of the Planning Commission
Unless otherwise modified herein, the authority and duties of the Kenton County Planning Commission
as it relates to these Subdivision regulations shall be as established in KRS 100.133 through 100.182 and
KRS 100.273 through KRS 100.292.
3.2-2 Delegation of Responsibilities to Staff
Unless otherwise specified, the Planning Commission authorizes staff to administer these regulations
pursuant to KRS 100.281(1). This authorization shall include, but not be limited to, the following
responsibilities:
(A) To interpret these regulations, including the ability to determine appropriate review processes, and
the applicability and substance of design standards;
(B) To review, process, and make decisions on all Plats and Improvement Plans;
(C) To inspect all work required by these regulations;
(D) To be in receipt of and to distribute fees collected as a result of these regulations;
(E) To distribute Plats and plans to various governmental bodies for review; and
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 31
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.3: Common Subdivision Requirements
(F) To assure compliance with these regulations that shall include the authority to:
(1) Notify any person(s) responsible for violating these regulations;
(2) Seek injunctions; and
(3) Institute any remedies permitted under KRS 100.
Authority 3.2-3 and Duty of Inspectors
Inspectors shall be members of Staff who are authorized to inspect all work performed and all materials
furnished in the following manner:
(A) Inspectors shall not revoke, alter, or waive any requirements of the approved plans, but call to the
attention of the Contractor and/or Project Engineer any failure of the work or materials to conform
to the approved plans and/or these Subdivision regulations.
(B) Any work determined by the Inspectors not to conform to the requirements of the approved plans
and/or these Subdivision regulations shall be suspended and such construction brought into
conformance with the approved plans and/or these Subdivision regulations.
(C) The Inspector’s authority includes the right to order items removed and replaced and/or additional
testing performed when work does not comply with the approved plans and/or these Subdivision
regulations, or when work was performed without the required notification or inspection.
Section 3.3: Common Subdivision Requirements
The requirements of this section shall apply to all Subdivisions and Applications subject to review under these
regulations, unless otherwise stated.
3.3-1 Authority to File Applications
The person having legal authority to take action in accordance with the approval sought shall file an
Application for any review in accordance with these regulations. The person having legal authority shall
be the record owner or the duly Authorized Agent of the record owner and may be required to provide
proof of such authority at the time of application.
3.3-2 Application Contents
(A) Submittal Requirements
(1) Applications required under these regulations shall be submitted in a form and in such
numbers as established by these regulations. A list of the requirements shall be made
available to the public.
(2) The Applicant shall attest to the truth and correctness of all facts and information presented
with the Application.
(B) Submission of Fees
(1) Applications shall be accompanied by a processing fee as established in the Planning
Commission’s by-laws.
(2) The Subdivider shall pay all fees due at the time of submittal.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 32
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.3: Common Subdivision Requirements
(3) Processing fees are not refundable except where the Applicant withdraws the Application
prior to a complete review by Staff. If the Applicant requests the withdrawal of an
Application (in writing), Staff shall determine the amount of the submittal fee used for
review based on an hourly fee and shall refund any amount not already used for Staff review.
(C) Complete Application Submittal Determination
(1) Staff shall only initiate the review and processing of Applications submitted under this article
if such Application submittal is determined to be complete.
(2) Staff shall make a determination of Application submittal completeness within five business
days of the Application filing.
(3) If the Application submittal is determined to be complete, the Application shall then be
processed according to the procedures set forth in these regulations.
(4) If an Application submittal is determined to be incomplete, Staff shall provide notice to the
Applicant along with an explanation of the Application submittal’s deficiencies. No further
processing of an incomplete Application shall occur until the deficiencies are corrected.
(5) If any false or misleading information is submitted or supplied by an Applicant on an
Application, that Application shall be deemed incomplete.
3.3-3 Digital Submission Policy
(A) Purpose of the Digital Submission Policy
The purpose of this policy is to describe the content, format, and standards required for the digital
submission of Subdivision Plats and development plans.
(B) Applicability
All Preliminary Plats, Improvement Drawings, Final Plats, and Record Drawings that were
produced digitally shall be submitted digitally in accordance with this subsection.
(C) Minimum Required Content
All information submitted shall be at an accurate scale. The minimum information that shall be
submitted for each Plat or drawing shall include:
(1) Preliminary Plats
a) Exterior boundary lines of the property;
b) Proposed Lot Lines;
c) Proposed Street centerlines and rights-of-way;
d) A north arrow; and
e) All required annotations.
(2) Improvement Drawings
a) Exterior boundary lines of the property;
b) Proposed Lot Lines;
c) Proposed Street centerlines and rights-of-way;
d) Proposed edges of pavement;
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 33
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.3: Common Subdivision Requirements
e) Proposed Sidewalks;
f) Proposed storm and sanitary sewers;
g) The proposed water system (e.g., water lines, hydrants, valves);
h) Existing utilities & Sidewalks; and
i) All required annotations.
(3) Final Plats
Digital files for a Final Plat shall provide a complete submission of all information outlined
in Subsection 3.6-6(E): Additional Content Requirements for Final Plats.
(4) Record Drawings
a) Platted property lines;
b) Lot numbers;
c) Right-of-way lines;
d) Easement lines;
e) As-built information of storm sewers, sanitary sewers, and water system components
(e.g., hydrants and valves).
(D) Accepted File Formats for Digital Submissions
Files will be accepted and implemented into the Planning and Development Services (PDS)
Geographic Information System (GIS) using the following formats:
(1) Microstation drawings as stored in a design format with a .DGN extension generated by
Microstation up to release V8 2004.
(2) AutoCad drawings as stored in a proprietary drawing file format with the .DWG extension.
Files will be accepted generated by AutoCad release 12 and higher.
(3) ArcGIS Software that produces a shape file (.shp) or geodatabase (.mdb).
(E) Accepted Standards and Data Integrity Requirements
(1) A layer system should be utilized. Each unique feature should have its own unique layer as
illustrated in Figure 3.3-A.
(2) Data accuracy standards shall conform to the requirements of the official hard copy and 201
KAR 18.150 of the Standards of Practice for Professional Land Surveyors.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 34
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.3: Common Subdivision Requirements
Figure 3.3-A: Example illustration of layers properties for digital submissions
(F) Tie to Horizontal Control
The following standards apply to all digitally submitted Plats and drawings:
(1) The boundary of the submitted plan shall be tied into the NAD 1983 Kentucky SPCS North
FIPS 1601;
(2) A reference shall be made as to which monuments were used for control; and
(3) Upon review with the Applicant’s Surveyor/Engineer, Staff may grant a modification or
waiver to the above requirements providing the Planning Commission shall find that the
proposed development does not lie within one mile of a horizontal control monument
established in the Northern Kentucky Control Network. The one mile shall be measured
along existing Street centerlines to the nearest available monument.
(G) Media Requirements
(1) Digital submissions will be accepted using the following media and methods:
a) A readable compact disc (CD-R);
b) Email of file provided that file size does not exceed eight megabytes;
c) Iomega or WinZip files; or
d) Publication to a FTP site provided by PDS.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 35
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.3: Common Subdivision Requirements
(2) All media submitted will provide labels or an attached transcript with the information as
illustrated the example provided in Table 3.3-1.
TABLE 3.3-1:LABEL INFORMATION FOR DIGITAL SUBMISSIONS
REQUIRED INFORMATION EXAMPLE
Project or Subdivision Name Sunny Acres
File Name sunnyacres.dwg
Date June 26, 2002
Company Name Bailey & Associates, Inc.
PLS/PE Joe Smith
Registration No. PLS 53405
Format DWG
(H) Availability of Information
Digitally submitted information shall not be available to the general public in the same digital
format in which it was delivered. The governing documentation will be in a hard copy format.
(I) Adjustments to Requirements
PDS reserves the right to waive or adjust requirements specified herein based on the continued
maintenance of the Kenton County GIS.
Examination and Copying of 3.3-4 Application and Other Document
Documents and/or records may be inspected and/or copied as provided for by state law.
3.3-5 Computation of Time
(A) In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by these regulations, the date of the
Application, act, decision, or event, from which the designated period of time begins shall not be
included. The last date of the period of time to be computed shall be included, unless it is a
Saturday, a Sunday, or a legal holiday, in which case the period runs until the end of the next day
which is not a Saturday, a Sunday, or a legal holiday as observed by the Staff’s offices where the
offices are closed for the entire day.
(B) When the offices are closed to the public for the entire day which constitutes the last day of the
period of time, then such Application, act, decision, or event may be performed on the next
succeeding days which is not a Saturday, a Sunday, or a legal holiday observed by Staff in which
the Staff’s offices are closed for the entire day.
3.3-6 Subdivider and/or Contractor Construction Responsibilities
(A) The Subdivider and/or Contractor shall have a superintendent acting as the agent for the project
that shall have available at all times, a copy of all approved plans and specifications.
(B) The Subdivider’s and/or Contractor's superintendent shall be capable of reading and thoroughly
understanding the plans and specifications and shall always be available regardless of the amount
of work sublet.
(C) The name and contact information of the Subdivider’s and/or Contractor’s superintendent shall be
submitted to Staff prior to the beginning of any site work.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 36
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.4: Guarantees for Improvements
(D) The Contractor shall notify Staff and/or the Inspectors at least 24 hours prior to the time when the
work is to begin on each phase of construction including earthwork, utilities, Street paving,
Sidewalk, and all applicable testing.
3.3-7 Final Clean Up of Site
The Subdivider and/or Contractor shall remove all debris or excess materials in connection with the
completed work within the proposed street Right-of-way, prior to Final Plat approval.
Section 3.4: Guarantees for Improvements
3.4-1 General Provisions
(A) A Subdivider may execute and file a written Guarantee with the Planning Commission in lieu of
actual installation or completion of the required public Improvements or Private Street construction
when requesting approval of a Final Plat.
(B) The amount of the Guarantee shall be based on a cost estimate provided by the Project Engineer or
Developer, approved by Staff, for the cost to complete the public Improvements contained on the
section(s) of Final Plat plus a 10 percent contingency fee.
(1) Where applicable, engineering, plan review, and construction review fees, etc., shall be
required to be a part of the cost estimate.
(2) After a period of two years from the date of submittal, Staff shall require that a revised
estimate and bond be submitted by the Developer or guarantor that reflects updated unit
prices if the unit prices have increased.
(C) Unit prices used in the cost estimate shall be based on R.S. Means Construction Cost Data, latest
edition.
(D) Guarantees shall be made payable to the Planning Commission and be acceptable to Staff and the
Planning Commission's legal counsel.
(E) Incomplete Improvements that Staff determines constitutes a safety hazard, is a maintenance issue,
or is necessary for the effective functioning of the infrastructure or Improvements, shall be required
to be completed prior to the approval of a Final Plat.
(F) The Guarantee shall have no expiration date and contain the condition that should the Subdivider
fail to complete all Guaranteed Improvements within 24 calendar months from the date of Final
Plat approval, the Planning Commission shall be authorized to claim the proceeds from the
Guarantee and use them to pay for the completion of all the Guaranteed Improvements.
(G) Should the Subdivider fail to complete the Guaranteed Improvements prior to 24 calendar months
from the date of Final Plat approval, the Planning Commission shall be authorized to claim the
proceeds from the Guarantee and use them to pay for the completion all of the Guaranteed
Improvements.
(H) Written verification shall be provided to the Subdivider by Staff when Guaranteed Improvements
have been completed in accord with the Subdivision regulations. Such written verification shall
constitute a release of any remaining Guarantee.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 37
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.5: Minor Subdivisions
3.4-2 Types of Guarantees
(A) A Guarantee shall be an assurance of faithful performance executed by the Subdivider for all
required uncompleted public Improvements and shall be in one of the following forms:
(1) Cash, check, cashier’s check, or money order;
(2) A Subdivision bond secured from an insurance company;
(3) An irrevocable standby letter of credit from a financial institution; or
(4) A certificate of deposit from a financial institution.
(B) Final Plats will not be released until checks, excluding cashier’s checks, have cleared the financial
institution.
(C) All Guarantees shall comply with the form and content contained in Section 3.4: Guarantees for
Improvements of these regulations.
Section 3.5: Minor Subdivisions
3.5-1 Minor Subdivision Applicability
(A) In order to be subject to the Minor Subdivision review process, the proposed Subdivision of land
shall:
(1) Be located along an existing Public Street or Roadway accepted for maintenance by the
applicable Legislative Body if the proposed Lots will be used for building purposes;
(2) Not involve the creation of a new Street or the widening or extension of a public or Private
Street; and
(3) Contain no proposed public utility Improvements.
(B) The Minor Subdivision process may also be used for the attachment of
land to an adjacent Parcel or consolidation of two Lots.
3.5-2 Review Process for Minor Subdivisions
Minor Subdivisions shall require the approval of an Identification Plat or a
Final Plat. The review process for an Identification Plat is outlined in this
subsection. The review process for a Final Plat is found in Subsection 3.6-6:
Final Plat Review and Recordation.
(A) Step 1 – Application
The Identification Plat, Application, fee, and any additional requirements
of this section shall be submitted for review at the Planning Commission
offices.
(B) Step 2 – Review and Decision by Staff
(1) Staff shall review the Identification Plat and Application and
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the Identification
Plats within 10 business days from the date the Plat and
Application is determined to be complete (See Subsection 3.3-
2(C): Complete Application Submittal Determination.) unless this
Review Process for
Minor Subdivisions
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 38
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.5: Minor Subdivisions
time is extended by agreement between Staff and the Applicant.
(2) Staff’s decision shall be made in writing.
(3) Conditional approvals and disapprovals shall be accompanied by written conditions or
reasons for the disapproval.
(4) An Applicant may appeal Staff’s decision in accordance with Section 3.10: Appeal of Staff
Actions.
(C) Step 3 – Recordation
(1) Approved Identification Plats shall be forwarded by Staff to the Kenton County Clerk for
recordation. Such forwarding of the approved Identification Plat shall not result in the
recordation of the Plat.
(2) Recordation shall not occur until the Applicant, or the Applicant’s representative, formally
requests such recordation at the offices of the Kenton County Clerk. Approved Identification
Plats remain valid and available for recordation for two years from the date of Staff’s
approval.
(3) Approved Identification Plats not recorded within two years from the date of Staff’s approval
must be resubmitted for review and approval. Resubmitted Identification Plats shall require
the submittal of all new information and fees as required by these regulations
(4) Approved Identification Plats must be recorded before the property can be transferred.
Technical Requirements f 3.5-3 or Identification Plats
An Identification Plat submitted for approval shall be prepared in compliance with 201 Kentucky
Administrative Regulations (KAR) 18.150 and:
(A) Drawn to an accurate scale of one inch is equal to 200 feet or greater;
(B) Contain a prepared date and signature from the Surveyor dated to within 90 days from the date of
submittal; and
(C) Submitted on two sets of paper that is no larger than 8.5 by 14 inches in size.
3.5-4 Additional Content Requirements for Identification Plats
An Identification Plat submitted for approval shall conform to the applicable zoning ordinance and shall
contain the following information, as applicable.
(A) A Right-of-way parcel measured from the centerline of the abutting Street indicating intent to
dedicate one half of the Right-of-way required for a new Street of the same classification. This
shall be accompanied by the following signed and notarized certificate of the owner(s) indicating
dedication of the required Right-of-way (See Figure 3.5-A and Figure 3.5-B.):
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 39
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.5: Minor Subdivisions
DEDICATION CERTIFICATE
We, the undersigned, do hereby adopt this plat, dedicate the Right-ofway
as shown on the plat herein to public use and further certify that
the title to the property shown herein is part or all of the same
property conveyed to us by deed dated _______and recorded in Deed
Book______, Page _______ of the ____________ County records at
_____________, KY.
Owner’s Signature _____________ Date _____________
Figure 3.5-A: Dedication Certificate
NOTARY ACKNOWLEDGMENT
County of ____________________
State of _____________________
I,__________________, a notary public in and for said county and
state, do certify that the foregoing instrument was acknowledged
before me this ____ Day of ___________, 200___By (Name of
Signer) , (Title) , (Company Name) .
Signed: __________________________
Notary Public State of ______________
My Commission Expires: ____________
Figure 3.5-B: Notary Acknowledgment
(B) Subdivisions of land that do not meet the minimum requirements for a buildable Lot shall contain
the following statement (as illustrated in Figure 3.5-C):
Subject parcel is a non-buildable parcel by itself and is approved for
attachment to adjacent land. This approval does not constitute a
guarantee that the resulting parcel complies with any other regulatory
agency’s requirements.
Figure 3.5-C: Non-Buildable Lot Statement
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 40
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.5: Minor Subdivisions
(C) Subdivisions of land within previously approved Preliminary Plats or Stage I Development Plans
shall contain the following statement (as illustrated in Figure 3.5-D):
Any development within or further Subdivision of the subject tract
shall comply with the previously approved preliminary plat (and/or
stage I development plan) on file at the Planning Commission
offices.
Figure 3.5-D: Previously Approved Preliminary or Stage I Plan Statement
(D) Sufficient information shall be included to locate the Parcel being subdivided in relation to
previously subdivided Parcels, as well as to their location within the original tract of land.
(E) The approval certificate illustrated in Figure 3.5-E.
APPROVAL CERTIFICATE
Approved for attachment to deed and conveyance purposes by the
Kenton County Planning Commission. This approval does not
constitute a guarantee that the resulting parcel(s) complies with
any other regulatory agency’s requirements.
this ________day of _____________________, 20___.
By: _____________________________
_____________________________
Chair, Kenton County Planning Commission
Figure 3.5-E: Approval certificate for Identification Plats
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 41
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.5: Minor Subdivisions
(F) A Surveyor’s Certificate that indicates the following (as illustrated in Figure 3.5-F):
SURVEYOR’S CERTIFICATE
I hereby certify that the survey depicted by this plat was done by
persons under my direct supervision by the method of random
traverse with sideshots. The unadjusted precision ratio of the
traverse was 1:_______ and the directions and distances shown on
the plat are based on a traverse that (was/was not) adjusted. The
reference meridian basis shown hereon is
from_________________________. This survey is a
(Rural/Urban) Survey and the accuracy and precision of said
survey meets all the specifications of this class and complies with
201 KAR 18:150. )
Signature____________________PLS
#________Date___________
Figure 3.5-F: Surveyor’s Certificate
(G) An Owners Certificate that indicates the following (as illustrated in Figure 3.5-G):
OWNERS CERTIFICATE
We the undersigned, do hereby adopt this plat and consent and
accept all easements and matters shown heron and further certify
that the title to the property shown hereon is part or all of the same
property conveyed to us by deed dated__________and recorded in
Deed Book________, Page_________of the ___________County
records at ______________KY.
Owners
Signature__________________________Date___________
Figure 3.5-G: Owners Certificate
(H) Subdivisions which will utilize on-site sewage disposal systems shall contain the following
statement (as illustrated in Figure 3.5-H):
Plat approval for building development and/or alteration of existing on-site systems on
each lot is contingent upon the issuance of a sewage construction permit and inspection
by the local and/or state health board or district.
Figure 3.5-H: On-Site Sewage Disposal Statement
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 42
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.5: Minor Subdivisions
(I) Plats in which no Subdivision of land is taking place and a plat is being requested for attachment to
a deed to clear up title confusion or otherwise shall contain the following statement (as illustrated
in Figure 3.5-I):
Survey plat represents all of the property conveyed
to_________________as recorded in O.R. C-xx, pg. xx. No new
subdivision of the property is shown. Plat approval indicates the
survey meets the requirements of 201 KAR 18:150 only.
Figure 3.5-I: Attachment or Title Confusion Statement
(J) All Easements that are to be established on the plat shall indicate the grantor of the Easement, the
recipient of the Easement and the purpose of the Easement.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 43
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
3.6-1 Major Subdivision Applicability
Any Subdivision that does not qualify as a Minor Subdivision
(See Subsection 3.5-1: Minor Subdivision Applicability.) or a
Condominium Property Regime Plat (See Subsection 3.7-1:
Condominium Property Regime Plat Applicability.) shall be
subject to the Major Subdivision review process outlined in
this section.
3.6-2 Summary of Overall Major Subdivision Process
Major Subdivisions are reviewed in a four-step process that
includes the following steps that are further defined in the next
subsections:
(A) Preliminary Plat Review
(B) Grading Plan Review
(C) Improvement Drawings/Plan Review
(D) Final Plat Review and Recordation
3.6-3 Preliminary Plat Review
(A) Step 1 - Pre-application Meeting
(1) Attendance at a pre-application meeting(s)
between Staff and the Applicant is required prior
to submission of an Application for Major
Subdivision review. The purpose of this meeting
is to:
a) Acquaint the Applicant with the standards
and requirements of these regulations;
b) Review with the Applicant the required
procedures and Application requirements;
and
c) Allow Staff and other regulatory authorities
to identify problematic components of the
project and to suggest improvements that
will speed the approval process and avoid
future costly plan revisions.
i) The Applicant and/or their
representatives and their invitees,
Staff, regulatory agencies and public
utility agencies shall be permitted to
attend pre-application meetings.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 44
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
(2) The following provisions apply to required pre-application meetings:
a) Pre-application meetings are held weekly and do not require a formal Application or
payment of any fee.
b) Pre-application meetings may be scheduled with Staff at least 24 hours in advance of
the next regularly scheduled meeting.
c) Conceptual layouts of the proposed Subdivision (which are not required to be prepared
by design professionals) are encouraged. These layouts should include:
i) The proposed site;
ii) The proposed use;
iii) The proposed access; and
iv) The proposed density.
d) Discussion during pre-application meetings should focus on:
i) Vehicular and pedestrian circulation;
ii) Improvements needed for new and/or existing infrastructure (water, sewer,
traffic, Watercourse disturbance, etc.);
iii) Storm water management and tree canopy preservation;
iv) Spatial elements such as Street and Lot layout;
v) Connectivity to adjacent properties;
vi) Open space and recreation areas including maintenance and dedication options;
and
vii) Other issues that will facilitate design and development of a better Subdivision
such as issues of hillside disturbance and grading.
(3) Pre-applications are non-binding on Staff or the applicable Legislative Body and should not
be construed to be an approval of any type.
(B) Step 2 – Application
(1) The Preliminary Plat, Application, fee, and any additional requirements of this section shall
be submitted for review.
(2) Preliminary Plats may be submitted at any time following the required pre-application
meeting.
(3) Preliminary Plat submissions shall be forwarded to applicable regulatory authorities with a
request that any comments be returned within seven business days.
(C) Step 3 – Review and Decision by Staff
(1) Staff shall review the Preliminary Plat and Application and approve, conditionally approve,
or disapprove the Plat within 15 business days from the date the Plat and Application is
determined to be complete (See Subsection 3.3-2(C): Complete Application Submittal
Determination.) unless this time is extended by agreement between Staff and the Applicant.
(2) Staff’s decision shall be made in writing.
(3) Conditional approvals and disapprovals shall be accompanied by written conditions or
reasons for the disapproval.
(4) Following Preliminary Plat approval, Applicants may proceed to grading plan and
Improvement Drawings review or may submit a Final Plat, as applicable.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 45
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
(5) Approved Preliminary Plats remain valid for two years from the date of Staff’s approval.
(6) If public Street or utility Improvements are involved, the approval of each phase of
Improvement Drawings extends the Preliminary Plat approval an additional two years from
the date of the approval of Improvement Drawings.
(7) Approved Preliminary Plats shall continue to remain valid if site work is progressing.
(8) If public Street or utility Improvements are not involved, the approval of each section of a
Final Plat extends the Preliminary Plat approval an additional two years from the date of
Final Plat approval.
(9) An Applicant may extend Preliminary Plat approval for two years upon written request if
Staff determines that appreciable changes in the vicinity of the approved Preliminary Plat
have not occurred. This two year extension may be granted by Staff on no more than one
occasion.
(D) Technical Requirements for Preliminary Plats
A Preliminary Plat submitted for approval shall be drawn to a scale of one inch equals 200 feet or
greater and submitted in two formats:
(1) On paper no larger than 24 inches by 36 inches in size; and
(2) In an electronic copy that conforms to the digital submission policy contained in Subsection
3.3-3: Digital Submission Policy if the Preliminary Plat was digitally generated.
(E) Additional Content Requirements for Preliminary Plats
A Preliminary Plat submitted for approval shall contain the following basic items and information:
(1) The proposed name of the Subdivision; in no case shall the name of a proposed Subdivision
duplicate or be similar to an approved Subdivision within the Planning Commission’s
jurisdiction unless it is an extension or expansion of that Subdivision;
(2) The name and address of the Owner / Developer, date, north arrow, and an accurate graphic
and written scale;
(3) The name and address of the Engineer or Surveyor responsible for the design of the
Preliminary Plat along with that professional’s stamp and signature. Where a Subdivision
proposal involves public infrastructure Improvements, the Preliminary Plat shall be prepared
by an Engineer;
(4) A vicinity map showing the proposed location of the Subdivision in relation to Streets in the
area;
(5) The original parent tract deed book and page, group number, and remaining acreage;
(6) All proposed uses including the type of housing (e.g., single-family attached or detached,
townhouses, duplexes, etc.) and any public dedication or reservation of land;
(7) The outline of any existing buildings, Access Drives, or other Improvements and an
indication as to whether these are to be retained;
(8) The acreage of land to be subdivided, the total number of Lots, the numbering of each Lot,
and if applicable the approximate number of acres in open space or other public uses;
(9) Existing contours with intervals of not more than two feet to reflect the current topography of
the proposed Subdivision with elevations based on mean sea level (USGS data);
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 46
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
(10) All landscaped areas within public rights-of-way along with provisions for their
maintenance. Drainage facilities shall be provided for landscape islands that contain
irrigation systems.
(11) The following regarding land within 100 feet of the Subdivision boundary:
a) Existing buildings;
b) Visible cemeteries;
c) Known historical landmarks or features;
d) Railroads;
e) Bridges;
f) All private/public utility facilities and Easements;
g) Water courses;
h) The names and deed book and page numbers for all adjoining property owners;
i) The numbering of all adjoining sections and Lots where the land has been subdivided;
and
j) The applicable zoning.
(12) A statement indicating the area of the smallest Lot in the Subdivision;
(13) A statement indicating the minimum Lot Width at the building Setback line;
(14) The layout of the following existing and proposed public/private utilities as well as a notation
as to whether they will be installed underground or overhead:
a) Storm and sanitary sewer lines;
b) Stormwater runoff control facilities;
c) Water lines;
d) Gas lines;
e) Telephone lines;
f) Electric lines; and
g) Cable service.
(15) Locations and widths of proposed Streets as well as a notation as to whether they are to be
public or private;
(16) The approximate boundaries of the 100-year Flood Plain based on National Flood Insurance
Program maps and the approximate boundaries of the 500-year Flood Plain if available;
(17) Known subsurface conditions that are not typical or which may cause problems (e.g. problem
soils, geological formations, wells, known mineral deposits, etc.); and
(18) The need for and scope of a Traffic Impact Study shall be determined by the traffic impact
study regulations contained in Article 7: Traffic Impact Studies.
(F) Revisions to Approved Preliminary Plats
An Applicant may find it necessary to make changes to the arrangement, size, number, or location
of individual Lots, Streets, or utilities after a Preliminary Plat has been approved. These changes
can be determined to be major or minor in nature by Staff.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 47
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
(1) Changes that are minor in nature include those that:
a) Do not increase overall density more than 10 percent;
b) Do not significantly alter vehicular or pedestrian circulation patterns;
c) Do not decrease the amount and/or usability of open space or recreation areas more
than 10 percent;
d) Require submission of a revised Preliminary Plat and/or Improvement Drawings;
and/or
e) Can be processed administratively by Staff.
(2) Changes that are major in nature include those that:
a) Increase the overall density more than 10 percent;
b) Will significantly alter vehicular or pedestrian circulation patterns;
c) Decrease the amount and/or usability of open space or recreation areas more than 10
percent;
d) Will require a pre-application meeting and submission of a revised Preliminary Plat
and/or Improvement Drawings including Application and fees; and/or
e) Must be processed in accordance with Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions.
3.6-4 Grading Plan Review
(A) Step 1 - Application
(1) Grading plans may only be submitted after approval of a Preliminary Plat.
(2) Grading plan submissions shall be forwarded to the applicable Legislative Body with a
request that any comments be returned within seven business days.
(3) Grading plan submissions may be forwarded to other regulatory authorities (e.g.,
public/private utilities, County public works department, transportation cabinet, etc.) in order
to seek input and coordinate reviews.
(B) Step 2 – Review and Decision by Staff
(1) Staff shall review the grading plan submission and approve, disapprove, or require revision
to the grading plan in writing within 15 business days from the date the plan submittal is
determined to be complete (See Subsection 3.3-2(C): Complete Application Submittal
Determination.) unless this time is extended by agreement between Staff and the Applicant.
(2) Staff’s decision shall be in writing.
(3) Conditional approvals and disapprovals shall be accompanied by written conditions or
reasons for the disapproval.
(4) Grading plans shall be generally consistent with the approved Preliminary Plat.
(5) Grading plans shall be approved by Staff prior to the commencement of any earthwork
operations and/or storm sewer installation. Failure to comply shall be considered a violation
of these regulations.
(6) Approved grading plans remain valid for two years from the date of approval.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 48
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
(7) The approval of each phase of an improvement drawing extends the grading plan approval an
additional year from the date of the improvement plan approval.
(8) Approved grading plans shall continue to remain valid if site work is progressing.
(9) An Applicant may extend the approval of the grading plan for two years upon written request
if staff determines that appreciable changes in the vicinity of the approved Preliminary Plat
have not occurred. This two year extension may be granted by staff on no more than one
occasion.
(C) Technical Requirements for Grading Plans
A grading plan submitted for approval shall be drawn to a scale of one inch equals 50 feet or
greater and submitted in three sets on paper no larger than 24 by 36 inches in size unless another
scale is approved by Staff.
(D) Additional Content Requirements for Grading Plans
A grading plan submitted for approval shall contain the following basic items and information:
(1) The proposed name of the Subdivision; in no case shall the name of a proposed Subdivision
duplicate or be similar to an approved Subdivision within the Planning Commission’s
jurisdiction unless it is an extension or expansion of that Subdivision;
(2) The names and addresses of owner and Developer of the Subdivision and the Kentucky
Registered Professional Engineer responsible for the design of all Improvements. The plan
shall be certified with the seal and signature of the Engineer;
(3) A vicinity map showing the proposed location of the Subdivision in relation to Streets in the
area, and the boundaries of the phase or phases under review relative to the entire
Subdivision;
(4) An accurate graphic and written scale shall be on each applicable sheet of the plan;
(5) The date shall be on the cover or first sheet of the plan, and a north arrow shall be on all
applicable sheets of the plan;
(6) The boundary of the Subdivision or section of Subdivision under review shall be indicated by
a heavy, solid line on one sheet of the plan at a standard scale to show the location of section
under review with other sections of the Subdivision. All Subdivision boundary lines shall be
labeled with the bearing and distance.
(7) The location and width of the following existing features:
a) Streets and/or Street Right-of-ways including Street names and classification of the
Street;
b) Railroads;
c) Public and private utility rights-of-way or Easements (including Drainage Easements);
d) Water courses (e.g., creeks, rivers, swales, Drainage ditches, etc.);
e) Public parks and open spaces;
f) Buildings (labeled "to remain" or "to be removed");
g) Legislative boundaries, County and state lines; and
h) Cemeteries and other historical landmarks or features.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 49
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
(8) The location and sizes of all existing utility facilities (public and private) within or adjacent
to the Subdivision or development area;
(9) The location and identification of all existing zoning districts within or adjoining the
Subdivision or project area;
(10) A general location of any proposed Streets and detailed plans of any storm sewer to be
installed at the time of grading;
(11) Profiles of all proposed storm sewer including percent grade, pipe diameters, material of
pipe, pipe lengths, and invert elevations;
(12) Design calculations for all Drainage facilities including stormwater runoff control facilities,
sediment basins, storm water pipelines, and Drainage channels. These calculations shall be
provided by a Kentucky Registered Professional Engineer;
(13) Sight Distance plan views and profiles for both exiting and approaching vehicles;
(14) Existing contours with intervals of not more than two feet. Such contours shall be clearly
marked with elevation based on mean sea level (U.S.G.S. Data) and location and description
of the benchmark used;
(15) Proposed finished contours with intervals of not more than two feet;
(16) The location of all erosion and sediment control facilities shall be shown on the plan, with
detail drawings of each type of facility being used;
(17) The approximate boundary of all areas that are to be left undisturbed;
(18) For Subdivisions planned with individual on-site sewage disposal systems, it is
recommended that the Applicant contact local and state health officials regarding the permit
process and preliminary soil testing.
Improvement 3.6-5 Drawing Review
(A) Step 1 - Application
(1) Improvement Drawings may only be submitted after approval of a Preliminary Plat (Grading
Plan can be part of an Improvement Plan).
(2) Improvement drawing submissions shall be forwarded to the applicable Legislative Body
with a request that any comments be returned within seven business days.
(3) Improvement drawing submissions may be forwarded to other regulatory authorities (e.g.,
public/private utilities, County public works department, transportation cabinet, etc.) in order
to seek input and coordinate reviews.
(B) Step 2 – Review and Decision by Staff
(1) Staff shall review the Improvement Drawings and approve, disapprove, or require revisions
to the Improvement Drawings in writing within 15 business days from the date the
Improvement Drawings submittal is determined to be complete (See Subsection 3.3-2(C):
Complete Application Submittal Determination.) unless this time is extended by agreement
between Staff and the Applicant.
(2) Staff’s decision shall be in writing.
(3) Conditional approvals and disapprovals shall be accompanied by written conditions or
reasons for the disapproval.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 50
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
(4) Improvement Drawings shall be generally consistent with the approved Preliminary Plat.
(5) Improvement Drawings shall be approved by Staff prior to the construction and installation
of any utilities or Streets, or grading of any Parcel. Failure to comply shall be considered a
violation of these regulations.
(C) Effect of Staff’s Decision on Improvement Drawings
(1) Approved Improvement Drawings remain valid for two years from the date of approval.
(2) The approval of each section of a Final Plat extends the improvement drawing approval an
additional two years from the date of the Final Plat approval.
(3) Approved Improvement Drawings shall continue to remain valid if site work is progressing.
(4) An Applicant may extend the approval of the improvement drawing for two years upon
written request if Staff determines that appreciable changes in the vicinity of the overall
approved Preliminary Plat have not occurred.
a) This two year extension may be granted by staff on no more than one occasion.
(5) Site grading and utility and Street construction may begin, subject to the approval of other
applicable review authorities, following the approval of Improvement Drawings.
(D) Technical Requirements for Improvement Drawings
Improvement Drawings submitted for approval shall be drawn to a scale of one inch equals 50 feet
or greater and submitted in two formats:
(1) Three sets on paper no larger than 24 by 36 inches in size unless another scale is approved
prior by staff; and
(2) In an electronic copy that conforms to the digital submission policy contained in Subsection
3.3-3: Digital Submission Policy if the improvement drawing was digitally generated.
(E) Additional Content Requirements for Improvement Drawings
Improvement Drawings submitted for approval shall contain the following basic items and
information:
(1) The proposed name of the Subdivision; in no case shall the name of a proposed Subdivision
duplicate or be similar to an approved Subdivision within the Planning Commission’s
jurisdiction unless it is an extension or expansion of that Subdivision;
(2) The names and addresses of owner and Developer of the Subdivision and the Kentucky
Registered Professional Engineer responsible for the design of all Improvements. The plan
shall be certified with the seal and signature of the Engineer and the Surveyor;
(3) A vicinity map showing the proposed location of the Subdivision in relation to Streets in the
area, and the boundaries of the phase or phases under review relative to the entire
Subdivision;
(4) An accurate graphic and written scale shall be on each applicable sheet of the plan;
(5) The date shall be on the cover or first sheet of the plan, and a north arrow shall be on all
applicable sheets of the plan;
(6) The boundary of the Subdivision or section of Subdivision under review shall be indicated by
a heavy, solid line on one sheet of the plan at a standard scale to show the location of section
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 51
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
under review with other sections of the Subdivision. All Subdivision boundary lines shall be
labeled with the bearing and distance.
(7) The location and width of the following existing features:
a) Streets and/or Street Right-of-ways including Street names and classification of the
Street;
b) Railroads;
c) Public and private utility rights-of-way or Easements (including Drainage Easements);
d) Water courses (e.g., creeks, rivers, swales, Drainage ditches, etc.);
e) Public parks and open spaces;
f) Buildings (labeled "to remain" or "to be removed");
g) Legislative boundaries, County and state lines; and
h) Cemeteries and other historical landmarks or features.
(8) The location and sizes of all existing utility facilities (public and private) within the
Subdivision or outside the Subdivision that will either impact or be impacted by the
Subdivision;
(9) The location and width of all public or private Sidewalks and Pedestrian Walkways including
ownership and maintenance of private Sidewalks and pathway systems.
(10) The location and identification of all existing zoning districts within or adjoining the
Subdivision or project area;
(11) Existing contours with intervals of not more than two feet. Such contours shall be clearly
marked with elevation based on mean sea level (U.S.G.S. Data) and location and description
of the benchmark used;
(12) Proposed finished contours with intervals of not more than five feet;
(13) The location, Right-of-way, and pavement width, and name of all proposed Streets and other
public utility Right-of-ways or Easements including the horizontal and vertical alignment of
Streets and typical cross-section details;
a) All landscaped areas within a proposed Public Street Right-of-way shall be shown.
Irrigated landscaped islands require permanent Drainage facilities that shall be shown
including details. Irrigation systems within the Right-of-way shall only be permitted if
written verification of approval from the authority designated by the applicable
legislative body is provided to staff.
b) The striping of Street lanes on Streets with more than two lanes shall be shown.
c) Street stations and points of vertical intersections (PVI's) shall be labeled on the
centerline of proposed Streets and correspond to profiles of said Street.
(14) The location and identification number of all Lots;
(15) The profile of each proposed Street with finish grades including all existing and proposed
underground public utility crossings with catch basins, junction boxes, and manholes and
existing private utility crossings including gas, electricity, and telephone.
a) The horizontal scale shall be the same as the plan scale, and the vertical scale not less
than one inch equal to 10 feet unless approved by Staff.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 52
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
b) Stationing shall be labeled and correspond to the plan view.
(16) Sight Distance plan views and profiles for both exiting and approaching vehicles; Sight
Distance plan views and profiles are not required if previously provided with a grading plan;
(17) The location of proposed sanitary, storm water, and water resource systems, including all
relating facilities such as manholes, pump stations, sewerage plants, catch basins, junction
boxes, headwalls, water valves, fire hydrants, stormwater runoff control facilities, etc.
Detailed drawings of all overflow facilities shall be shown and labeled including any
proposed connection to an existing facility;
(18) The location and identification of any Drainage facility (i.e., manmade dams) or natural
feature (i.e., lake or pond) on the site or within 100 feet of the Subdivision or development
boundary which has, or could have a significant impact on Drainage or siltation control;
(19) Profiles of all proposed stormwater and sanitary sewer pipelines, and facilities including
percent grade, pipe diameters, material of pipe, pipe lengths, and invert elevations.
a) Profiles shall show all existing and proposed public utility (e.g., water, storm and
sanitary sewer) crossings, and all existing private utility (e.g., gas, electric, telephone)
crossings.
b) Connections to existing pipelines or facilities shall be shown and labeled.
(20) The names of adjacent Street rights-of-way within 100 feet of the Subdivision boundary and
the names of the property owners of all adjoining properties. If the proposed Subdivision is
an additional section of an existing platted Subdivision, the plan shall show the numbering of
all adjoining sections and Lots;
(21) Lots in the proposed Subdivision that are intended to be dedicated or temporarily reserved
for public use, or to be reserved by deed covenant for use of all property owners in the
Subdivision;
(22) The location of all erosion and sediment control facilities with detail drawings of each type
of facility being used;
(23) For Subdivisions planned with individual on-site sewage disposal systems, it is
recommended that the Applicant contact local and state health officials regarding the permit
process and preliminary soil testing.
Final 3.6-6 Plat Review and Recordation
(A) Step 1 – Application
(1) A Final Plat may be filed under one of the following two conditions:
a) Immediately, without prior approvals, if the Subdivision qualifies as a Minor
Subdivision (See Section 3.5: Minor Subdivisions.) and the Applicant opts to file a
Final Plat instead of an Identification Plat; or
b) Following the approval of the Improvement Drawings where there will be
infrastructure or other Improvements.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 53
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
(2) The Final Plat may contain only that portion of the approved Preliminary Plat which the
Applicant proposes to record at the time.
(3) Submitted Final Plats may be forwarded to other regulatory authorities (e.g., private utilities,
County public works department, transportation cabinet, etc.) in order to seek input and
coordinate reviews.
(4) Where there will be infrastructure or other Improvements, the submitted Final Plats shall be
forwarded to Sanitation District No. 1 in order to seek input and coordinate reviews.
(B) Step 2 – Review, Field Inspections, and Decision by Staff
(1) Final Plats without Infrastructure Improvements
a) Submitted Final Plats may be forwarded to other regulatory authorities (e.g., private
utilities, public works department, transportation cabinet, etc.) in order to seek input
and coordinate reviews.
b) For all Final Plats that do not include infrastructure Improvements, Staff shall review
the Final Plat and approve, disapprove, or require revisions to the Final Plat within 10
business days from the date the Final Plat submittal is determined to be complete (See
Subsection 3.3-2(C): Complete Application Submittal Determination.) unless this time
is extended by agreement between Staff and the Applicant.
c) Staff shall notify the Applicant’s Surveyor when mylar Final Plats may be produced.
i) The Surveyor shall then submit one copy of the Final Plat on a fixed line mylar
along with eight paper copies.
ii) Signatures are only required on the mylar Final Plat.
d) Approved mylar Final Plats shall be signed by Staff on a weekly basis and distributed
to the Applicant.
e) Written documentation of the approved Final Plat shall be forwarded to the Applicant,
the applicable Legislative Body, and other regulatory authorities (e.g., public/private
utilities, County public works department, transportation cabinet, etc.).
f) Disapproved Final Plats shall be accompanied by written documentation of the reasons
for denial.
(2) Final Plats with Infrastructure Improvements
a) Final Plats with infrastructure Improvements may be submitted after approval of
applicable Improvement Drawings. The Final Plat may contain only that portion of the
approved Preliminary Plat which the Applicant proposed to record at that time.
b) Submitted Final Plats may be forwarded to other regulatory authorities (e.g., private
utilities, public works department, transportation cabinet, etc.) in order to seek input
and coordinate reviews.
c) Staff shall perform a field inspection of Street or other infrastructure Improvements
within five business days (weather permitting) from the date the Plat and Application
is determined to be complete (See Subsection 3.3-2(C): Complete Application
Submittal Determination.), and prior to approval of the Final Plat, unless this time is
extended by agreement between Staff and the Applicant.
i) Incomplete public Improvements shall be completed, or in the case of bondable
public Improvements, guaranteed in lieu of completion in accordance with
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 54
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
Section 3.4: Guarantees for Improvements. Such Guarantee shall be submitted
prior to Final Plat approval.
ii) Results of the field inspection shall be forwarded to the Applicant's Design
Engineer and Applicant in writing.
d) For all Final Plats that include infrastructure Improvements, Staff shall review the
Final Plat and approve, disapprove, or require revisions to the Final Plat within 12
business days from the date the Final Plat submittal is determined to be complete (See
Subsection 3.3-2(C): Complete Application Submittal Determination.) unless this time
is extended by agreement between Staff and the Applicant.
e) The Final Plat shall generally conform to the approved Preliminary Plat.
f) Staff shall notify the Applicant’s Surveyor when mylar Final Plats may be produced.
i) The Surveyor shall then submit one copy of the Final Plat on a fixed line mylar
along with eight paper copies.
ii) Signatures are only required on the mylar Final Plat.
g) Approved mylar Final Plats shall be signed by the Chair or other KCPC officer and
distributed to the Applicant.
h) Written documentation of the approved Final Plat shall be forwarded to the Applicant,
the applicable Legislative Body, and other regulatory authorities (e.g., public/private
utilities, County public works department, transportation cabinet, etc.).
i) Disapproved Final Plats shall be accompanied by written documentation of the reasons
for denial.
(C) Step 3 – Recordation
(1) Approved Final Plats shall be returned to the Applicant or the Applicant’s designated
representative for recordation.
(2) Approved Final Plats shall be recorded in the office of the Kenton County Clerk by the
Applicant or the Applicant’s representative before the property can be transferred.
(D) Technical Requirements for Final Plats
A Final Plat submitted for approval shall be prepared in compliance with 201 Kentucky
Administrative Regulations (KAR) 18.150 and submitted in two formats:
(1) Three sets on paper no larger than 18 by 24 inches in size; and
(2) In an electronic copy that conforms to the digital submission policy contained in Subsection
3.3-3: Digital Submission Policy if the Final Plat was digitally generated.
(3) Final Plats containing Lots having a minimum Lot Area of 80,000 square feet or greater shall
be drawn to an accurate scale of one inch is equal to 200 feet or greater. All other Final
Plats shall be drawn to an accurate scale of one inch is equal to 50 feet or greater.
(E) Additional Content Requirements for Final Plats
A Final Plat submitted for approval shall contain the following basic items and information:
(1) The proposed name of the Subdivision, as established by the improvement drawing;
(2) The date, north arrow, and a graphic and written scale;
(3) The area of the Subdivision or section of the Subdivision to the nearest 100th of a foot or
square feet to the nearest one foot;
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 55
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
(4) The area of each Lot in acres to the nearest 100th of a foot or square feet to the nearest one
foot;
(5) The location and Right-of-way width of all Streets and Easements that are to be dedicated or
reserved for public or private use;
(6) The names of Streets within or adjacent to the Subdivision;
(7) Centerline curve data for the Right-of-way of the Streets and Easements with the data to
include: central angle and radius, arc, length, long chord and tangent distances;
(8) Numbered Lots (corresponding to the approved Improvement Drawings) whose boundaries
are described by bearing and distance for each tangent course, and proper curve data (as
given above) for curve courses;
a) Side Lot Lines that are not radial with curved Street centerlines shall have a reference
tie to the tangent line of that centerline curve.
b) Lots that were subject to an Identification Plat shall be noted with dashed lines and
referenced by deed book and page number.
(9) The location of areas to be dedicated for public or common use, and conservation Easements,
riparian buffers and other areas to be set aside for environmental stewardship;
(10) A statement that describes the ownership and maintenance responsibilities for any public or
common use areas; and
(11) The statement illustrated in Figure 3.6-A for Plats without public Improvements.
OWNERS CERTIFICATE
We, the undersigned, do hereby adopt this plat and further certify that the title to the property
shown hereon is part or all of the same property conveyed to us by deed dated _______and
recorded in Deed Book______, Page _______ of the ____________ County records at
_____________, KY.
Owner’s Signature ___________________ Date _____________
Figure 3.6-A: Owners Certificate
(F) The statement illustrated in Figure 3.6-B for Plats with public Improvements.
DEDICATION CERTIFICATE
We, the undersigned, do hereby adopt this plat, dedicate the Right-of-way as shown on the plat
herein to public use and further certify that the title to the property shown herein is part or all of
the same property conveyed to us by deed dated _______and recorded in Deed Book______, Page
_______ of the ____________ County records at _____________, KY.
Owner’s Signature ___________________ Date _____________
Figure 3.6-B: Dedication certificate.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 56
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
(G) Both the owners certificate (Figure 3.6-A) and the dedication certificate (Figure 3.6-B) shall be
notarized with the acknowledgment illustrated in Figure 3.6-C.
NOTARY ACKNOWLEDGMENT
County of ____________________
State of ______________________
I,__________________, a notary public in and for said county and state, do
certify that the foregoing instrument was acknowledged before me this ____
Day of ___________, 200___By (Name of Signer) , (Title) ,
(Company Name) .
Signed: __________________________
Notary Public State of ______________
My Commission Expires: ____________
Figure 3.6-C: Notary acknowledgement
(H) The approval certificate illustrated in Figure 3.6-D.
APPROVAL CERTIFICATE
Approved by the Kenton County Planning Commission. This approval
does not constitute a guarantee that the resulting parcel(s) complies
with any other regulatory agency’s requirements.
this ________day of _____________________, 20___.
By: _____________________________
_________________________________
Chair, Kenton County Planning Commission
Figure 3.6-D: Approval certificate for Final Plats and Condominium Property Regime Plats
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 57
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
(I) The County Clerk acknowledgment illustrated in Figure 3.6-E.
COUNTY CLERK ACKNOWLEDGMENT
I, ___________________, Clerk of Kenton County Court, do certify
that this plat of (Subdivision Name), (Section) was this day presented
to me at my office and was this day left for record. Whereupon same
has been duly recorded this ______________day of
________________, 20___.
Signed_____________________________
Figure 3.6-E: County clerk acknowledgement for Final Plats and Condominium Property Regime Plats
(J) The Surveyor certificate illustrated in Figure 3.6-F.
SURVEYOR’S CERTIFICATE
I hereby certify that the survey depicted by this plat was done by persons under
my direct supervision by the method of random traverse with sideshots. The
unadjusted precision ration of the traverse was 1:_______ and the directions
and distances shown on the plat are based on a traverse that (was/was not)
adjusted. The reference meridian basis shown hereon is
from_________________________. This survey is a (Rural/Urban) Survey and
the accuracy and precision of said survey meets all the specifications of this
class and complies with 201 KAR 18:150. )
Signature_______________________PLS #_________Date________________
Figure 3.6-F: Surveyor certificate for Final Plats and Condominium Property Regime Plats
(K) The statement illustrated in Figure 3.6-G related to sanitary sewer Easements.
SANITARY SEWER EASEMENTS
The utility easements shown and described on this plat are dedicated to the use
and benefit of the named utility. The respective rights, duties and obligations of
the individual lot owner and the respective utility are set forth in separate
recorded document in the Kenton County Clerk’s Office. Terms and conditions
of the document listed below are incorporated by reference:
Sanitary Sewers Sanitation District No. 1 Misc. Book 431, Pg. 110
Figure 3.6-G: Sanitary sewer Easement statement for Final Plats and Condominium Property Regime Plats
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 58
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.6: Major Subdivisions
(L) The statement illustrated in Figure 3.6-H for Condominium Property Regime Plats that involve onsite
sewage disposal systems.
"Plat approval for building development and/or alteration of existing systems on
each Lot is contingent upon the issuance of a sewage construction permit and
inspection by the local and/or state health board or district."
Figure 3.6-H: Statement for Plats that involve on-site sewage disposal
(M) The statement illustrated in Figure 3.6-I for Condominium Property Regime Plats that involve
private, on-site sanitary sewage treatment plants.
"The sanitary sewer lines and the sewage treated at the plant
shall be owned and operated by . The sanitary sewer lines shall
be maintained by and the sewage treatment plant shall be
maintained by ."
Figure 3.6-I: Statement for Plates that involve private, on-site sanitary sewage treatment plants
(N) The statement illustrated in Figure 3.6-J for Condominium Property Regime Plats that contain
water mains installed on private property that are going to be maintained by the water district.
WATER MAIN EASEMENTS
The Water Main Easement(s) as shown on this plat are subject to the
DECLARATION OF MASTER WATER FACILITY EASEMENT AGREEMENT
as set forth in __________________________of the Kenton County Clerk’s
records
(Document Location) at Kenton County Courthouse, Ky.”
Figure 3.6-J: Water main Easement statement for Final Plats and Condominium Property Regime Plats
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 59
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.7: Condominium Property Regime Plats
Section 3.7: Condominium Property Regime Plats
3.7-1 Condominium Property Regime Plat Applicability
(A) This section and review process shall apply to condominium property
regimes that do not include the Subdivision of land into individual Lots.
Condominium property regimes allow a unit within a building to be
individually conveyed and be the subject of ownership and other acts as
if it were solely and entirely independent of the other units in the
building(s) of which they form a part.
(B) In accord with the Horizontal Property Law (KRS 381), whenever an
owner or the co-owners of a building expressly declare through the
recordation of a master deed or lease, a condominium property regime
may be established.
3.7-2 Condominium Property Regime Plat Review and Recordation
(A) Step 1 – Application
(1) Condominium Property Regime Plats without infrastructure
Improvements do not require submittal of a Preliminary Plat.
(2) Condominium Property Regime Plats that include infrastructure
Improvements shall only be submitted after approval of an
improvement drawing.
(3) The Condominium Property Regime Plats may contain only that
portion of the approved plat that the Applicant proposes to record at the time of approval.
(4) The Condominium Property Regime Plat, Application, fee, and any additional requirements
of this section shall be submitted for review.
(5) Condominium Property Regime Plats and Applications may be forwarded to other regulatory
authorities (e.g., public/private utilities, County public works department, transportation
cabinet, etc.) in order to seek input and coordinate reviews. The Condominium Property
Regime Plat shall be forwarded to Sanitation District No. 1 in order to seek input and
coordinate reviews.
(B) Step 2 – Review, Field Inspections, and Decision by Staff
(1) Condominium Regime Plats without Infrastructure Improvements
a) Submitted condominium regime plats may be forwarded to other regulatory authorities
(e.g., private utilities, public works department, transportation cabinet, etc.) in order to
seek input and coordinate reviews.
b) For all condominium regime plats that do not include infrastructure Improvements,
Staff shall review the condominium regime plat and approve, disapprove, or require
revisions to the condominium regime plat within 15 business days from the date the
condominium regime plat submittal is determined to be complete (See Subsection 3.3-
2(C): Complete Application Submittal Determination.) unless this time is extended by
agreement between Staff and the Applicant.
c) Staff shall notify the Applicant’s Surveyor when mylar condominium regime plats may
be produced.
Review Process for
Condominium
Property Regime
Plats
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 60
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.7: Condominium Property Regime Plats
i) The Surveyor shall then submit one copy of the condominium regime plat on a
fixed line mylar along with eight paper copies.
ii) Signatures are only required on the mylar condominium regime plat.
d) Approved mylar condominium regime plats shall be signed by Staff on a weekly basis
and distributed to the Applicant.
e) Written documentation of the approved condominium regime plat shall be forwarded
to the Applicant, the applicable Legislative Body, and other regulatory authorities
(e.g., public/private utilities, County public works department, transportation cabinet,
etc.).
f) Disapproved condominium regime plats shall be accompanied by written
documentation of the reasons for denial.
(2) Condominium Regime Plats with Infrastructure Improvements
a) Condominium regime plats with infrastructure Improvements may be submitted after
approval of applicable Improvement Drawings. The condominium regime plat may
contain only that portion of the approved Preliminary Plat which the Applicant
proposed to record at that time.
b) Submitted condominium regime plats may be forwarded to other regulatory authorities
(e.g., private utilities, public works department, transportation cabinet, etc.) in order to
seek input and coordinate reviews.
c) Staff shall perform a field inspection of Street or other infrastructure Improvements
within 10 business days from the date the Plat and Application is determined to be
complete (See Subsection 3.3-2(C): Complete Application Submittal Determination.),
and prior to approval of the condominium regime plat, unless this time is extended by
agreement between Staff and the Applicant.
i) Incomplete public Improvements shall be completed, or in the case of bondable
public Improvements, guaranteed in lieu of completion in accordance with
Section 3.4: Guarantees for Improvements. Such Guarantee shall be submitted
prior to condominium regime plat approval.
ii) Results of the field inspection shall be forwarded to the Applicant's Design
Engineer in writing.
d) For all condominium regime plats that include infrastructure Improvements, Staff shall
review the condominium regime plat and approve, disapprove, or require revisions to
the condominium regime plat within 12 business days from the date the condominium
regime plat submittal is determined to be complete (See Subsection 3.3-2(C):
Complete Application Submittal Determination.) unless this time is extended by
agreement between Staff and the Applicant.
e) The condominium regime plat shall generally conform to the approved Preliminary
Plat.
f) Staff shall notify the Applicant’s Surveyor when mylar condominium regime plats may
be produced.
i) The Surveyor shall then submit one copy of the condominium regime plat on a
fixed line mylar along with eight paper copies.
ii) Signatures are only required on the mylar condominium regime plat.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 61
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.7: Condominium Property Regime Plats
g) Approved mylar condominium regime plats shall be signed by Staff on a weekly basis
and distributed to the Applicant.
h) Written documentation of the approved condominium regime plat shall be forwarded
to the Applicant, the applicable Legislative Body, and other regulatory authorities
(e.g., public/private utilities, County public works department, transportation cabinet,
etc.).
i) Disapproved condominium regime plats shall be accompanied by written
documentation of the reasons for denial.
(C) Step 3 – Recordation
(1) Approved condominium regime plats shall be returned to the Applicant or the Applicant’s
designated representative for recordation.
(2) Approved condominium regime plats shall be recorded in the office of the Kenton County
Clerk by the Applicant or the Applicant’s representative before the property can be
transferred.
Technical Requirements for Condominium 3.7-3 Property Regime Plats
A Condominium Property Regime Plat submitted for approval shall be prepared in compliance with 201
Kentucky Administrative Regulations (KAR) 18.150 and submitted in two formats:
(A) Three sets on paper no larger than 18 inches by 24 inches in size; and
(B) In an electronic copy that conforms to the digital submission policy contained in Subsection 3.3-3:
Digital Submission Policy if the Condominium Property Regime Plat was digitally generated.
3.7-4 Additional Content Requirements for Condominium Property Regime Plats
A Condominium Property Regime Plat submitted for approval shall conform to the applicable zoning
ordinance and shall contain the following information, as applicable.
(A) The proposed name of the Subdivision, as established by the improvement drawing;
(B) The date, north arrow, and an accurate graphic and written scale;
(C) The area of the Subdivision or section of the Subdivision to the nearest 100th of a foot or square
feet to the nearest one foot;
(D) The area of each Lot and/or unit in acres to the nearest 100th of a foot or square feet to the nearest
one foot;
(E) Floor plans of the building or buildings bearing the certification of a registered architect or
Professional Engineer;
(F) The location and Right-of-way width of all Streets and Easements that are to be dedicated or
reserved for public or private use;
(G) The names of Streets within or adjacent to the Subdivision;
(H) The centerline curve data for the Right-of-way of the Streets and Easements with the data to
include central angle and radius, arc, length, long chord, and tangent distances.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 62
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.8: Minor Deviations by Staff
(I) Numbered Lots (corresponding to the approved Improvement Drawings) whose boundaries are
described by bearing and distance for each tangent course and proper curve data (as given above)
for curve courses.
(1) Side Lot Lines that are not radial with curved Street centerlines shall have a reference tie to
the tangent line of that centerline curve.
(2) Lots that were subject to an Identification Plat shall be noted with dashed lines and
referenced by deed book and page number.
(J) The location of areas to be dedicated for public or common use, and conservation Easements,
riparian buffers and other areas to be set aside for environmental stewardship.
(K) A statement shall appear on the Final Plat that describes the ownership and maintenance
responsibilities for any public or common use areas.
(L) All of the statements and certificates, as applicable, required for Final Plats and defined in
Subsection 3.6-6(E): Additional Content Requirements for Final Plats.
Section 3.8: Minor Deviations by Staff
3.8-1 Staff has been delegated certain discretionary judgment when minor deviations from the approved plans
and/or Subdivision regulations are observed in the field. No minor deviation shall be authorized by Staff
or an Inspector if it is:
(A) In conflict with the intent and purpose of these regulations;
(B) In dispute with generally accepted construction practices or industry standards; or
(C) Detrimental to the public interest.
3.8-2 Where minor deviations from the approved plans and/or Subdivision regulations have been identified,
Staff may require a warranty of up to 12 months for the work in question.
Section 3.9: Waivers to the Regulations
This section sets forth a procedure by which the Planning Commission may allow for waivers of these regulations.
The purpose is to allow some flexibility in dealing with unique issues that are outlined in Subsection 3.9-2(C)
below.
3.9-1 Step 1 – Application
(A) An Application requesting a waiver, the applicable fee, and any additional requirements of this
section shall be submitted for review.
(B) Waivers to lot size requirement or other regulations controlled by the zoning ordinance shall be
heard through the applicable waiver or variance procedure in the zoning ordinance.
3.9-2 Step 2 – Planning Commission Review and Decision
(A) The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing for the purposes of reviewing the requested
waiver.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 63
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.10: Appeal of Staff Actions
(B) After the public hearing, the Planning Commission may approve, conditionally approve, or
disapprove a waiver to these regulations.
(C) The Planning Commission may grant a waiver to these regulations balanced against the public
interest, providing the Planning Commission finds that the waiver will not be detrimental to the
public interest and at least one of the following criteria applies:
(1) That unusual topographical or exceptional physical conditions exist; or
(2) That strict compliance with these regulations would create an extraordinary hardship in the
face of exceptional conditions; or
(3) That compliance with the regulations could cause an unsafe situation; or
(4) That the requested waiver would create a materially safer situation than complying with the
regulations; or
(5) That the requested waiver is not objectionable to the surrounding property or community and
does not materially change the intent of the regulations. If using these criteria as a basis for
waiver, the Applicant shall provide evidence from all adjoining property owners that they
have no objection to the requested waiver. Note that approval from adjoining property
owners is not intended to serve as approval by surrounding property owners or the
community as a whole.
Section 3.10: Appeal of Staff Actions
3.10-1 Any Subdivider or Applicant claiming to be aggrieved by any action of Staff may appeal such actions to
the Planning Commission.
3.10-2 Such appeal shall be submitted for review by the Planning Commission at their next regularly scheduled
meeting.
3.10-3 Staff shall forward any applicable material of record to the Planning Commission.
3.10-4 The Planning Commission shall consider the appealed decision and make a decision to reaffirm or
overturn Staff’s decision.
Section 3.11: Appeals of Planning Commission Actions
3.11-1 Any person or entity claiming to be injured or aggrieved by any final action of the Planning Commission
may appeal from the action to the Kenton County Circuit Court. Such appeal shall be taken within 30
consecutive calendar days after the final action of the Planning Commission.
3.11-2 Final action shall not include the Planning Commission's recommendation made to other governmental
bodies.
3.11-3 All final actions which have not been appealed within 30 consecutive calendar days shall not be subject
to judicial review.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 64
Article 3: Administration and Procedures
Section 3.12: Enforcement
Section 3.12: Enforcement
The following regulations comply with the authority granted to local Planning Commissions by Chapters 100.273
through 100.317 of the Kentucky Revised Statutes (KRS).
3.12-1 All Subdivisions of land shall receive final approval from Staff. No person or his agent shall subdivide
any land, before securing the approval from Staff of a Plat designating the areas to be subdivided, and no
Plat of a Subdivision of land within Kenton County shall be recorded by the County Clerk until the Plat
has been approved by Staff, and the approval entered thereon in writing by the Planning Commission
chairman.
3.12-2 No person owning land composing a Subdivision, or his agent, shall transfer or sell or agree to sell any
Lot or Parcel of land located within a Subdivision by reference to, or by exhibition, or by any other use of
a Plat of such Subdivision, before such Plat has received final approval from Staff, been signed by the
Planning Commission chairman, and has been recorded. Any such instrument of transfer, sale, or contract
shall be void and shall not be subject to be recorded, but all rights of such purchaser to damages are
hereby preserved. The description of such Lot or Parcel by metes and bounds in any contract or
instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring same shall not
exempt the person attempting to transfer from penalties provided or deprive the purchaser of any rights or
remedies he may otherwise have.
3.12-3 No revisions shall be made to any Subdivision Plat after final approval has been given by Staff unless the
Plat is first resubmitted and the revisions are approved by Staff in accordance with the provisions of these
regulations.
3.12-4 After the applicable Legislative Body or fiscal court has adopted an official map, no board, public officer,
or authority shall accept, layout, improve, or authorize any Improvements to be constructed in any Street,
including rights-of-way, Watercourses, park and playgrounds, public school, or other public building
sites shown on the official map, except as provided for in KRS 100.293 through 100.317.
3.12-5 The Planning Commission shall have the power to apply for an injunction against any type of
Subdivision construction by the Subdivider or the landowner where the Subdivision regulations have
been violated or other remedies permitted under KRS 100.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 65
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
4.1-1 Purpose
This section fulfills the infrastructure requirements of Kentucky Revised Statutes (KRS) 100.273 through
100.292. By establishing these Street standards as a factor in the development review process, it assures
a necessary component of harmonious, progressive, and aesthetically-pleasing development. It
contributes to healthy and dynamic neighborhoods where residents can live, work, shop, and play.
Furthermore, it promotes the health, safety, and general welfare of the public in Kenton County. To
further these more general purposes, this section:
(A) Establishes the adequacy of existing and proposed transportation elements as a factor to be
considered when reviewing proposed Subdivisions;
(B) Sets forth minimum standards for new Streets and the extent to which they shall be provided;
(C) Provides a Street system of suitable location, width, and improvement to accommodate satisfactory
access to police, firefighting, emergency medical services, snow removal, and maintenance
equipment; and
(D) Ensures an effective traffic circulation system by requiring that new Streets extend into adjoining
areas and that existing Streets interconnect from adjoining areas.
4.1-2 Street Names
The following shall apply to the naming of proposed Streets:
(A) The name of a new Street shall not duplicate existing or platted Street names within the County, or
approximate such names in spelling, sound, or pronunciation.
(B) The use of existing Street names differentiated by alternate prefixes (i.e., "North," "South," etc.), or
suffixes (i.e., "Lane," "Way," etc.) is prohibited.
(C) Street names shall not be objectionable or offensive.
(D) Street names shall be limited to no more than three words including any prefix or suffix, and shall
not contain more than 20 characters including spaces.
(E) Punctuation, such as apostrophes or hyphens, etc., or numerals including fractions, are prohibited.
(F) Streets in direct alignment that cross an intersecting Street should bear the same name.
(G) Street names shall be approved and/or reserved by Staff prior to approval of Improvement
Drawings.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 66
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
4.1-3 Street Name Signs
The following shall apply to the installation of Street Name Signs:
(A) The Developer shall be responsible for the installation of Street Name Signs in conformance with
standards established by the applicable Legislative Body.
(B) Street Name Signs shall be installed prior to approval of a Final Plat. Temporary Street Name Signs
are permitted during construction until the permanent signs are erected.
4.1-4 Traffic Control Signs and Devices
Traffic Control signs and devices shall be the responsibility of the applicable Legislative Body.
4.1-5 Pavement Signing and Marking
(A) Pavement marking and signing shall be provided on all arterial and collector streets in accordance
with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), latest edition.
(B) Marking and signing shall include centerline, edgeline, and lane use markings and all necessary
regulatory signing.
4.1-6 Addressing
(A) Addresses shall conform to a uniform County system and be assigned by Staff prior to approval of
an identification or Final Plat.
(B) Addresses shall be shown for each Lot or unit on the Plats prior to recording.
4.1-7 Street Lights
Street lights shall be the responsibility of the applicable Legislative Body.
4.1-8 Public Rights-of-Way
The following shall apply to public rights-of-way:
(A) The minimum public Right-of-way width for Streets shall comply with Table 4.1-1 of these
regulations.
(B) The required Right-of-way widths are based on development type and Functional Classification.
(C) Subdivisions platted along existing Streets shall dedicate additional Right-of-way, if necessary, to
meet the minimum Right-of-way requirements identified in Table 4.1-1. Such dedication shall be
in accord with the following:
(1) The minimum total Right-of-way width shall be dedicated where the proposed Subdivision is
on both sides of an existing Street.
(2) When the Subdivision is located on only one side of an existing Street, one-half (1/2) of the
required Right-of-way width, measured from the centerline of the Right-of-way, shall be
dedicated.
(D) Proposed Streets shall be constructed dimensionally within the Right-of-way widths identified in
Table 4.1-1. The pavement shall be located centrally within the Right-of Way width.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 67
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
(E) For developments containing only Multi-Family Residential Dwellings, the Right-of-way width
may be less than the minimum required width in Table 4.1-1 provided:
(1) The Right-of-way width is coupled with an ingress/egress and street maintenance easement
that when totaled, equals or exceeds the minimum Right-of-way width indicated in Table
4.1-1; and
(2) That the use of the narrowed Right-of-way width coupled with the ingress/egress and street
maintenance easement is approved by the authority designated by the applicable Legislative
Body in writing.
4.1-9 Pavement Widths
The following shall apply to the pavement width of Streets.
(A) The minimum pavement widths shall comply with Table 4.1-1.
(B) The required pavement widths are based on development type and Functional Classification.
(C) Pavement widths shall be measured from back of Curb to back of Curb. If no Curbs are required,
then pavement width shall include the entire paved surface of the wearing course. See Figure
4.1-A.
(D) Subdivisions located along existing Streets that contain pavement widths less than identified in
Table 4.1-1, may be required by Staff to construct additional pavement to comply with the
minimum widths contained in Table 4.1-1.
Figure 4.1-A: Illustration of pavement width measurements
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 68
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
TABLE 4.1-1: INFRASTRUCTURE AND DESIGN STANDARDS FOR STREETS
DEVELOPMENT
TYPE
FUNCTIONAL
CLASSIFICATION
PAVEMENT
WIDTH [1]
(FEET)
CURB PARKING SIDEWALK/MULTIUSE
FACILITIES TREELAWN TYPE OF BICYCLE
FACILITIES
MEDIAN
WIDTH
ROW
WIDTH
(FEET)
CROSSSECTION
FIGURE #
RURAL
RESIDENTIAL[3]
Local (Serving under
50 lots) 17 No None No Side Ditches
Only None None 40 Figure 4.1-J
Local (Serving 50 to
199 lots) 20 No None 4 feet wide [2] Side Ditches
Only None None 50
Subcollector (Serving
200 to 500 lots) 20 No None 4 feet wide [2] Side Ditches
Only None None 60
Collector (Serving
over 500 lots) 22 No None 8 feet wide [2] Side Ditches
Only None None 60
Arterial 24 No None 10 feet wide [2] Side Ditches
Only Multi-use path None 60 Figure 4.1-B
SUBURBAN
RESIDENTIAL
Local (Serving under
200 lots)
22 Yes None 4 feet wide 4 feet wide None None 40
25 Yes One Side 4 feet wide 4 feet wide None None 50
Subcollector (Serving
200 to 500 lots)
35 Yes Both 4 feet wide 4 feet wide None None 60 Figure 4.1-G
22 Yes None 4 feet wide 4 feet wide None None 40
28 Yes One Side 4 feet wide 4 feet wide None None 50
Collector (Serving
over 500 lots)
22 Yes None 10 feet wide [2] 4 feet wide Multi-use path None 60 Figure 4.1-C
30 Yes One Side 10 feet wide [2] 4 feet wide Multi-use path None 60
Arterial 28 Yes None 12 feet wide [2] 10 feet wide Multi-use path None 60 Figure 4.1-D
URBAN
RESIDENTIAL
Local (Serving under
200 lots)
22 Yes One Side 5 feet wide 4 feet wide None None 40
28 Yes Both 5 feet wide 4 feet wide None None 46
Subcollector (Serving
200 to 500 lots)
25 Yes One Side 5 feet wide 4 feet wide None None 43 Figure 4.1-H
30 Yes Both 5 feet wide 4 feet wide None None 48 Figure 4.1-I
Collector (Serving
over 500 lots)
30 Yes None 5 feet wide 5 feet wide Dedicated Bike
Lane None 50
44 Yes Both 5 feet wide 5 feet wide Dedicated Bike
Lane None 64
Arterial
32 Yes None 5 feet wide 5 feet wide Dedicated Bike
Lane None 52 Figure 4.1-E
46 Yes Both 5 feet wide 5 feet wide Dedicated Bike
Lane None 66
TRADITIONAL
NEIGHBORHOOD
Local (Serving under
200 lots)
22 Yes One Side 5 feet wide 4 feet wide None None 40
28 Yes Both 5 feet wide 4 feet wide None None 46
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 69
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
TABLE 4.1-1: INFRASTRUCTURE AND DESIGN STANDARDS FOR STREETS
DEVELOPMENT
TYPE
FUNCTIONAL
CLASSIFICATION
PAVEMENT
WIDTH [1]
(FEET)
CURB PARKING SIDEWALK/MULTIUSE
FACILITIES TREELAWN TYPE OF BICYCLE
FACILITIES
MEDIAN
WIDTH
ROW
WIDTH
(FEET)
CROSSSECTION
FIGURE #
RESIDENTIAL Subcollector (Serving
200 to 500 lots)
25 Yes One Side 5 feet wide 4 feet wide None None 43
30 Yes Both 5 feet wide 4 feet wide None None 48
Collector (Serving
over 500 lots)
40 Yes None 5 feet wide 5 feet wide Dedicated Bike
Lane 10 feet wide 60
54 Yes Both 5 feet wide 5 feet wide Dedicated Bike
Lane 10 feet wide 74
Arterial
44 Yes None 5 feet wide 5 feet wide Dedicated Bike
Lane 12 feet wide 64
58 Yes Both 5 feet wide 5 feet wide Dedicated Bike
Lane 12 feet wide 78 Figure 4.1-F
COMMERCIAL /
INDUSTRIAL
All Classifications 28
6”
Barrier
Curb
Only
None 5 feet wide Optional None None 60
ALL
DEVELOPMENT
TYPES
Access Drives 12 (20) No None None None None None N/A
NOTES:
[1] Total pavement width including amenities such as Medians, Bicycle Facilities and parking
[2] Sidewalk is required along only one side of the Street
[3] Development type determined by lot sizes and widths as indicated in Table 4.1-2; not by geographic area.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 70
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
Allowable 4.1-10 Pavement Design
The allowable pavement design shall be permitted in conjunction with the appropriate development type
as identified in Table 4.1-2.
TABLE 4.1-2:ALLOWABLE PAVEMENT DESIGN
DEVELOPMENT TYPE
PAVEMENT DESIGN
TRADITIONAL
NEIGHBORHOOD
DEVELOPMENT
(TND)
URBAN SUBURBAN RURAL
Single-Family
and Two-Family
Residential [1]
Lot Widths equal to or greater
than 200 feet and Lot Sizes
equal to or greater than 2 acres
--- --- P P
Lot Widths 60 feet to 199 feet --- --- P ---
Lot Widths less than 60 feet P P P ---
Multi-Family Residential P [2] --- P ---
Special
Development
Zones
Agricultural Zone --- --- P
P (provided Lot Widths
are equal to or greater
than 200 feet and lot
Sizes are equal to or
greater than 2 acres) [1]
Rural Commercial Zone --- --- P
P (provided Lot Widths
are equal to or greater
than 200 feet and lot
Sizes are equal to or
greater than 2 acres) [1]
Institutional Zone --- --- P ---
Eco-Commerce Park Zone --- --- P
P (provided Lot Widths
are equal to or greater
than 300 feet) [1]
Mixed Use Zone P [2] P [2] P ---
Specific Use
Regulations
Residential Cluster
Development or Planned Unit
Development Zone
P [2] --- P ---
Conservation Subdivisions --- --- --- P
Retirement Communities P P P P
Manufactured Home Parks P P P P
NOTES:
“---” Pavement design not permitted for specified development type.
“P” Stands for “Permitted”
[1] Minimum Lot Width along a Street excluding Flag Lots and Cul-de-sac Lots.
[2] Collector or Arterial Streets only
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 71
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
Figure 4.1-B: Typical cross-section of a rural development arterial street without parking
Figure 4.1-C: Typical cross-section of a suburban development collector street without parking
Figure 4.1-D: Typical cross-section of a suburban development arterial street without parking
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 72
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
Figure 4.1-E: Typical cross-section of an urban development arterial street without parking
Figure 4.1-F: Typical cross-section of a traditional neighborhood development arterial street with parking on both
sides of the street
Figure 4.1-G: Typical cross-section of a suburban development subcollector street with parking on both sides of
the street
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 73
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
Figure 4.1-H: Typical cross-section of an urban development subcollector street with parking on one side of the
street
Figure 4.1-I: Typical cross-section of an urban development subcollector street with parking on both sides of the
street
Figure 4.1-J: Typical cross-section of a rural development local street without parking
4.1-11 Sidewalks
The following shall apply to the installation of Sidewalks.
(A) Sidewalks shall be provided as indicated in Table 4.1-1, except as provided in this subsection.
(B) With the exception of a Rural Type Development where sidewalks may not be required at all,
sidewalks may be provided along one side of new Streets under the following circumstances:
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 74
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
(1) When residences are proposed only along one side of the entirety of the Street;
(2) When the development contains alternative Pedestrian Walkways (Subject to Subsection 4.1-
12: Alternative Pedestrian Walkways.) that constitute a pedestrian circulation system equal to
or exceeding Sidewalk on both sides of the Street; or
(3) When the Street serves as an entrance to a development and contains no residences or
contains residences along one side of the Street.
(C) Sidewalks shall be provided along existing Streets that abut the limits of a Subdivision shown on a
Preliminary Plat.
(D) Where Sidewalks are present, Curb ramps shall be installed at all Street intersections containing
Curb and gutter in accord with Appendix A: Standard Construction Drawings.
(1) Curb ramps shall be required at the intersection of the sidewalk and curb when sidewalk
dead-ends into a t-type or hammerhead type turnaround.
(E) Sidewalks constructed closer than two feet from the edge of Street pavement, or back of Curb,
shall require the use of a barrier Curb along the Street.
(1) Sidewalks shall be permitted closer than two feet from the back of sloped Curb within multifamily
developments only.
(F) Concrete Sidewalks shall have a minimum thickness of four inches. See Figure 4.1-K.
(1) The thickness of concrete Sidewalks shall be increased to five inches when part of a
Driveway. See Figure 4.1-K.
Figure 4.1-K: Illustration of Sidewalk thickness for Sidewalks
(2) In commercial and industrial areas, Sidewalks within the Driveway apron shall have a
minimum thickness equal to the thickness required for the commercial or industrial
Driveway apron.
(G) In the case where Sidewalk Improvements have not been completed, a conditional Certificate of
Occupancy may be given provided it does not exceed six months.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 75
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
(H) In the case where Sidewalks have not been installed fronting platted, but vacant Lots, such
Sidewalks shall be installed by the owner of the Lot(s) in question within six months from the date
when 75 percent of the Lots have been issued certificates of occupancy.
Alternative 4.1-12 Pedestrian Walkways
Alternative Pedestrian Walkways may be permitted in developments by choice of the Applicant and/or as
an alternative to Sidewalks identified in Subsection 4.1-11: Sidewalks.
(A) Pedestrian Walkways within the public Right-of-way shall be constructed of Portland cement
concrete.
(1) Multi-use paths (hiker-biker paths) referenced in Table 4.1-1 may be constructed of asphalt.
(B) Pedestrian Walkways located outside of the public Right-of-way that are intended to meet, in an
alternate way, the requirement of Table 4.1-1 may be constructed of asphalt.
(1) Asphalt walkways shall have a minimum width of five feet and a minimum thickness of five
inches consisting of a modified base mixture.
(2) The Subgrade for asphalt walkways shall be proofrolled prior to placement of the Sidewalk.
(3) Walkways constructed outside the public Right-of-way (See Figure 4.1-L.) shall only be
permitted within developments that contain a homeowners’ association with specific
maintenance and Easement agreements for the walk recorded at the County Clerk’s office.
Figure 4.1-L: Illustration of an alternative Pedestrian Walkway
(4) The recording of the maintenance and Easement agreements for the walkways shall occur
concurrently with the first Final Plat containing the walk.
(C) If the requirement for sidewalks in Table 4.1-1 have been met, either through the provision of: a)
Concrete sidewalks within the Right-of-way; b) a combination of Concrete sidewalks within the
Right-of-way and Asphalt sidewalks outside the Right-of-way; or c) Asphalt sidewalks outside the
Right-of-way, then any other sidewalk construction is not regulated in terms of materials used.
(1) Sidewalk construction where materials are not regulated by these regulations is still required
to comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 76
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
4.1-13 Roadside Swales
The following shall apply to the installation of roadside swales.
(A) Curbs shall be provided along both sides of new Streets except within a Rural Type Development
and as herein provided.
(B) Roadside swales may be provided in the following circumstances:
(1) In developments that allow on-street parking and contain minimum Lot Widths that equal or
exceed 100 feet when used in conjunction with curb and gutter containing cut-outs and
flumes;
(2) Along streets that serve as an entrance to the development and contain no residences and no
parking.
4.1-14 Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Curb Ramps
Where Sidewalks along Streets are required, Curb ramps shall comply with the U.S. Department of
Justice’s regulations for the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990.
(A) Curb ramp installation shall prohibit stormwater from flowing onto the ramps.
(B) Curb ramps shall be installed at all new Street intersections in conjunction with construction of the
concrete Curbs and gutters.
(C) Curb ramps shall be required at the intersection of the Sidewalk and curb when Sidewalk dead-ends
into a t-type or hammerhead type turnaround.
4.1-15 Bicycle Facilities
If a Parcel or area is designated as an “Urban/Suburban Focus Area” in the Comprehensive Plan, Bicycle
Facilities shall be required in accordance with Table 4.1-1 of these regulations. See also Figure 4.1-M.
(A) Alternative Bicycle Facilities may be permitted provided they constitute a bicycle circulation
system equal to or exceeding the requirements of Table 4.1-1.
(B) Developments interfering with a bikeway planned by a Legislative Body shall reserve available
land and develop the bikeways as planned. These Improvements may serve as an alternative
bicycle facility to meet the requirements of this subsection.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 77
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
Figure 4.1-M: Illustration of a bicycle facility network
(C) All Bicycle Facilities shall be developed in accordance with the American Association of State
Highway Officials (AASHTO) Guide for the Development of Bicycle Facilities.
4.1-16 On-Street Parking
The following shall apply to on-Street parking:
(A) On Street parking may be provided as identified in Table 4.1-1 of these regulations.
(B) Lots that abut Streets which prohibit on-Street parking in residential developments shall contain
twice the off-Street parking that is required by the applicable zoning ordinance.
(C) Unless the water main changes to the opposite side of the street mid-street, on-Street parking lanes
shall not be shifted from one side of the Street to the other mid-Street, but can be shifted from
block to block as a traffic calming measure.
(D) Except for Streets that allow parking on both sides of the Street, the on-Street parking lane shall be
located on the opposite side of the Street from fire hydrants. See Figure 4.1-N.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 78
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
Figure 4.1-N: Illustration of on-Street parking
4.1-17 Off-Street Parking Areas
Off-street Parking Areas shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the applicable
zoning ordinance.
4.1-18 Geometric Design of Streets
The horizontal and vertical alignment of Streets shall be designed in compliance with the guidelines
established by the American Association of State Highway Officials (AASHTO) manual “A Policy of the
Geometric Design of Highway and Streets, “(The Green Book) as summarized in Table 4.1-3. The
following issues shall also apply:
(A) When there is a change in the horizontal alignment of a Street along the centerline, a curve with a
minimum radius appropriate to the Design Speed of the Street as defined in Table 4.1-3 shall be
constructed.
(B) A tangent of at least 200 feet for Collector Streets shall be provided between reverse horizontal
curves.
(C) At intersections, the algebraic difference in cross slopes at the crown line of the intersected Street,
shall not exceed six percent. This standard shall apply to the centerline of all through travel lanes
at the intersection. See Figure 4.1-O.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 79
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
Figure 4.1-O: Illustration of cross slopes at an intersection
(D) The maximum grade of the centerline of the side Streets intersecting with the gutter line of the
through Street shall not exceed four percent for a distance of not less than 75 feet for Local Streets
and 150 feet for collector and arterial streets. See Figure 4.1-P.
Figure 4.1-P: Illustration of the maximum grades permissible along a Street
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 80
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
(E) Descending centerline grades approaching the terminus of a Cul-de-sac shall be reduced within a
vertical curve to a maximum of four percent unless determination is made by Staff that a steeper
grade will provide adequate clearance for vehicles entering ascending Driveways. See Figure 4.1-P
and Figure 4.1-Q.
Figure 4.1-Q: Illustration of a descending centerline approaching the terminus of a Cul-de-sac
TABLE 4.1-3:GEOMETRIC DESIGN STANDARDS
FUNCTIONAL
CLASSIFICATION DESIGN SPEED
HORIZONTAL
VERTICAL
GRADES (%)
CREST SAG
MINIMUM RADIUS
(FEET)
KFACTOR
MINIMUM
KFACTOR
MINIMUM
MAX MIN
Local and
Subcollector 25 100 15 15 12 (8) 1
Collector 35 400 30 35 10 1
Arterial 45 900[1] 61 79 7[1] 1
NOTES:
Numbers in parenthesis indicate values required for commercial/nonresidential uses.
[1] Under proposed standards, the Design Speed on arterial streets is 45 miles per hour.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 81
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
Street Connectivity 4.1-19 to Adjoining Areas
The arrangement of Streets in new Subdivisions shall provide for reasonable access to adjoining tracts,
through connections between Streets, logical distribution of traffic patterns, and convenient and efficient
access for emergency vehicles, Street maintenance, school buses, postal delivery, and other essential
services.
(A) The public Right-of-way for a Street connection to adjoining property shall be platted when the
contributing Street in the Subdivision is within 150 feet of the connection to the adjoining property.
(B) No further Final Plat approvals will be granted until the condition in Clause 4.1-19(A) above is
satisfied.
(C) A Guarantee may be filed with the Planning Commission in lieu of the completion of the required
Street connection (See Section 3.4: Guarantees for Improvements.).
(D) Public Street rights-of-way not intended to dead-end permanently through the use of a Cul-de-sac
are required to extend to the abutting property line. Spite strips of land, defined as a piece of land
that limits or denies access to another Right-of-way for no legitimate reason, are prohibited by
these regulations.
(1) When the abutting property differs in elevation from the proposed Right-of-way the street
shall be constructed as close as practical, as determined by Staff, to the abutting property
line.
a) The distance between the end of the street and the elevation of the abutting property
line shall not result in a slope that exceeds 3 horizontal to 1 vertical.
b) In those areas where the street was not able to be constructed to the abutting property
line, the section of unconstructed street shall not be required to be bonded.
c) The Engineer shall be required to provide on the Final Plat any grading easements
outside the Right-of-way necessary to accomplish constructing the unconstructed
section of street referenced above to the abutting property line when the adjacent
property develops.
4.1-20 Street Connectivity within a Subdivision
(A) The Street system shall be in compliance with the maximum intersection spacing identified in
Table 4.1-4. See Figure 4.1-R and Figure 4.1-S.
(B) Permanent Cul-de-sacs and dead end Streets may be provided in accordance with Table 4.1-4 of
these regulations unless topographic or other physical conditions render these provisions
impracticable as determined by Staff. See Figure 4.1-T.
TABLE 4.1-4: INTERNAL CONNECTIVITY STANDARDS BY DEVELOPMENT TYPE
DEVELOPMENT TYPE CUL-DE-SAC
PERMITTED
MAXIMUMCULDE-
SACLENGTH
MAXIMUM INTERSECTION
SPACING
Traditional Neighborhood NO N/A 600 Feet
Urban NO N/A 600 Feet
Suburban YES 1,200 Feet 1,200 Feet
Rural YES 1,200 Feet 1,200 Feet
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 82
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
Figure 4.1-R: Illustration of connectivity within a traditional neighborhood or urban development type Subdivision
Figure 4.1-S: Illustration of connectivity within a suburban or rural development Subdivision
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 83
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
Figure 4.1-T: Illustration of where Cul-de-sacs may be appropriate due to topographic conditions
Intersection 4.1-21 Design and Access Points
The design and spacing of intersections and Access Points shall comply with the access control
regulations contained in Article 8: Access Control Regulations.
(A) Centerlines of all intersecting Streets shall intersect at a 90 degree angle where possible and in no
case shall the angle of intersection be less than 75 degrees or greater than 105 degrees.
(B) Where ‘T’ type intersections are used, a minimum centerline offset of 150 feet for Access Points
along opposite sides of the Street shall be maintained on Local Streets. On collector and arterial
streets, a minimum centerline offset capable of accommodating required left and right turn lanes
shall be maintained. When no auxiliary turn lanes are required, a minimum centerline offset of 200
feet for Access Points along opposite sides of the Street on collector and arterial streets shall be
maintained.
(C) A Curb radius shall be constructed at intersections as shown in Table 4.1-5. The minimum radius
to be used shall comply with the standards for the Street with highest functional class at the
intersection and the adjacent land use. See Figure 4.1-U.
TABLE 4.1-5:CURB RADIUS (FEET)
FUNCTIONAL
CLASSIFICATION
LAND USE
RESIDENTIAL COMMERCIAL INDUSTRIAL
Local 25 30 40
Collector 30 40 50
Arterial 40 40 50
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 84
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
Figure 4.1-U: Illustration of applicable Curb radii based on land use and the Functional Classification of Streets
4.1-22 Sight Distance Requirements
(A) Minimum Sight Distances for vehicles entering and exiting an intersection shall be designed in
compliance with the guidelines established by the American Association of State Highway
Officials (AASHTO) manual “A Policy of the Geometric Design of Highway and Streets,” as
summarized in Table 4.1-6 and Table 4.1-7. See Figure 4.1-V and Figure 4.1-W.
(B) Sight Distance calculations and profiles shall utilize a driver’s eye height of 3.5 feet and an object
height of 2.0 feet.
TABLE 4.1-6: SIGHT DISTANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR EXITING VEHICLES (FEET)
NO. OF LANES
POSTED SPEED LIMIT (MILES PER HOUR)
20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55
2-Lane 230 285 340 400 455 510 570 625
4-Lane 245 305 365 425 485 545 605 665
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 85
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
Figure 4.1-V: Illustration of Sight Distance requirements for exiting vehicles
TABLE 4.1-7: SIGHT DISTANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR APPROACHING VEHICLES
(FEET)
NO. OF LANES
POSTED SPEED LIMIT (MILES PER HOUR)
20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55
2-Lane 165 205 245 285 325 365 405 445
4-Lane 180 220 265 310 355 400 440 485
6-Lane 195 240 290 335 385 430 480 525
Figure 4.1-W: Illustration of Sight Distance requirements for approaching vehicles
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 86
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
4.1-23 Private Streets
Private Streets shall be designed, constructed, and inspected by Staff to ensure conformity with the same
standards as Public Streets.
4.1-24 Access Drives
(A) Access drives may be used to provide direct vehicular access to buildings and Parking Areas from
the side or rear of the property. See Figure 4.1-X.
(B) Access Drives may serve as the primary means of access for a maximum of four residential units or
four commercial Lots.
(C) Access drives may serve as the secondary means of access for an unlimited number of residential
units or commercial Lots when the primary means of access is provided by a Public Street system
accepted for maintenance by the appropriate governing body.
Figure 4.1-X: Illustration of an Access Drive
4.1-25 Temporary Turnarounds for Dead-End Streets
Temporary turnarounds shall be constructed at the terminus of all Streets.
(A) Temporary turnarounds constructed between phases within the same Preliminary Plat may be
constructed of Dense Graded Aggregate a minimum of eight inches in thickness.
(1) The missing asphalt or concrete turnaround is required to be bonded.
(B) Temporary turnarounds constructed at an abutting property line shall be constructed of either
asphalt of concrete in accord with the standards contained herein for street construction.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 87
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.1: Streets
4.1-26 DrivewayWidths
Driveways for residential areas shall be provided with a minimum width as identified in Table 4.1-8. See
Figure 4.1-Y.
TABLE 4.1-8:MINIMUM REQUIRED DRIVEWAY
WIDTHS
NO. OF RESIDENCES DRIVEWAYWIDTH
1 9 [1]
2 12
3 - 6 16
NOTE:
[1] Driveways longer than 150 feet shall have a minimum width
of 12 feet.
Figure 4.1-Y: Illustration of required Driveway widths based on number of residences served
4.1-27 Driveway Aprons
The following shall apply to Driveway aprons:
(A) Driveway aprons in residential areas shall have a minimum thickness of five inches.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 88
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.2: Lot Layout
(B) Driveway aprons in commercial and industrial areas shall have a minimum thickness equal to the
thickness required for the commercial or industrial entrance.
(C) Driveway aprons shall be constructed in accordance with Figure A.1-U: Detail #19 and Figure A.1-
V: Detail #20.
Additional 4.1-28 Street Improvements
Improvements to the existing transportation network may be required to ensure adequate safety and
mobility of users on the Street system. The improvements shall be limited to the study area established
in a required traffic impact study and shall be consistent with the recommendations of the traffic impact
study that were identified to be necessary to maintain the pre-build level of service within the defined
study area.
4.1-29 Construction Details and Specifications
All infrastructure contained in this chapter shall conform to the standard construction drawings contained
in Appendix A: Standard Construction Drawings.
Section 4.2: Lot Layout
4.2-1 Purpose
This section fulfills the infrastructure requirements of Kentucky Revised Statutes (KRS) 100.273 through
100.292. These Lot layout standards assure a necessary component of harmonious, progressive, and
aesthetically-pleasing development. They contribute to healthy and dynamic neighborhoods where
residents can live, work, shop, and play, and promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the public
in Kenton County. To further these more general purposes, this section:
(A) Creates standards that result in the logical arrangement of Lots that are accessible and capable of
being built upon;
(B) Ensures that proper protection from Flood is provided to Lots, built structures and public
infrastructure;
(C) Sets forth minimum standards for utility and Watercourse Easements that will accommodate their
future maintenance needs; and
(D) Provides for the reservation of desirable recreational areas, school sites or other public grounds for
the potential purchase of such areas by the appropriate public body.
4.2-2 Easements
(A) The minimum width of Public utility Easements shall be as required by the applicable public utility
agency. The utilities shall be centrally located within the width of the Easement.
(B) Additional Easement width shall be required by Staff if Staff determines that such additional width
is necessary due to the depth the utilities must be buried or due to the proposed size and use of the
utilities.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 89
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.2: Lot Layout
4.2-3 Watercourses
(A) The Subdivider shall provide Easements for storm Drainage purposes that conform to the lines of
any existing or proposed Watercourses which traverse the Subdivision.
(B) The Easement width shall be sufficient to provide for the maintenance of the Watercourse as
determined by Staff.
4.2-4 Natural Land Use
Subdivisions shall be encouraged to be designed to take advantage of the natural topography of the land,
to economize the construction of Drainage facilities, to minimize destruction of trees and topsoil, and to
preserve such natural features as Watercourses, unusual rock formations, large trees, sites for historical
significance, and other natural assets. See Figure 4.2-A.
Figure 4.2-A: Illustration of Subdivision design taking advantage of the natural topography
4.2-5 Flood Protection
The following shall apply to Flood protection:
(A) All Subdivision development shall comply with the Flood protection development controls
contained in the applicable zoning ordinance.
(B) All Streets and utilities constructed to serve a Subdivision shall be either Flood protected, or
constructed to a level of not less than two feet above the elevation of the 100-year Flood.
4.2-6 Lot Size
All proposed Lots shall conform to the minimum size requirements of the applicable zoning ordinance.
4.2-7 Lot Frontage
(A) All proposed Lots for building purposes shall front onto a Public Street system accepted for
maintenance by the applicable Legislative Body.
(B) The minimum Frontage for a single proposed building Lot along a Public Street system shall be 20
feet.
(C) The minimum frontage for contiguous Flag Lots along a Public Street system is 10 feet per flag.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 90
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.2: Lot Layout
Double 4.2-8 and Triple Frontage Lots
(A) Lots shall not have Frontage onto more than one Street except:
(1) When a Lot is a Corner Lot;
(2) When the rear of a Double Frontage Lot abuts an arterial, Freeway, Access Drive, or
collector street; or
(3) When the rear of a Triple Frontage Lot abuts a Freeway, or Access Drive.
(B) Double frontage and Triple Frontage Lots shall be restricted to one Driveway on the Street with the
lowest Functional Classification.
(1) More than one Driveway may be provided for double and triple frontage lots that abut local
streets if permitted by the applicable zoning ordinance.
4.2-9 Flag Lots
The following shall apply to Flag Lots:
(A) Flag Lots shall only be used in those locations where due to geometric, topographic, or other
physical features, or the lack of economic feasibility in proportion to the size of the development, it
would be impractical to extend a publicly dedicated Street.
(B) Single Flag Lots shall have a minimum Frontage of 20 feet along a publicly dedicated and accepted
Street.
(C) Two or more contiguous Flag Lots shall each have a minimum Frontage of 10 feet onto a publicly
dedicated and accepted Street. Contiguous Flag Lots require the provision of a minimum 20-foot
wide ingress/egress Easement that provides for the permanent maintenance of the access way to be
located over the 10-foot Flag Stems. See Figure 4.2-B.
(D) Except in the unincorporated portion of Kenton County, access to the Lot(s) shall only be provided
from within the limits of the contiguous Flag Stem portion of the Lot(s) or from an existing, shared
driveway.
(E) In the case of new developments containing new Street only, no more than four Flag Lots are
permitted to be contiguous to each other at the street. Otherwise no more than two Flag Lots are
permitted to be contiguous to each other at the Street. See Figure 4.2-B.
(F) No more than 15 percent of Lots contained on a Preliminary Plat shall be Flag Lots.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 91
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.2: Lot Layout
Figure 4.2-B: Illustration of Flag Lot requirements
4.2-10 Maximum Lot Depth
(A) The maximum depth of a Lot shall not be greater than four times the width of the Lot, except for
Flag Lots and Lots which contain over five acres of Lot Area. See Figure 4.2-C.
Figure 4.2-C: Illustration of maximum lot depth
(B) Individual site conditions and/or the proposed Lot layout and arrangement may require variation
from these requirements, as determined by Staff.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 92
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.2: Lot Layout
4.2-11 Driveway Access
(A) The minimum width of a Driveway serving a single Lot shall conform to the applicable Zoning
Ordinance.
(B) The minimum width of a Driveway serving two Lots shall be 12 feet.
(C) The minimum width of a Driveway serving three to six Lots shall be 16 feet.
(D) Driveways shall serve no more than six Lots and/or residential dwellings.
4.2-12 Residual Parcels
No Residual Parcels shall be created which:
(A) Do not conform to the minimum lot size requirements of the zoning district in which the Parcel is
located;
(B) Are not required for a private or public utility purpose; or
(C) Are not accepted by the applicable Legislative Body or any other appropriate public body.
4.2-13 Side Lot Lines
(A) Side Lot Lines shall be as close to right angles with the Street centerline as possible, or radial to
curve Street centerlines. See Figure 4.2-D.
(B) Lot Lines not at right angles with the Street centerline, and Lot Lines intersecting with curved
Right-of-ways shall have a reference tie to the tangent line of that centerline curve. See Figure
4.2-D.
Figure 4.2-D: Illustration of Side Lot Lines
4.2-14 Property Lines at Street Intersections
Property lines at Street intersections shall be provided from the same radius point necessary to establish
the pavement radius. See Figure 4.2-E.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 93
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.3: Public Utilities
Figure 4.2-E: Illustration of property line location at Street intersections
4.2-15 Public Sites
Where a proposed park, recreational area, open space, school site, or other public uses identified in the
Comprehensive Plan is located in whole or in part within a proposed Subdivision, Staff may require a
reservation for the purchase of such ground by an applicable public body not to exceed two years as a
condition precedent to Preliminary Plat approval.
Section 4.3: Public Utilities
4.3-1 Purpose
This chapter fulfills the infrastructure requirements of Kentucky Revised Statutes (KRS) 100.273 through
100.292. These public utility standards assure a necessary component of harmonious, progressive, and
aesthetically-pleasing development is addressed. They contribute to healthy and dynamic neighborhoods
where residents can live, work, shop, and play. Furthermore, they promote the health, safety, and general
welfare of the public in Kenton County. To further these more general purposes, this section:
(A) Establishes the adequacy of existing and proposed stormwater, wastewater and water supply
facilities as a factor to be considered when reviewing proposed Subdivisions;
(B) Sets forth minimum standards for stormwater Drainage systems, sanitary sewer and water systems,
and the extent to which they shall be provided;
(C) Ensures that new Lots are provided access to essential public utilities when they are available; and
(D) Promotes the ability of fire departments to fight fires by requiring minimum fire flows and
adequate provision of fire hydrants.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 94
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.3: Public Utilities
4.3-2 Storm Water Drainage Systems
All storm water Drainage systems shall comply with the Northern Kentucky Regional Storm Water
Management Program Rules and Regulations of Sanitation District No. 1 (SD 1’s Storm Water
Regulations).
(A) Sanitation District No. 1 shall perform the plan review of the storm water Drainage system(s) and
issue the appropriate permit(s) for any development that disturbs one acre of land or greater, or for
disturbances of less than one acre when that disturbance is part of a larger overall development.
(B) Development that does not disturb one acre of land or greater will be subject to the requirement of
plan reviews and/or permits through these regulations and/or the applicable zoning ordinance.
(C) Any proposed Subdivision that requires submission of a grading plan or improvement drawing to
Staff shall receive grading plan or improvement drawing approval prior to the commencement of
any earth moving operations.
4.3-3 Inlet Grates
Except for inlets serving temporary silt basins, detention and/or retention basins, Inlet Grates shall not
allow a sphere with a diameter of six inches to pass through.
4.3-4 On-Street Inlet Location
Inlet spacing along Streets shall be based upon gutter and inlet capacity, Street slope, and contributing
Drainage area. In addition, inlet spacing shall not exceed the following spacing requirements unless
hydraulic calculations are submitted that indicate acceptable capacity:
(A) Along continuous grades less than two percent - 400 feet maximum;
(B) Along continuous grades two percent and over - 600 feet maximum;
(C) At sag locations less than two percent - 400 feet maximum between inlets or from a high point;
(D) At sag locations two percent and over - 600 feet maximum between inlets or from a high point;
(E) Inlets shall be placed immediately upstream of Pedestrian Walkways and designed to intercept 100
percent of the flow at the gutter line;
(F) Inlets placed at locations other than in Clause 4.3-4(E) above shall be designed to conform to
SD1’s Storm Water Regulations; and
(G) Roll type grate inlets shall be used in any location where a Driveway will intersect the Street.
4.3-5 Cul-de-sac Inlet Location
Special consideration should be given to storm Drainage entering Cul-de-sacs. In addition to an inlet
provided at the low point within the Cul-de-sac, two additional inlets shall be required along each Curb
prior to the entrance of the Cul-de-sac:
(A) For Street slopes eight percent and less draining more than 400 feet of pavement; and
(B) For all Street slopes more than eight percent and draining more than 300 feet of pavement.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 95
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.3: Public Utilities
4.3-6 Culverts and Pipe Types
Culverts and pipe types shall be designed in accord with SD 1’s Storm Water Regulations
(A) All pipe installations greater than 30 inches in diameter require full-time on-site inspections under
the direction of a Qualified Geotechnical Engineer of Firm.
4.3-7 Lot Grading and Drainage
The following shall apply to Lot grading and Drainage:
(A) Surface Drainage swales to accommodate individual Lot Drainage shall be constructed as part of
the final Lot grading and seeded and mulched.
(B) Surface Drainage swales shall have a minimum grade of two percent and shall be constructed so
that the surface water will drain onto a Street, storm inlet, natural Drainage area, or other Drainage
feature. See Figure 4.3-A.
Figure 4.3-A: Illustrations of Lot Drainage and Swales
(C) Roof downspouts, footing, foundation drains, and sump pumps that are discharged above ground
shall be discharged onto the same Parcel of land from which the water is generated, as far from the
property line as practical and at least five feet from the residence.
(D) Roof downspouts, footing, foundation drains, and sump pumps discharging toward the Street shall
be discharged onto a pervious area no closer than 20 feet from the edge of pavement or back of
Curb. See Figure 4.3-B.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 96
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.3: Public Utilities
(1) The discharge of roof downspouts, footing, foundation drains and sumps directly onto an
impervious area that drains to the street is prohibited.
Figure 4.3-B: Illustration of Drainage on Lot
(E) The connection of roof downspouts, footing, foundation drains, or sump pumps to the public storm
sewer system shall be prohibited unless approved by Sanitation District No. 1 in writing.
Waivers for Storm Water 4.3-8 Runoff Control Facilities
A waiver (See Section 3.9: Waivers to the Regulations.) of stormwater management control facilities
may be granted by Staff when the following criteria are present:
(A) Less than one acre of land is disturbed and the area is not part of a larger overall development;
(B) Less than ½ acre will be impervious area; and
(C) Drainage calculations indicate that the downstream Drainage facilities are adequately sized to
accommodate the additional stormwater runoff and that no pre-existing stormwater Drainage
problems in this watershed exist immediately downstream.
4.3-9 Sanitary Sewer System
The following shall apply to a sanitary sewage system:
(A) The sanitary sewage system shall comply with the Rules and Regulations of Sanitation District No.
1.
(B) In those areas identified in the Comprehensive Plan within the "Urban/Suburban Focus Area", a
sanitary sewage system shall be provided to adequately serve all Lots in the Subdivision.
(C) The sanitary sewer system easements shall be required to be provided to adjacent property not
presently served by a sanitary sewer system.
(D) Where package sewage treatment plants are proposed, the sewage collection system shall be
designed for ultimate connection to the public system.
(E) Sanitary sewage treatment plants for any Subdivision shall be set back a minimum of 200 feet from
any existing residence.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 97
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.3: Public Utilities
Individual On-4.3-10 Site Sewage Disposal Systems
Individual on-site sewage disposal systems are permitted in those areas identified in the Comprehensive
Plan within the "Rural Focus Area" and are required to be constructed in accordance with the current
standards and specifications of the state and local health department.
4.3-11 Water System
The following shall apply to a domestic water system:
(A) The water system shall comply with the applicable water district’s rules and regulations.
(B) In those areas identified in the Comprehensive Plan as "Urban Service Area," a water system shall
be provided to adequately serve all Lots in the Subdivision.
(C) The water system easements shall be required to be provided to adjacent property not presently
served by a water system.
(D) The water system shall be required to interconnect with an existing water system where practical.
4.3-12 Fire Flow Requirements for Residential Development
The following shall apply to minimum fire hydrant flows within residential developments:
(A) The minimum fire hydrant flows shall be provided in accord with Table 4.3-1.
(B) The minimum fire hydrant flow is the quantity of flow in gpm (gallons per minute) at 20 psi
(pounds per square inch) residual pressure.
(C) In areas served by the Northern Kentucky Water District, minimum fire hydrant flows shall be
determined by the Design Engineer using Fire Flow Testing conforming to the standard procedures
contained in the National Fire Protection Association, (NFPA) Handbook and/or by hydraulic
modeling data provided by the Northern Kentucky Water District.
(D) In areas outside the jurisdiction of the Northern Kentucky Water District, minimum fire hydrant
flows shall be determined by a Fire Flow Test performed by the applicable water service district or
fire department and shall conform to the standard procedures contained in the National Fire
Protection Association (NFPA) Handbook.
TABLE 4.3-1:MINIMUM FIRE FLOW REQUIREMENTS FOR
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
EXPOSURE DISTANCES [1] MINIMUM FIRE FLOW
Over 100 feet None
100 feet or less 500 gpm
NOTE:
[1] Exposure distances are measured using the minimum allowable side yards
identified in the applicable zoning ordinance.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 98
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.3: Public Utilities
Fire Hydrant Locations for 4.3-13 Residential Development
The following shall apply to the location and spacing of fire hydrants for residential development:
(A) Water mains and fire hydrants shall be extended along any proposed Street where the existing
water system can support the extension and meet all of the Northern Kentucky Water District
Regulations.
(B) The maximum spacing of fire hydrants shall be provided in accordance with Table 4.3-2. See also
Figure 4.3-C.
(C) Fire hydrant spacing shall be measured along the centerline of the Street and placed at proposed
Lot Lines where practical.
(D) A fire hydrant shall be located a maximum of 500 feet from the face of any building within
developments where a new Street is involved.
(1) Other Northern Kentucky Water District Regulations
TABLE 4.3-2:MAXIMUM SPACING OF FIRE
HYDRANTS
DEVELOPMENT TYPE SPACING
Single-Family 500 feet
Multi-Family 300 feet
Figure 4.3-C: Illustrations of fire hydrant locations for single-family and multi-family developments
4.3-14 Fire Hydrant Locations and Fire Flow Requirements for Nonresidential Development
Minimum fire hydrant locations and fire flows for nonresidential developments shall be as approved by
the applicable fire department in writing.
4.3-15 Telephone, Cable and Electric Utility Lines
All new telephone, cable and electrical utility lines shall be installed underground and be in conformance
with the appropriate utility company's policy and requirements.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 99
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.4: Pavement Design Method and Required Thicknesses
Pavement Section 4.4: Design Method and Required Thicknesses
4.4-1 Pavement Design Method
AASHTO Guide for Design of Pavement Structures (1986 and 1993), published by The American
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials is the design method used herein and is
specified as the design method to be used for any alternate pavement designs that are allowed or required
in this regulation. Table 4.4-1: Subdivision Pavement Design Parameters Using AASHTO Method sets
out the design parameters used herein for Kenton County Subdivision pavements. For definition and
explanation of the parameters shown here, see the above mentioned AASHTO guides, Section 4.8:
Pavement Performance and Design herein, and Appendix C: Engineers Committee Final Report. Project
specific pavement designs are required for residential streets serving over 1,000 residences or
commercial/industrial streets serving more than 3,500,000 ESALs or alternative pavement designs
proposed under Section 4.4-2: Required Thicknesses. Any project specific pavement designs are required
to use the design parameters identified in Table 4.4-1: Subdivision Pavement Design Parameters Using
AASHTO Method.
TABLE 4.4-1: SUBDIVISION PAVEMENT DESIGN PARAMETERS USING AASHTOMETHOD
PARAMETER
DESIGN VALUES
CONCRETE ASPHALT
Design Life 20 years 20 years
Life Cycle Analysis 50 years 50 years
Drainage Coefficient 1.0 --
Reliability 80% 80%
Deviation 0.35 0.45
Initial Serviceability 4.2 4.5
Terminal Serviceability 2.5 2.5
Modulus of Rupture 600 psi --
Modulus of Elasticity 3,600,000 psi --
CBR, Minimum 2 (K=50 pci) 3 (MR=2700 psi)
Load Transfer 4.4 (no dowels) --
Load Transfer 3.2 (dowels) --
20 Year ESAL, Residential Local Street, ≤ 199 lots served 81,000 81,000
20 Year ESAL, Residential Subcollector Street, 200-500 lots served 203,000 203,000
20 Year ESAL, Residential Collector Street, 501-1000 lots served 406,000[2] 406,000[2]
20 Year ESAL, Commercial/Industrial Street 3,500,000[1] 3,500,000[1]
Year 17 to Year 34 and Year 34 to Year 50
ESAL, Residential Local Street, ≤ 199 lots served 53,000 53,000
Year 17 to Year 34 and Year 34 to Year 50
ESAL, Residential Subcollector Street, 200-500 lots served 133,000 133,000
Year 17 to Year 34 and Year 34 to Year 50
ESAL, Residential Collector Street, 501-1000 lots served 265,000[2] 265,000[2]
ESAL, Arterial Per KYTC Specification
Asphalt Surface Layer Coefficient 0.44
Asphalt Base Layer Coefficient 0.40
Crushed Stone Base Layer Coefficient 0.14
Crushed Stone Base with Tensar TX5 Geogrid Layer Coefficient 0.25 for CBR ≥ 3
0.21 for 2≤ CBR < 3
Thickness conversion factor, 17 year old asphalt 0.7
Thickness conversation factor, 34 year old asphalt 0.6
NOTES:
[1] Engineer shall submit a Traffic Impact Study (TIS) documenting project-specific design ESALs for each
commercial/industrial Subdivision generating more than 100 vehicle trips per hour during the AM or PM peak period. If projectspecific
ESAL loading is greater than 3,500,000, a project-specific pavement design is required.
[2] Project specific pavement design required for residential streets serving more than 1,000 lots
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 100
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.4: Pavement Design Method and Required Thicknesses
4.4-2 Required Thicknesses
(A) Table 4.4-2: Required Subdivision Street Thicknesses shows the required pavement thicknesses for
various Street classifications for Asphalt and Concrete Streets where in situ Subgrade soils can
meet the minimum required Subgrade CBR equal to 2 or greater for Concrete pavements or CBR
of 3 or greater for Asphalt pavements. These thicknesses were determined using the AASHTO
Guide for Design of Pavement Structures (1986 and 1993) and the design parameters identified in
Table 4.4-1: Subdivision Pavement Design Parameters Using AASHTO Method. These values
meet requirements for a 50 year life cycle without replacement, assuming resurfacing at 17 and 34
years as shown in the example calculation in Figure C.1-A: Exhibit A.
(B) Wherever the minimum CBR values for Asphalt or Concrete pavements as defined in Table 4.4-1:
Subdivision Pavement Design Parameters Using AASHTO Method cannot be provided by the in
situ Subgrade soils, the Engineer shall: 1) submit an engineered Subgrade improvement design
that increases the CBR value of the in situ Subgrade soils to the required minimum CBR values
for Asphalt and Concrete pavement in Subsection 4.4-1: Pavement Design Method; or 2) submit an
engineered alternate pavement design that takes into account the substandard CBR values.
TABLE 4.4-2:REQUIRED SUBDIVISION STREET THICKNESSES
STREET
CLASSIFICATION
WITH NUMBER OF
LOTS SERVED[5]
CONCRETE
CONCRETE
OVER 4”
CRUSHED
STONE
BASE
FULL-DEPTH
ASPHALT
ASPHALT OVER CRUSHED
STONE BASE (CSB)
ASPHALT OVER CRUSHED
STONE BASE (CSB)+
GEOGRID[6]
SURFACE BASE[1] SURFACE BASE CSB[1] SURFACE BASE CSB[1]
Residential Local
≤199 Lots
7”[2] NA 1.25” 8” 1.5” 5” 7”[4] 1.5” 3” 7”[4]
Residential
Subcollector
200 – 500 Lots
8”[2] NA 1.25” 8.75” 1.5” 6” 7”[4] 1.5” 4” 7”[4]
Residential
Collector
501 – 1,000 Lots
9”[2] NA 1.25” 10.5” 1.5” 7.75” 7”[4] 1.5” 5.75” 7”[4]
Commercial/
Industrial Not Permitted 10”[3] Not
Permitted
Not
Permitted 1.5” 14” 7”[4] 1.5” 12” 7”[4]
Arterial Per KYTC Specifications
[1]Average thickness. Varies from 1 inch less at centerline to 1 inch greater at gutter apron
[2] Plain Concrete, tooled skewed transverse Contraction Joints without dowels (see Figure A.1-N: Detail #12 and Figure A.1-O: Detail
#13).
[3] Plain Concrete, with doweled and sawed (non-skewed) transverse Contraction Joints (see Figure A.1-M: Detail #11).
[4] 6-8 inch KYTC crushed stone base for residential pavements to be installed in one lift (pug milled) and properly compacted (one
lift). Any crushed stone base greater in thickness than the above noted 6-8 inches must be installed in two lifts. Asphalt base can be
replaced with a structurally equivalent thickness of crushed stone base as long as the following minimum asphalt thicknesses are
maintained: minimum total Asphalt thickness equals 4.5 inches local, 5.5 inches subcollector, 6.5 inches residential collector, and 7.5
inches commercial/industrial
[5] Number of lots served for a particular Street is defined as the number of lots which that Street serves as the sole access or, where a
number of Lots are served by more than one access, it is an approximation of the number of lots served that is equivalent to one
access.
- Example 1: A particular section Street serves as the sole access to less than 200 Lots. That Street would then be a Local
Street.
- Example 2: An area of existing and future residential development of 450 Lots is served by more than one access Street.
Only those Streets that will carry traffic and ESAL loading higher than a Subdivision Street that provides sole access to
more than 200 Lots will be classified as a subcollector Street.
[6] Geogrid shall be Tensar TX5 triaxial geogrid.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 101
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.4: Pavement Design Method and Required Thicknesses
(1) Engineered subgrade improvements may include:
a) Undercutting the substandard Subgrade soils and replacing them with documented
soils that provide the minimum CBR values, or greater.
b) Providing a chemically stabilized Subgrade (usually lime stabilization) to effectively
provide the minimum CBR values, or greater.
c) Utilizing crushed stone base with geotextile and/or Tensar TX5 triaxial geogrid to
effectively provide the minimum CBR values, or greater.
(2) Alternative pavement designs may be proposed for Asphalt pavement on subgrades with a
CBR value of 2, provided the pavement structure is shown to meet the structural number
requirements identified in Table 4.4-3: Structural Numbers For Alternative Asphalt
Pavement Designs (CBR =2). Alternative pavement designs are not permitted for Subgrade
soils with a CBR less than 2; rather, the subgrade soils shall be improved to CBR equal to 2
or greater, per Subsection 4.4-2(B)(1).
TABLE 4.4-3: STRUCTURAL NUMBERS FOR
ALTERNATIVE ASPHALT PAVEMENT DESIGNS
(CBR=2)
STREET CLASSIFICATION STRUCTURAL NUMBER
Local (<200 Lots) 4.09
Subcollector 4.92 (200-500 Lots)
Collector 5.60 (501-1,000 Lots)
Commercial/ 8.40 Industrial
(3) When chemically stabilized Subgrade demonstrates a documented CBR value greater than 3,
an alternative asphalt pavement design may be proposed to reduce pavement thickness,
provided the pavement structure is shown to meet the structural number requirements
identified in Table 4.4-4: Structural Numbers For Alternative Asphalt Pavement Designs.
TABLE 4.4-4: STRUCTURAL NUMBERS FOR
ALTERNATIVE ASPHALT PAVEMENT DESIGNS
STREET
CLASSIFICATION
STRUCTURAL NUMBER
CBR4 CBR5 CBR6 CBR7
Local
2.85 2.50 2.24 2.04
(<199 Lots)
Subcollector
3.52 3.14 2.84 2.60
(200-500 Lots)
Collector
(501-1,000 4.09 3.65 3.34 3.07
Lots)
Commercial/
6.47 5.92 5.47 5.12
Industrial
a) For full depth asphalt pavements, the maximum allowable reduction in asphalt
thickness over that identified in Table 4.4-2: Required Subdivision Street Thicknesses
shall be 2 inches. Asphalt base shall be a minimum of 4” thick under the curb; if the
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 102
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.4: Pavement Design Method and Required Thicknesses
CBR of the subgrade is improved to 5 or higher, a 3” minimum thickness may be used
under the curb.
b) For Asphalt over Crushed Stone Base pavements, the crushed stone base may not be
reduced below the thicknesses shown in Table 4.4-2: Required Subdivision Street
Thicknesses, and minimum total Asphalt thicknesses of 4.5 inches (local streets), 5.5
inches (subcollector streets), 6.5 inches (residential collector streets), and 7.5 inches
(commercial/industrial streets) shall be maintained.
c) There shall be no reduction in thickness for Concrete pavements below those shown in
Table 4.4-2: Required Subdivision Street Thicknesses
d) Alternative pavement designs shall not be permitted for:
i) in situ soils with CBR values greater than 3;
ii) undercut and replaced subgrade soils; or
iii) crushed stone base and geotextile/geogrid subgrade improvements.
Pavement and Pavement Drainage 4.4-3 Construction Details
Appendix A: Standard Construction Drawings contains important construction details that are a part of
these specifications for the pavement, pavement Drainage system, and other utility construction within
the Right of Way that can impact pavement performance. Proper construction execution of the details in
Appendix A: Standard Construction Drawings is important to good pavement performance. For
discussion of the background of the reasoning behind these details, see Appendix C: Engineers
Committee Final Report.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 103
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.5: Use of Aggregates Within the Right-of-way
Use of Section 4.5: Aggregates Within the Right-of-way
4.5-1 Aggregate Specifications
Table 4.5-1 indicates the specifications for the various aggregate types and their uses in improvement
construction within the Street Right-of-way. All aggregates must pass all KYTC aggregate requirements
for their intended use as set out in Section 800 of the KYTC Road and Bridge Manual, latest edition.
TABLE 4.5-1:AGGREGATE SPECIFICATION TABLE
KYTCSPECIFICATION USE WITHIN RIGHT-OF-WAY
Pipe Bedding Sand Bed and cover for deep sanitary sewer and storm sewer
Concrete Sand Concrete mix and bed and cover for waterline and power and
communication utilities
DGA Backfill for waterline and power and communication utilities under
the Street
No. 57 Crushed Limestone Concrete pavement aggregate and catch basins crossover
construction
No. 57 Gravel Allowable aggregate for all Concrete not used in Concrete pavement
and Concrete Curb and gutter
No. 8 Gravel Allowable aggregate for all Concrete
No. 467 Crushed Limestone Required aggregate for Concrete pavements
Crushed Stone Base Base material for Asphalt pavements with stone base
Asphalt Aggregates
See Table 4.7-1
Asphalt pavement aggregate must meet requirements in Section 400
of the KYTC Road and Bridge Manual, latest edition, except where
noted otherwise in this specification.
All aggregates must pass all KYTC aggregate requirements for their intended use as set out in Section
800 of the KYTC Road and Bridge Manual, latest edition.
Section 4.6: Portland Cement Concrete (Concrete) Infrastructure
4.6-1 General Requirement
(A) Materials
Portland cement, water, aggregates, air entraining agents, and admixtures to reduce water, retard
set, etc. shall satisfy the material specifications of, and be proportioned, batched, delivered, and
cured in accordance with, the Portland Cement Association (PCA), Design and Control of Concrete
Mixtures, latest edition, except as noted otherwise in these regulations.
(B) Mix Design
Concrete mix design will vary depending on the intended use, as spelled out in Subsections 4.6-
2(A), 4.6-3(A), and 4.6-4(A).
(C) Fly Ash
No fly ash is allowed in the Concrete mix.
(D) Strength
Finished Concrete shall attain a minimum compressive strength at 28 days of 4,000 pounds per
square inch.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 104
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.6: Portland Cement Concrete (Concrete) Infrastructure
(E) Ready Mix Suppliers
All Concrete Ready Mix must be provided by Ready Mix plants listed on the KYTC List of
Approved Materials (LAM) as a qualified producer. In the alternative, the Ready Mix supplier
must supply to the staff an executed original of KTC Form TC-64-764/09 2011 “Certification of
Compliance for Freeze Thaw Resistant Concrete Aggregate” for the aggregate used in Concrete
mixes prior to commencement of construction. All Ready Mix Concrete suppliers shall submit to
the Staff in January of each year mix design verifications for all Concrete mixes that will be
supplied during that year for use in Subdivision improvements.
(F) Delivery and Discharge
Concrete shall be delivered and discharged from a truck mixer or agitator truck within the periods
specified in Table 4.6-1. Delivery tickets shall have this time clearly shown and be checked for
conformance by the Staff. Delivery tickets shall also show the date of the delivery, the Concrete
mix supplied, and the design compressive strength. All delivery tickets shall be delivered to Staff.
Any Concrete which is not plastic and workable when placed shall be rejected.
TABLE 4.6-1:MAXIMUM CONCRETE DISCHARGE TIME
AIR TEMPERATURE MAXIMUM DISCHARGE TIME
Up to 85 degrees Fahrenheit 1.5 hours
More than 85 degrees Fahrenheit 1 hour
(G) Curing
Concrete shall be cured in accordance with Section 601.03.17 of the KYTC specification.
(H) Expansion and Isolation Joints
Expansion and Isolation Joint material used herein shall be preformed one inch thick material, the
full depth of the Concrete, and shall conform to KYTC specifications for use in Concrete
pavements.
Street 4.6-2 Pavement Requirements
(A) Concrete Mix Design Requirements
(1) Aggregates for Concrete Street pavement shall be a blend of No. 467 crushed limestone, No.
8 gravel and concrete sand.
(2) The No. 467 crushed limestone aggregate shall meet the gradation limits shown in Table 4.6-
2.
TABLE 4.6-2:NO. 467GRADATION LIMITS
SIEVE SIZE PERCENT PASSING
2” 100
1½” 93-98*
1” ----
¾” 35-70
½” ----
⅜” 10-30
#4 0-5
#8 ----
*Note that the specified percent passing the 1½” sieve
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 105
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.6: Portland Cement Concrete (Concrete) Infrastructure
(3) Gradation of the No. 8 gravel and the concrete sand shall meet the requirements of Section
800 of the KYTC Road and Bridge Manual, latest edition.
(4) Minimum cement factor shall be 564 pounds per cubic yard.
(5) Minimum compressive strength at 28 days shall be 4,000 psi.
(6) Maximum water / cement ratio shall be 0.45.
(7) Air entrainment shall be 6% ± 2%.
(8) Maximum slump without mid-range water reducer shall be 4-inches.
(9) Maximum slump with mid-range water reducer shall be 7-inches.
(10) Workability factor shall be between 38 high to 33 low.
(11) Coarseness factor shall be between 73 high to 68 low.
(B) Thickness Requirements
Pavement thicknesses for various classifications of Streets shall be as shown in Table 4.4-2:
Required Subdivision Street Thicknesses. Various critical Concrete pavement design and
construction details that shall be used in Concrete Subdivision pavements are shown in Appendix
A: Standard Construction Drawings.
(C) Testing Requirements
(1) One set of three test cylinders shall be made for each day’s placement of Street. An
additional set of three test cylinders shall be made for each additional 100 cubic yards of
placement. One slump, air entrainment and temperature test shall be performed for each set
of Concrete test cylinders.
(2) One cylinder shall be tested for compressive strength at no later than seven days and two
cylinders at 28 days.
(3) Part of the plastic Concrete sample used for the test cylinders shall be washed to visually
confirm that crushed limestone coarse aggregate was used in the Concrete mix.
(4) All Concrete testing shall be performed by a Qualified Materials Testing firm in accord with
applicable ASTM specifications, latest editions. The results of all Concrete testing are
required to be provided to Staff by the Developer prior to the approval of a Final Plat.
(D) Reinforcing Steel
The use of continuous reinforced concrete pavements is not required but can be considered for
streets serving commercial/industrial uses.
differs from Section 800 of the KYTC Road and Bridge
Manual, latest edition, for No. 467 gradation. The No.
467 crushed limestone for Street pavement in the
Regulation must have 2% to 7% retained on the 1½”
sieve.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 106
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.6: Portland Cement Concrete (Concrete) Infrastructure
(1) Bent bars are not considered reinforcing steel in the contents of this section.
(2) The use of wire mesh in concrete pavements is prohibited.
(E) Placement
(1) Formwork
a) Fixed forms shall have a depth equal to or greater than the thickness of the pavement.
b) Forms shall be of such cross-sections and strength and so secured as to resist the
pressure of the Concrete when placed, and the impact and vibration of any equipment
which they support, without springing or settlement.
(2) Setting
The Subgrade under the forms shall be compacted and shaped so that the form set shall
provide the specified elevation.
(3) Grade and Alignment
The alignment and grade elevation of the forms shall be checked by the Contractor
immediately ahead of Concrete placement and corrections made when necessary.
(4) Placement Method
a) All Concrete placement shall conform to ACI Specifications, latest edition.
b) The Concrete shall be mixed in quantities required for immediate use and shall be
deposited on the Subgrade to the required depth and width of the construction lane in
successive batches and in a continuous operation. The terminus of a continuous pour
shall be a Construction Joint per Figure A.1-N: Detail #12.
c) The Concrete shall be placed as uniformly as possible in order to minimize the amount
of additional spreading necessary.
d) The Concrete shall be vibrated and consolidated with suitable tools while being placed
so that the formation of voids or honeycomb pockets is prevented.
e) Concrete shall not be placed around manholes or other structures until they have been
brought to the required grade and alignment.
f) Additional tamping and compaction of surrounding fill material may be required after
raising manholes.
(5) Consolidating and Finishing
a) Concrete pavement shall be struck off and consolidated with a mechanical finishing
machine, vibrating screed, slipform paver, or by hand-finishing methods such that,
after consolidation and final finishing, it shall be at the elevation shown on the
approved plans.
b) The finishing method shall incorporate a screed, which will consolidate the Concrete
by pressure, vibration, or both.
c) The Concrete shall be brought to a true and even surface, free from rock pockets.
d) Hand-finishing tools shall be kept available for use in case the mechanical finishing
machine breaks down.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 107
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.6: Portland Cement Concrete (Concrete) Infrastructure
e) When hand finishing, the pavement shall be struck off and consolidated by a vibrating
screed to the elevation as shown on the plans. When the forward motion of the
vibrating screen is stopped, the vibrator shall be shut off and not be allowed to idle on
the Concrete.
(6) Scraping and Straight Edging
a) The Inspector may require that the pavement be scraped with a straightedge with a
minimum width of six feet, equipped with handles long enough to permit it to be
operated from the edge of the pavement.
b) When irregularities with the surface elevation are discovered, they shall be corrected
by adding or removing Concrete. All disturbed areas shall be floated with a wooden or
metal float not less than four feet long and not less than six inches wide and straight
edged.
(7) Edging
Before final finishing is completed and before the Concrete has taken its initial set, the edges
of the slab and Curb shall be carefully finished with an edger.
(8) Final Surface Finish
a) The final surface of the Concrete pavement and Curb shall have a uniform gritty
texture at the grades and cross-sections shown on the plans.
b) A burlap drag or medium broom shall be used as the final finishing method for
Concrete pavement.
c) A burlap drag finish shall have a minimum width of at least three feet and have a
length that is long enough to cover the entire pavement width.
d) The burlap drag shall be pulled forward across the pavement in the direction in which
the pavement is being placed.
e) A broom finish shall be drawn transversely across the pavement using overlapping
strokes to produce surface corrugations of uniform appearance approximately 1/16
th
inch in depth.
f) Curbs shall be finished using the same method as the pavement.
(9) Integral Curb
a) Curbs shall be constructed monolithically with pavement extrusion equipment or hand
formed prior to the finishing operation.
b) The integral barrier and sloped Curb shall be constructed with or prior to the finished
paving operation. Special care shall be taken so that the Curb construction does not
create a “cold joint.”
c) Curbs placed immediately following the paving operation shall be sufficiently
consolidated with the paving slab and shall not contain voids within or along the back
face of the Curb.
d) Integral barrier Curbs along the edges of Street pavement shall contain depressed
Curbs not less than 1-3/4 inches above the gutter line at all Driveway entrances and at
such other locations as designed on the approved plans.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 108
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.6: Portland Cement Concrete (Concrete) Infrastructure
e) When barrier Curb is used, the Curb may be sawed horizontally to facilitate residential
Driveways, approaches, and Sidewalks.
(F) Concrete Street Pavement Joints
(1) Contraction Joints
a) All Contraction Joints shall be placed a maximum of 15 feet on center. Commercial/
industrial Subdivision pavements shall have sawed transverse Contraction Joints with
steel dowels that are cut perpendicular across the pavement. All residential pavements
shall have tooled or sawed Contraction Joints without dowels. Residential pavement
transverse Contraction Joints shall be skewed (except at intersections, paired catch
basins and in Cul-de-sacs). See Figure A.1-O: Detail #13.
b) Sawed joints shall be equal to a depth of one-fourth (1/4) of the pavement thickness
continuous across the slab.
c) The timing of the installation of joints shall conform to ACI specifications, latest
edition.
d) Contraction Joints cut into fresh Concrete with a jointing tool shall be a minimum 1½
inches deep.
(2) Expansion Joints
There shall be no Expansion Joints in any pavements except at bridge abutments and where
required by construction details in Figure A.1-R: Detail #16, Figure A.1-S: Detail #17,
Figure A.1-T: Detail #18, Figure A.1-U: Detail #19, and Figure A.1-V: Detail #20.
(3) Longitudinal Joints
a) All pavements wider than 15 feet require Longitudinal Joints. Longitudinal Joints may
be Construction Joints or tooled/sawed joints.
b) Longitudinal Construction Joints will require 18 inches long #4 deformed bars
embedded into each slab at the mid-slab height, no more than four feet on center and
no closer than 18 inches to each Contraction Joint.
c) Bent bars may be inserted into fresh Concrete before its initial set.
d) Bent bars shall not be straightened until the Concrete has cured sufficiently to enable
bending without fracture of the Concrete slab.
(4) Other Pavement Joints
Other Contraction Joints and Isolation Joints shall be constructed per Figure A.1-N: Detail
#12.
(G) Manholes and On-Street Inlets
Manholes, on-Street inlets, and water valves encountered in the areas to be paved shall be raised or
lowered to the surface of the new pavement. On-Street inlets may be separated from the pavement
and Curb by boxing out around the inlet. Details for Joint construction at manholes and catch
basins are in Figure A.1-P: Detail #14, Figure A.1-Q: Detail #15, and Figure A.1-R: Detail #16.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 109
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.6: Portland Cement Concrete (Concrete) Infrastructure
(H) Protection and Opening to Traffic
(1) Traffic shall be prohibited from the pavement until the Concrete has attained a compressive
strength of 3,500 pounds per square inch.
(2) Prohibited traffic shall include Contractor’s vehicles.
(3) Prior to opening to public traffic, the Developer is responsible for completing, curing and
sealing the pavement, including box outs, backfilling the Street, sealing the joints and
cleaning the pavement of all debris.
(I) Concrete Pavement Lugs
The purpose of pavement lugs in Subdivision pavements is to provide some additional resistance to
Contraction Joints separating during repeated expansion and contraction cycles over the life of the
pavement in certain open ended and relatively steep downhill pavement conditions. In these open
ended and downhill conditions, resistance to pavement lengthening at contraction joints is
substantially reduced as compared to Contraction Joints in long stretches relatively straight
pavement. In the long, relatively straight streets, the repetitive adjacent slabs help keep the
contraction joints from separating during repeated expansion and contraction cycles. Those
conditions which shall require lugs are related to the geometry of the Streets and are as follows (see
Figure A.1-J: Detail #8, Figure A.1-K: Detail #9, and Figure A.1-L: Detail #10).
(1) The ends of Cul-de-sacs where the Street grade approaching the Cul-de-sac decreases more
than 20 feet vertically, at an average grade of more than six percent, before there is a change
in direction of Street Drainage. In this condition, install a lug near the end of the Cul-de-sac
across the extension of the two lanes of pavement.
(2) At T-intersections, place a lug on the intersecting street near the intersection, where grade on
the intersecting Street is going up from the intersection more than 20 feet vertically, at an
average grade of more than six percent, before there is a change in the Drainage direction.
(3) On the main line of a Street pavement where the pavement is going straight and downhill
more than 20 feet vertically, at an average grade of more than six percent and the direction of
centerline deflects horizontally by more than 30 degrees, place a lug just uphill of the start of
the horizontal curve.
a) Lugs shall be placed at least 20 feet uphill from any shallow utility excavation
transverse to the pavement.
(4) The Design Engineer may add other lugs in conditions he considers critical to Contraction
Joint integrity.
(5) Lug locations are to be shown on construction design and as-built drawings.
(J) Joint Sealing Compound
(1) Joint sealing compound shall conform to the following standard designations:
a) Hot-poured elastic type, as specified by AASHTO, latest edition; or
b) Silicone rubber sealant type (non-sag, self-leveling, or rapid cure) conforming to the
KYTC Department of Highways Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction, latest edition; or
c) An approved equal, as determined and approved by Staff.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 110
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.6: Portland Cement Concrete (Concrete) Infrastructure
(2) The application of joint sealant is prohibited at temperatures below 40 degrees Fahrenheit.
Concrete Curb and Gutter Requirements 4.6-3 for Asphalt Streets
(A) Concrete Mix Design Requirements
(1) Aggregates for Concrete Curb and Gutter shall be a blend of No. 57 crushed limestone, No. 8
gravel and concrete sand .
(2) Gradation of the No. 57 crushed limestone, the No. 8 gravel and the concrete sand shall meet
the requirements of Section 800 of the KYTC Road and Bridge Manual, latest edition.
(3) Minimum cement factor shall be 564 pounds per cubic yard.
(4) Minimum compressive strength at 28 days shall be 4,000 psi.
(5) Maximum water / cement ratio shall be 0.45.
(6) Air entrainment shall be 6% ± 2%.
(7) Maximum slump without mid-range water reducer shall be 4-inches.
(8) Maximum slump with mid-range water reducer shall be 7-inches.
(9) Workability factor shall be between 40 high to 35 low.
(10) Coarseness factor shall be between 63 high to 58 low.
(B) Curb Design
(1) 24-inch wide Concrete Curb and gutter shall be used for all Streets Types with Asphalt
pavements.
(2) The Developer may choose between using the sloped Curb or the six inch barrier Curb
profile shown in Figure A.1-H: Detail #7.
(3) All Streets serving industrial/commercial developments shall use the six inch barrier Curb.
(C) Concrete Curb over Asphalt Base
Concrete Curb over Asphalt base shall be a minimum of six inches thick at the Curb apron.
Concrete Curb over crushed stone base shall be a minimum of seven inches thick at the Curb
apron.
(D) Expansion Joints
(1) Expansion Joints shall be placed in Concrete Curbs at each side of Curb inlet catch basins.
(2) Two ¾-inch diameter, 18-inch long smooth dowels with expansion caps shall be placed in
each Expansion Joint location.
(3) Expansion material must go completely through the Curb cross section, preventing Concrete
to Concrete contact. See Figure A.1-R: Detail #16.
(E) Contraction Joints
Contraction Joints shall be installed in the Curb at a spacing of no more than 10 feet on center.
(F) Standard Details
Details for Concrete Curb and gutter are shown in the exhibits in Figure A.1-H: Detail #7 and
Figure A.1-I: Detail #7A.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 111
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.6: Portland Cement Concrete (Concrete) Infrastructure
(G) Testing Requirements
(1) One set of three test cylinders shall be made for each day’s placement of Street. An
additional set of three test cylinders shall be made for each additional 100 cubic yards of
placement. One slump, air entrainment and temperature test shall be performed for each set
of Concrete test cylinders.
(2) One cylinder shall be tested for compressive strength at no later than seven days and two
cylinders at 28 days.
(3) Part of the plastic Concrete sample used for the test cylinders shall be washed to visually
confirm that crushed limestone coarse aggregate was used in the Concrete mix.
(4) All Concrete testing shall be performed by a Qualified Materials Testing firm in accord with
applicable ASTM specifications, latest editions. The results of all Concrete testing are
required to be provided to Staff by the materials testing firm prior to the approval of a Final
Plat.
Concrete Public Sidewalks, Pathways, Driveway Aprons a 4.6-4 nd Other Infrastructure Uses Not
Specified Elsewhere in These Regulations
(A) Concrete Mix Design Requirements
(1) Aggregates shall be a blend of No. 57 gravel or crushed limestone, No. 8 gravel and concrete
sand .
(2) Gradation of the No. 57 gravel or crushed limestone, the No. 8 gravel and the concrete sand
shall meet the requirements of Section 800 of the KYTC Road and Bridge Manual, latest
edition.
(3) Minimum cement factor shall be 564 pounds per cubic yard.
(4) Minimum compressive strength at 28 days shall be 4,000 psi.
(5) Maximum water / cement ratio shall be 0.45.
(6) Air entrainment shall be 6% ± 2%.
(7) Maximum slump without mid-range water reducer shall be 4-inches.
(8) Maximum slump with mid-range water reducer shall be 7-inches.
(9) Workability factor shall be between 40 high to 35 low.
(10) Coarseness factor shall be between 63 high to 58 low.
(B) Subgrade
(1) Subgrade for Sidewalks, pathways, and Driveway aprons shall be non-organic and consist of
natural clay or sand soils.
(2) Clay soils must be knit together without any loose clay soils. Any material used to finish
grade Subgrade shall be bank run sand, KYTC crushed limestone DGA, or crushed recycled
Concrete.
(3) Any granular material in excess of two inches thick shall be compacted with a vibrating plate
compactor or equivalent.
(4) No gravel and no other crushed limestone gradation will be used for finish grade fill material.
(C) Thickness Requirements
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 112
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.7: Asphalt Concrete (Asphalt) Paving Mixture and Construction Specifications
(1) Concrete for public Sidewalks and pathways shall be a minimum of four inches thick.
(2) Residential Driveway aprons shall be a minimum of five inches thick.
(3) Commercial and industrial Driveway aprons shall be a minimum of seven inches thick.
(D) Drive/Apron Requirements
Required Driveway apron layouts and construction details, including required Expansion Joint
thickness and location, are shown in Appendix A: Standard Construction Drawings. Special care
must be taken during construction to make sure there is no Concrete-to-Concrete contact under all
Expansion Joints.
(E) Edge Drain Installation
When installing Driveway aprons, special care must be taken not to damage the edge drain
installed on the outside of the Curb. If the edge drain is damaged, the damaged section must be
properly replaced to assure water flow through the edge drain.
(F) Contraction Joint Spacing
For Sidewalks, the maximum spacing of Contraction Joints shall not exceed five feet, except when
the Sidewalk or pathway is wider than five feet when the spacing shall not exceed the width of the
slab.
Asphalt Section 4.7: Concrete (Asphalt) Paving Mixture and
Construction Specifications
4.7-1 General
(A) All Subdivision Streets in Kenton County Subdivisions shall be constructed in accordance with the
latest edition of the KYTC Roadway Manual, Division 400, except where noted otherwise in this
specification.
(B) All Contractors must be prequalified by KYTC or demonstrate experience and success on similar
projects in order to perform this work.
(C) All construction materials incorporated into the work shall conform to the requirements set forth in
the KYTC Roadway Manual.
(D) The Contractor shall notify Staff of the intent to start the project within 24 hours of beginning
production.
4.7-2 Mixture Designation and Design
(A) Volumetric Mix Design
The Contractor shall perform the volumetric mix design according to AASHTO R35 and
conforming to AASHTO M323 and utilize 50 gyrations.
(B) Mix Design Submittal
At least 72 hours prior to the start of production, the Contractor shall submit the mix design to the
Staff and the Applicant’s Qualified Material Testing Lab for review.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 113
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.7: Asphalt Concrete (Asphalt) Paving Mixture and Construction Specifications
(C) Aggregate Gradation
Aggregate gradations for base, intermediate and surface mixtures shall conform to KYTC Roadway
Manual Division 400 and Table 4.7-1.
TABLE 4.7-1:AGGREGATE GRADATIONS
SIEVE SIZE 1.0BASE MIXTURE 0.75 INTERMEDIATE
MIXTURE SURFACE MIXTURE
1½” 100 -- --
1” 90-100 100 --
¾” <90 90-100 --
½” -- <90 100
⅜” -- -- 90-100
#4 -- -- <70
#8 19-45 23-49 25-55
#16 -- -- --
#200 1-7 2-8 2-10
(D) Voids in Mineral Aggregate (VMA), Asphalt Content (AC) and Air Voids (AV)
VMA, AC and AV for residential streets shall be as specified in Table 4.7-2 and for commercial /
industrial streets as specified in Table 4.7-3.
TABLE 4.7-2:VMA,ACAND AVFOR RESIDENTIAL STREETS
MINIMUM VMA MINIMUM AC AV
Base Mixture 12% 4% 4%
Intermediate Mixture 13% 4.3% 4%
Surface Mixture 14% 5.4% 3%
TABLE 4.7-3:VMA,ACAND AVFOR COMMERCIAL / INDUSTRIAL STREETS
MINIMUM VMA MINIMUM AC AV
Base Mixture 12% 4% 4%
Intermediate Mixture 13% 4.3% 4%
Surface Mixture 14% 5.4% 4%
(E) Remaining Mix Design
The remaining mix design shall conform to the applicable KYTC mix designations Class 2 BASE
0.75D PG64-22 or Class 2 BASE 1.0D PG64-22 “Base and Intermediate Mixture” and Class 2
SURF 0.38D PG64-22 “Surface Mixture”.
(F) Recycled Asphalt Pavement and Recycled Asphalt Shingles
Recycled Asphalt Pavement (RAP) may be used but is limited to 25 percent of the mixture by
weight in the surface and 30 percent of the mixture by weight in the base. Recycled Asphalt
Shingles (RAS) may be used but is limited to 3.0 percent of the mixture by weight. However,
when combined, the total amount of RAP and RAS may not exceed 25 percent in the surface and
30 percent in the base with no more than three percent RAS. Warm mix Asphalt technology is
allowed on a permissive base similar to the KYTC Standard Specifications. See Table 4.7-4.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 114
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.7: Asphalt Concrete (Asphalt) Paving Mixture and Construction Specifications
TABLE 4.7-4:MAXIMUM RECYCLED RAP AND RASIN ASPHALT PAVEMENT
MAXIMUM RAP MAXIMUM RAS MAXIMUM RAPAND RAS
Base Mixture 30% 3% 30%
Intermediate Mixture 30% 3% 30%
Surface Mixture 25% 3% 25%
4.7-3 Plant Mix Operation
(A) Plant Requirements
(1) All Asphalt mixing plants shall conform to KYTC standards.
(2) Maximum asphalt temperature during plant operations is 330o F.
(3) Minimum asphalt temperature in the truck at the plant is 220o F.
(B) Plant Testing Requirements
(1) The Contractor shall monitor the plant production and perform quality control testing at the
Asphalt mixing plant.
(2) Staff shall be provided access to the facility during production and may be present to observe
sampling and testing by the Contractor personnel.
(3) A minimum of one test shall be performed per day of paving and additional tests shall be
performed for each 1,000 tons produced.
a) The Contractor may perform additional testing as desired to control mix properties.
b) When multiple test samples are obtained, the average value of those results shall be
used for acceptance.
c) At the start of production on the project, the first sample shall be obtained after a
minimum of 50 tons have been loaded.
d) Samples shall be tested for conformance to gradation and Asphalt content requirements
(AASHTO T164 & AASHTO T30).
e) Testing results from any offsite laboratory testing shall be reported to Staff, the
applicant and the Qualified Material Testing Lab within 24 hours.
4.7-4 Minimum and Maximum Lift Thicknesses
Minimum and maximum thicknesses for asphalt lifts are indicated in Table 4.7-5.
TABLE 4.7-5:MINIMUM AND MAXIMUM LIFT THICKNESSES
MINIMUM LIFT MAXIMUM LIFT
Base 3” 5”
Intermediate 2¼” 4½”
Surface 1¼” 1¾”
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 115
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.7: Asphalt Concrete (Asphalt) Paving Mixture and Construction Specifications
4.7-5 Placement Procedures
(A) General
(1) All Contractors must be prequalified by KYTC or demonstrate experience and success on
similar projects in order to perform this work.
(2) Immediately before placing Asphalt materials, remove loose and deleterious materials using
a power broom or street sweeping equipment.
(B) Subgrade
(1) Asphalt placement is prohibited on subgrade with free water on the surface.
(2) Pavement Subgrade cross slopes shall vary from 3.7 percent to 5 percent depending on the
applicable Street cross section.
(C) Overlay
(1) A tack coat shall be evenly applied across the width of the lane at a rate of 0.05 gallons per
square yard. Adjust spray bars as necessary to avoid streaks.
(2) A tack coat is not required when placing Asphalt base mixtures on granular base layers.
(3) When Asphalt surface abuts a barrier Curb or similar vertical surface, the abutting surface
shall be tack coated prior to construction of the Asphalt course.
(D) Equipment
(1) The Contractor shall furnish dump trucks with clean, smooth metal beds to transport
materials and shall use approved and environmentally friendly release agents.
(2) Use of diesel fuel is strictly prohibited in truck beds.
(3) Sufficient trucks should be scheduled to allow for a continuous paving operation without
significant delays between trucks.
(4) The Contractor shall furnish a self-propelled paver with the capacity of spreading and
finishing all courses to the indicated widths, depths, line, grade and cross section, with a
smooth finish, uniform in density and texture.
(5) Rollers must also be self-propelled and capable of reversing smoothly. Steel wheel rollers
must be equipped with adjustable scrapers, spray bars, and/or wetting pads to keep wheels
clean at all times.
(6) Hand tampers may also be used in tight areas inaccessible by rollers.
(E) Temperatures for Asphalt, Ambient Air and Subgrade
(1) Do not place Asphalt mixtures when the ambient air temperature and existing surface
temperatures on the project are less than those specified below or when weather conditions
otherwise prevent the proper handling or finishing of the Asphalt mixtures.
a) Minimum ambient air and existing surface temperature shall be 35o F (and rising) prior
to placement of Asphalt Base Mixture.
b) Minimum ambient air and surface temperature shall be 40o F (and rising) prior to
placement of Asphalt Surface Mixture:
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 116
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.7: Asphalt Concrete (Asphalt) Paving Mixture and Construction Specifications
(2) The maximum temperature of the mixture shall not exceed 330o F at any time, and the
minimum temperature (measured in the truck at the project site) shall not fall below 200o F
for all mixtures.
(3) Compaction efforts shall be completed before the Roadway mix temperature falls below 150o
F.
(F) Application of Asphalt Mixes
(1) All courses shall be placed and spread as continuously as possible, keeping the number of
joints to a minimum.
(2) The longitudinal joint in the final surface course shall be placed along the dividing line
between the lanes.
(3) Best paving practices shall be utilized to ensure the proper amount of material at the joint and
to make the same number of passes over the joint as the middle of the mat.
(4) The finished Joint shall be smooth and tight and free from voids or coarse material.
(G) Surface Course Application
(1) The surface course application shall be provided no later than 12 months from the date the
base Asphalt was placed.
(2) Prior to the surface course application, Staff shall inspect the Asphalt base course. Damage
to the Asphalt base course that will affect the structural integrity or future maintainability of
the pavement section shall be repaired prior to placement of the surface course.
(3) Damage to Curb and gutter sections identified by Staff that will affect the structural integrity
and/or future maintainability of the Curb and gutter shall be removed and replaced prior to
the placement of surface Asphalt course.
(4) The surface course shall be compacted to between ⅛” and ½” above adjacent Concrete Curb
apron.
(5) The pavement surface cross slope shall be three percent.
(6) The joint between Curb and gutter and Asphalt pavements shall be sealed in accord with
Subsection 4.7-7: Joint Sealing.
Density 4.7-6 Testing Requirements
(A) Sampling
All base and surface Asphalt and aggregate materials shall be sampled, tested, and reported by a
Qualified Material Testing Lab in accordance with the KYTC Roadway Manual Division 400.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 117
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.7: Asphalt Concrete (Asphalt) Paving Mixture and Construction Specifications
(B) Testing Frequency and Results
(1) Density tests shall be performed at least every 150 feet along each lane of asphalt placed.
(2) At the discretion of Staff, a quality assurance check (including cores) of the sampling and
testing may be required if deficiencies are suspected.
(3) Asphalt base and surface courses shall be compacted to an average density of between 90 and
97 percent of solid volume.
(4) Density testing shall be per ASTM D2950 “Density of Bituminous Concrete In Place by
Nuclear Density Methods” or ASTM D7113 “Density of Bituminous Mixtures In Place by
Electromagnetic Surface Contact Methods”.
4.7-7 Joint Sealing
(A) Compound Material
The Joint Sealing Compound shall conform to the following standard designations:
(1) Hot-Poured Elastic Type, as specified by AASHTO, latest edition; or
(2) Silicone Rubber Sealant Type (Non-Sag, Self-Leveling, or Rapid Cure) conforming to the
KYTC Roadway Manual, latest edition; or
(3) An approved equal, as determined and approved by Staff.
(4) The use of AC-20 as joint sealant is prohibited.
(B) Air Temperature
The application of joint sealant is prohibited at air temperatures below 40o F.
(C) Application
(1) Joint Sealant shall be applied to all Joints abutting the Asphalt, which includes the Joint
between the base Asphalt and the Curb if the surface course is not going to be applied
immediately.
(2) Joint sealant shall be applied to the Curb line immediately upon placement of the surface
Asphalt.
4.7-8 Acceptance
(A) All Asphalt pavement materials shall be evaluated by the Staff, per the requirements set forth in
this specification and the KYTC Roadway Manual. Asphalt mixtures will be considered
acceptable if the test results determine the materials are within the acceptable limits, as shown in
Table 4.7-6 and Table 4.7-7. Any materials deemed to be outside of these ranges shall be re-tested
for compliance.
TABLE 4.7-6:ACCEPTABLE RANGES FOR ACAND DENSITY
ASPHALT CONTENT DENSITY
±0.6% 90% - 97%
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 118
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.8: Pavement Performance and Design
TABLE 4.7-7:ACCEPTABLE GRADATION RANGES
SIEVE SIZE
ACCEPTANCE RANGES PERCENT PASSING
1.0BASE MIXTURE 0.75 INTERMEDIATE
MIXTURE 0.38 SURFACE MIXTURE
1½“ 94-100 -- --
1” 84-100 94-100 --
¾“ <90 84-100 --
½“ -- <90 94-100
⅜” -- -- 84-100
#4 -- -- <90
#8 14-50 18-54 32-73
#16 -- -- --
#200 1-10 1-10 1-10
(B) When test results are in the “Acceptable Ranges,” the material will be accepted. Staff shall require
the Applicant to “Remove and Replace” the materials when the test results indicate they are outside
the limits of the “Acceptable Ranges”.
(C) The surface of each course shall be inspected for uniformity and adequate thickness. Base courses
shall be placed within a ½ inch tolerance and surface courses within ¼ inch tolerance. All
irregularities exceeding the allowable tolerances must be repaired as directed by the Staff.
Section 4.8: Pavement Performance and Design
NOTE: THIS SECTION IS NOT REGULATORY BUT SETS OUT IMPORTANT PAVEMENT
FACTS AND SUPPORT FOR HOW THE REGULATIONS REGARDING STREET PAVEMENT
AND EARTHWORK WERE DERIVED AND INCORPORATED INTO Article 4: Public and Private
Infrastructure AND Article 6: Geotechnical Exploration and Earthwork Construction Requirements.
4.8-1 Purpose
Pavement in Public Streets, including Subdivision Streets, is one of the largest physical assets by dollar
value owned by various Kenton County legislative bodies (city/county). The purpose of this section is
twofold. The first is to inform all in Kenton County who have responsibilities in the design, construction
and maintenance of Subdivision Streets of important facts about the nature of pavements and their
individual responsibilities in obtaining good long-term pavement performance in new Kenton County
Subdivisions.
The second is to set out some of the critical engineering analysis and reasoning used to establish the
pavement, pavement Subgrade, and pavement Drainage specifications for future Subdivision pavement
contained in Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure, Section 4.4: Pavement Design Method and
Required Thicknesses through Section 4.7: Asphalt Concrete (Asphalt) Paving Mixture and Construction
Specifications, and Article 6: Geotechnical Exploration and Earthwork Construction Requirements of
these regulations.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 119
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.8: Pavement Performance and Design
Existing Subdivision Pavement 4.8-2 Performance Analysis
During the process of reviewing this 2014 update of the Kenton County Subdivision Regulations there
was a substantial community discussion on Subdivision pavement design, construction and performance.
During the late stages of this community discussion, at the suggestion of the Kenton County Judge
Executive and several city Mayors, and authorization of the Planning Commission Chairman, a
committee of five local pavement professionals with extensive and long-term experience in the design,
construction, and maintenance of Subdivision pavements was formed. This committee was asked, as a
voluntary community service, to do the following: analyze existing Subdivision pavement performance,
evaluate that performance compared to reasonable expectations for pavement performance, and make
recommendations that would improve pavement customer value in future Subdivision pavements. All
earlier community discussion on pavement performance was to be considered as input into their process.
Appendix C: Engineers Committee Final Report contains this committee’s final report to the Planning
Commission in this regard. The recommendations of this report were an important source of information
that was used in the formation of these Subdivision pavement regulations.
4.8-3 Important Pavement Facts
There is no perfect pavement, no pavement lasts indefinitely, and all pavements require maintenance,
repair and refurbishment on a timely basis in order to minimize long term pavement costs. All
professional pavement design procedures recognize that all pavements will eventually fail, regardless of
how well they are built, either by the impacts of weathering, the impacts of repetitive heavy vehicle axle
loads, or both. Professional engineering pavement design also recognizes pavement will have local
failures during its life because of the imperfect nature of the natural soil Subgrade, pavement materials,
and construction techniques. Pavements designed by pavement professionals are, therefore, designed
with assumptions and calculations of the need for maintenance, repair of isolated failures, and
refurbishment during the pavement life. All pavement literature recognizes that the three essential
components of good pavement performance are (A) proper pavement design for the in situ conditions,
(B) proper construction consistent with the design, and (C) proper and timely maintenance and repair.
Failure in the proper execution of any one of these three components will lead to very substantial
increases in long term pavement cost and/or inadequate pavement serviceability. These three
components are discussed further below.
(A) Pavement Design
The following is a discussion of certain important elements of the engineering approach taken to
establish the pavement design, materials and construction methods specified for Subdivision
Streets in Section 4.4: Pavement Design Method and Required Thicknesses through Section 4.7:
Asphalt Concrete (Asphalt) Paving Mixture and Construction Specifications, and Article 6:
Geotechnical Exploration and Earthwork Construction Requirements.
(1) Proper pavement engineering design requires economic analysis of pavement design
alternatives. For an in-depth discussion of the engineering economics of pavements, see
Chapter 3 of the AASHTO ’93 Pavement Design Manual. The economic engineering design
objective used herein is to minimize pavement 50 year net present value life cycle costs to
the pavement Customer while maintaining adequate pavement serviceability. The pavement
“Customer” is defined as the amalgamation of the Subdivision Lot/home purchaser,
occupant, tax payer and citizen. There is no attempt to differentiate any of these Customer
subgroups. Collectively, they are the pavement Customer.
The Customer pays all of the costs of pavement through Lot/home purchase price, rent, and
various forms of taxes.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 120
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.8: Pavement Performance and Design
Pavement cost over the pavement life cycle includes construction costs; maintenance, repair
and refurbishment costs; and costs related to the time value of money (thus net present
value). These various costs include any overhead and profit that is related to the goods and
services provided.
A 50 year life cycle was chosen for the analysis period because there is substantial local
experience that demonstrates Subdivision pavements, when properly designed, built,
maintained, and resurfaced, can last 50 years or more. A longer analysis period was not
chosen because transportation modes and pavement loading, maintenance and repair methods
and materials, and all sorts of other related factors, are simply not foreseeable beyond 50
years. Pavement designs herein are also designed with a 20 year design life or performance
period, defined as the time that an initial pavement will last before it needs rehabilitation.
Pavement designs presented herein are designed to last at least 50 years, as long as properly
constructed, maintained, and resurfaced over the 50 year period as shown in Subsection 4.8-
3(C): Pavement Maintenance herein. Figure A.1-AA: Detail #25 also shows a method of
extending the pavement life past 50 years using existing refurbishment and resurfacing
methods.
Any alternate pavement design submitted for a particular Subdivision by a pavement design
professional must also include a 20 year design life and a 50 year life cycle maintenance,
repair, and resurfacing analysis, including relevant traffic loading.
(2) The pavement Subgrade is the soil directly under the pavement. Pavements rely on the
Subgrade for structural support. Subgrades must, therefore, be constructed of soils with
adequate load bearing capacity, properly prepared.
Portland Cement Concrete (“Concrete”) is a rigid pavement and spreads traffic loads over a
larger Subgrade area as compared to Asphalt Cement Concrete (“Asphalt”) pavement which
is a flexible pavement. Because of this wheel load distribution difference in the nature of
these two pavement types, Asphalt pavements require a higher minimum Subgrade bearing
capacity than Concrete pavements.
Pavement specifications herein require Subgrade soils that, when properly prepared, will
produce a bearing capacity or California Bearing Ratio (“CBR”) of 2 or greater for Concrete
pavement and CBR of 3 or greater for Asphalt pavement.
A substantial majority (not all) of potential future Subdivision sites in Kenton County have
natural soils that, when properly prepared, will produce an adequate Subgrade bearing
capacity to support Concrete or Asphalt, but not necessarily both. For Subdivision locations
with in situ soils that will not produce these minimum bearing capacities for the pavement
type that the Developer selects, properly designed and built Subgrade improvements will be
required.
Quality control of as-built Subgrades is a very important component of assuring the expected
pavement design performance.
(3) The repetition of Equivalent 18,000 Pound Single Axle Loads (“ESALs”) going over the
pavement during its life is one mode of eventual pavement failure. Therefore, estimates of
ESALs are required to properly design pavements. Pavement designs herein include ESAL
loading estimates during land development construction, building construction, and traffic
activity after full building occupancy. The estimate methods and quantities are shown in
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 121
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.8: Pavement Performance and Design
Figure C.1-A: Exhibit A. Any alternate pavement designs must be based on these ESAL
estimates, or greater.
(4) Pavement surface and subsurface storm water conditions are another important consideration
in pavement design. The primary engineering design methods for minimizing the negative
effects of storm water on pavement and pavement Subgrades are (1) preventing water from
entering the pavement, (2) providing Drainage that quickly removes excess water that enters
the pavement, and (3) building the pavement strong enough to resist the combined effects of
wheel load and water. Because Asphalt is more porous and has higher reliance on Subgrade
strength as compared to Concrete pavement, accounting for the potential negative effects of
water entering Asphalt pavements and pavement Subgrade is more critical for Asphalt
pavements.
The design features specified in these regulations use all three methods listed above to
minimize the negative effects of storm water on Subdivision pavement.
The primary pavement requirements used in these regulations for effective storm water
surface and subsurface management are as follows:
a) Rural Development Streets
i) Three percent surface cross slope, as shown in Figure A.1-E: Detail #5 and
Figure A.1-F: Detail #6.
ii) Subgrade cross slope of three percent for Concrete Streets and three percent +2
inches for Asphalt Streets, as shown in Figure A.1-C: Detail #3, Figure A.1-D:
Detail #4, Figure A.1-E: Detail #5, and Figure A.1-F: Detail #6.
iii) Drainage ditches on both sides of the Street where the ditch depth is always
deeper than the Subgrade at the outside edge of pavement, as shown in Figure
A.1-E: Detail #5, and Figure A.1-F: Detail #6.
b) Suburban and Urban Streets
Most Subdivision pavements likely to be built in Kenton County will be classified as
urban or suburban. These Streets are built with curb and gutter. The pavement with
curb and gutter serves as a surface storm water conduit which is designed to collect
surface storm water off the Street and off adjoining Subdivision lots and transport that
storm water to Street catch basins which connect to storm sewers. Street design
requirements herein are designed to get and keep storm water in the gutter flow line of
these Streets as much as practical.
i) All Streets
a) Curb and gutter and three percent surface cross grade to get and keep storm
water in the gutter line until it is collected at catch basins (see Figure A.1-C:
Detail #3 and Figure A.1-D: Detail #4.
b) Build Public Sidewalk so that the edge nearest the Street is built six inches
above the adjacent Curb on sloped Curbs and three inches above the Curb on
Barrier Curbs. This maintains positive street Drainage even after multiple
pavement overlays (see Figure A.1-C: Detail #3 and Figure A.1-D: Detail
#4).
c) Install continuous edge drain at the outside edge of the pavement on both
sides of the Street, as shown in Figure A.1-C: Detail #3, Figure A.1-D:
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 122
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.8: Pavement Performance and Design
Detail #4, Figure A.1-X: Detail #22, and Figure A.1-Y: Detail #23. This
edge drain will help drain the Subgrade, help keep surface water from the
outside edge of the pavement out of the Subgrade, and will help drain Joints
in Concrete and the Asphalt/Concrete Curb and gutter interface.
d) Provide for Subgrade Drainage and edge drain Drainage at all paired catch
basins, as shown on the Required Street Cross Section Construction at Catch
Basin Crossings in Figure A.1-B: Detail #2.
ii) Concrete Streets
a) All pavement Joints are properly sealed with joint sealing compound to
minimize water penetrating those Joints and getting into the Subgrade.
b) All pavements are built with a three percent Subgrade cross grade (see
Figure A.1-C: Detail #3 and Figure A.1-E: Detail #5) continuous from
centerline to edge of Curb, which will help any water that gets into the
Subgrade to the outside of the Curb and to the edge drain.
iii) Asphalt Streets
a) The surface course of Asphalt has been designed to minimize the water that
will penetrate the pavement and get into the Subgrade.
b) The finish course of Asphalt is built ¼ inch above the Curb apron to force
any surface water toward the gutter line rather than allow the water to lay out
in the pavement surface for extended periods of time.
c) The Curb apron is built with a six percent cross pitch to keep water in the
gutter line.
d) The Asphalt Joint at the Concrete Curb apron is sealed with Joint sealer to
keep water from penetrating through that Joint into the Subgrade.
e) The Subgrade is built with a three percent plus two inch cross slope and is
built continuously from the centerline to the outside of the Curb to help drain
the Subgrade and help minimize the potential for water penetrating into the
Subgrade from the outside edge of the pavement.
f) The first course of pavement base (Asphalt or KYTC crushed stone base) is
continuous from the centerline to the outside edge of the pavement, and the
Concrete Curb and gutter is built on top of the first course of base, which
will help keep water from penetrating the Subgrade at the outside edge of the
pavement and will help support the Curb and reduce potential for Curb
breakage.
In regards to “…building the pavement strong enough to resist the combined effects of wind
and water,” the Subgrade design parameters used in Table 4.4-1 account for substantial
Kenton County seasonal variability in Subgrade support consistent with substantial change in
water content of Subgrade soils season-to-season.
(5) There are many other design, material, and construction method details set out in Section 4.4:
Pavement Design Method and Required Thicknesses through Section 4.7: Asphalt Concrete
(Asphalt) Paving Mixture and Construction Specifications, Article 6: Geotechnical
Exploration and Earthwork Construction Requirements, and Appendix A: Standard
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 123
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.8: Pavement Performance and Design
Construction Drawings that are important to good pavement performance. Because these
details are not discussed here does not diminish their importance.
(B) Pavement Construction Quality Control
Construction quality control, which means building the pavement with good construction practices
and in substantial conformance with these Subdivision regulations and the approved construction
design drawings, is the responsibility of the Subdivision Developer and its agents who are the
Engineers and construction Contractors hired by that Developer to design and build that
Subdivision’s improvements. The Planning Commission’s role in construction quality control is,
through its Staff or other quality control service provider, to confirm and document that the
Subdivision design drawings satisfy these regulations and that the in-place Subdivision
improvements are built in substantial accordance to these Subdivision regulations and the
Subdivision design drawings.
(C) Pavement Maintenance
The need for and benefit of timely and adequate maintenance by the Street pavement’s owners is
documented throughout the pavement literature. Failure to properly and timely maintain
pavements will lead to substantially increased Customer pavement costs and/or diminished
pavement serviceability.
(1) Recommended 50 Year Life Cycle Maintenance
The following is a schedule for maintenance, repair, and resurfacing that can be expected in
an effort to minimize Customer 50 year life cycle costs for Subdivision pavements.
a) Recommended Asphalt Pavement Owner Maintenance
Minor Maintenance:
• Joint and crack seal every three years
• Spot Curb repair
• Spot pavement repair
Major Maintenance:
• At approximately +17 years:
- Spot Curb repair, as necessary
- Spot base repair
- Mill Asphalt two inches deep at the Concrete Curb apron to zero inches at
six feet out from the Curb Apron
- Install new two inch Asphalt surface with a four percent Curb apron to
centerline cross slope.
- Seal the Asphalt/Curb Apron interface
• At approximately +34 years:
- Spot Curb repair
- Spot base repair
- Pavement fabric over joint between Asphalt and Curb
- New two inch Asphalt surface overlay
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 124
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.8: Pavement Performance and Design
b) Recommended Concrete Pavement Owner Maintenance
Minor Maintenance:
• Joint and crack seal every three years
• Inspect Driveway apron expansion material for signs of pavement lengthening;
take remedial action as necessary (See Subsection 4.8-3(C)(1)c): Management
of Concrete Pavement Lengthening, below.)
• Localized failure repairs
Major Maintenance:
• At approximately +17 years:
- Spot Curb repair
- Spot slab repair
• At approximately +34 years:
- Spot Curb repair
- Spot slab and Joint repair
- Inspect for erosion (tunneling) under pavement, mud jack as necessary
- Mill Concrete two inches deep at or near the Concrete gutter line to zero
inches deep six feet out from the gutter line.
- Install Asphalt skim coat and Stress Absorbing Asphalt Membrane
Interlayer (SAMI) over the width of the pavement.
- Install 1½-inch deep Asphalt surface overlay with a four percent gutter line
to centerline cross slope.
c) Management of Concrete Pavement Lengthening
Concrete pavements can expand in length later in the pavement’s life as described on
Appendix C: Engineers Committee Final Report - Problem #12(b). While the
pavement design features incorporated into this regulation along with proper owner
pavement maintenance will minimize this lengthening, the potential for lengthening
and the related potential negative impacts cannot be eliminated.
The design feature incorporated into these regulations which will allow for the
identification and management of any potential negative impacts to improvements on
private property is the placement of a total of three inches of expansion joint material
within the Street Right-of-way at each Driveway apron, as shown in Figure A.1-T:
Detail #18, Figure A.1-U: Detail #19, and Figure A.1-V: Detail #20.
The pavement owners’ regular inspection (every three years) of the expansion material
to see if the three inches of expansion material has “closed up” to two inches or less is
required. If the expansion material has “closed up” to two inches or less, remedial
action consisting of saw cutting the Driveway apron next to the Curb to allow for
additional expansion is required.
The preceding is one set of proven long-term pavement management strategies that
have been used on Northern Kentucky Subdivision Streets. There are others that have
been effective. When these strategies are properly and timely executed on pavement
designs in these regulations (properly constructed), the result should be satisfactory
pavement performance for at least 50 years without pavement replacement.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 125
Article 4: Public and Private Infrastructure
Section 4.8: Pavement Performance and Design
As new, more cost effective maintenance and repair strategies are developed over time,
they should be adopted for use.
(2) Extending Pavement Life Beyond 50 Years
Figure A.1-AA: Detail #25 shows a methodology of extending pavement life that should
allow most Subdivision pavements, properly built and maintained under these regulations, to
have their life extended beyond 50 years without replacement. Obviously, many things can
and likely will change over the next 50 years that will substantially change the best course of
action for refurbishment or replacement of these Subdivision pavements.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 126
Article 5: Green Infrastructure (GI) Options
Section 5.1: Purpose
Article 5: Green Infrastructure (GI) Options
Section 5.1: Purpose
5.1-1 Green infrastructure uses natural processes to ameliorate the negative effects of urban development,
including reducing heat island effects, air pollution, water pollution and excess storm water runoff.
Integrated stormwater management is a subset of green infrastructure. The use of integrated stormwater
management is encouraged because of its connection to effective development practices and
environmental quality. The influence of the natural flow regime (hydrology) of a given watershed on
overall stream integrity (chemical, physical, biological) is well established, and as such, maintaining the
natural flow regime is a priority for stormwater managers. The proper use of integrated stormwater
management practices can achieve this goal and dramatically improve stormwater runoff quality,
decrease runoff volume, reduce infrastructure costs, protect the integrity of downstream streams and
rivers, and create more interesting places to live. Stormwater management practices include a broader
understanding of watershed management and ecosystem function, coupled with overall site design and
layout, and implementation of an impervious area reduction strategy. The creation of impervious
surfaces on a site can dramatically impact a community’s watersheds, wastewater treatment systems, and
water supplies by altering the landscape’s inherent ability to slow, filter, and absorb stormwater runoff
(i.e. alters the natural flow regime). Development or redevelopment of a site can be accomplished while
reducing the overall negative impact to receiving streams, by applying carefully considered stormwater
management techniques which mimic natural hydrology. To further these more general purposes, this
article:
(A) Establishes site design components to promote more effective use of individual stormwater
management techniques to prevent negative impacts rather than mitigating them;
(B) Provides the ability to utilize simple, nonstructural methods for stormwater management that are
lower cost and lower maintenance than structural controls;
(C) Encourages the management of stormwater as close to the point of origin as possible and
minimizes collection and conveyance, establishing a strategy to determine what portions of
stormwater are to be filtered into the ground on site and what portions of stormwater are to flowthrough
the site for management elsewhere;
(D) Provides benefits to the environment as well as to the development community by improving water
quality and restoring aquatic habitats while controlling flooding. This approach can increase
rainfall infiltration and groundwater recharge with potentially large environmental benefits and
potentially lower net costs – both to the environment and to the Developer. The integrated
stormwater management techniques provide innovative options for Developers to rethink overall
site design and layout to utilize a site more efficiently while providing better stormwater
management opportunities than traditional gray infrastructure;
(E) Uses multiple impervious area reduction techniques within the context of an overall site design to
reduce the negative runoff impact created with the development or redevelopment of a site and
ideally reduce the amount of underground pipe infrastructure necessary on a site;
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 127
Article 5: Green Infrastructure (GI) Options
Section 5.2: Site Layout Strategies
(F) Promotes the aesthetic value of integrated stormwater management. In addition to the benefits of
maintaining healthy waterways and the multiple environmental benefits supporting healthy
communities found in the use of integrated stormwater management, the use of these techniques
can provide aesthetic value to a community with the use of added vegetation to the landscape. By
integrating natural processes into the built environment, these techniques provide stormwater
management, Flood mitigation and control, and air quality management with more aesthetic appeal
than standard gray stormwater infrastructure.
Section 5.2: Site Layout Strategies
5.2-1 Overall site layout strategies are encouraged to be incorporated into an integrated stormwater
management plan. Site layout strategies are the first step in managing stormwater in a way that mimics
natural hydrology. Using land more efficiently for development, preserving critical ecological areas, and
reducing runoff through better site design are vital to maintaining a healthy watershed. Stormwater
management works most effectively in conjunction with an overall site design strategy which identifies
how the stormwater impacts created by the development will be addressed.
5.2-2 A site design strategy should include identification of which portions of expected stormwater will be
managed using either infiltration methods, retention methods, or flow-through methods. Shifting the
focus toward the utilization of rainwater as a resource that should be managed as close to where it falls as
possible and away from addressing rainwater solely as a waste that should be removed from a site will
increase the efficiency of stormwater management.
5.2-3 Effective stormwater management will utilize multiple methods aimed at managing runoff through both
infiltration into natural systems as well as use of management methods which remove water from the site
through piping infrastructure without adding significant impacts to local waterways and watersheds. The
elements work collectively to lessen the negative impacts to nearby waterways and watershed systems.
5.2-4 Efficiently designing a site should include conscious efforts to minimize the impervious areas created by
new streets, pedestrian pathways, parking Lots, and/or buildings.
Section 5.3: Elements of Integrated Stormwater Management
5.3-1 The following elements are examples of integrated stormwater management which, when used in
coordination with effective site design strategies, can aid in lowering the negative impact to local
waterways and watersheds. Once a strategy has been established to minimize collection and conveyance,
these elements can be utilized, in varying combinations, to successfully implement stormwater to be
filtered into the ground on site and stormwater to flow-through the site for management elsewhere.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 128
Article 5: Green Infrastructure (GI) Options
Section 5.3: Elements of Integrated Stormwater Management
(A) Narrower Right-of-way Widths
Whether used in conjunction with narrower pavement widths or traditional width pavements,
narrowing the Right-of-way established within a site is a significant opportunity to reduce the
quantity and increase the quality of storm water runoff by allowing structures to be set closer to the
street. Because of the topography that is typical for this region, many developments involve land
that includes ridge tops, hillside slopes and headwater streams. As such, development plans often
include streets and structures constructed along ridge tops with back yards that extend down the
hillside slopes and into headwater streams. Placing structures closer to the ridge top lessens the
need for earthwork and tree removal along these hillside slopes which keeps more undisturbed land
on the slopes and near the headwater streams. In addition to the added benefit of helping to ensure
hillside stability, lessening hillside disturbance and tree removal will result in a lesser impact to the
natural flow regime, and therefore a lesser impact to water quantity and water quality in these
headwater streams as well as the corresponding receiving streams downstream of the site. See
Figure 5.3-A.
Figure 5.3-A: Illustration of Narrower Right-of-way Widths
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 129
Article 5: Green Infrastructure (GI) Options
Section 5.3: Elements of Integrated Stormwater Management
(B) Grassy Swales (Bioretention Swales) Without Curb and Gutter and Grassy Swales With
Curb and Gutter Containing Cut-outs and Flumes
Swales are long and narrow depressions in the landscape which incorporate vegetation to gradually
move stormwater through a site by use of gentle slopes to guide runoff through the system. Swales
are primarily used to slow the speed of stormwater runoff as it moves through a site though some
infiltration can occur when slopes (less than five percent) and soils are favorable. The vegetation
used within swales typically requires lower ongoing maintenance than that of traditional
landscaping. When used in combination with Curb and gutter containing cutouts and flumes, the
swales provide the same benefit as traditional swales without Curb and gutter by collecting
stormwater outside of traditional gray infrastructure associated with the site and decreasing the
impacts of development to the overall man-made stormwater management system. However this
system offers the added benefit of providing Curb and gutter along the edge of streets to help
buttress asphalt pavements, create a well-defined pavement edge and increase the overall pavement
edge lifespan. See Figure 5.3-B and Figure 5.3-C.
Figure 5.3-B: Illustration of a Grassy Swale without Curb and Gutter
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 130
Article 5: Green Infrastructure (GI) Options
Section 5.3: Elements of Integrated Stormwater Management
Figure 5.3-C: Illustration of a Grassy Swale with Curb and Gutter
(C) Infiltration Gardens (Biofiltration Swales or Rain Gardens)
Infiltration gardens are shallow depressions in the landscape which provide larger, often unused or
left-over areas on a site to filter stormwater into the natural soils and groundwater system. Use of
infiltration gardens can significantly lessen the amount of stormwater collected into piping
infrastructure. The vegetation used within infiltration gardens typically requires lower ongoing
maintenance than that of traditional landscaping. See Figure 5.3-D.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 131
Article 5: Green Infrastructure (GI) Options
Section 5.3: Elements of Integrated Stormwater Management
Figure 5.3-D: Illustration of an Infiltration Garden
(D) Pedestrian Walkways as a Design Element
Alternative pedestrian ways which are outside of the requirements set forth in Table 4.1-1 can be
created to constitute a pedestrian circulation system equal to the level of effectiveness that
traditional Sidewalk on one or both sides of the street would provide. Rather than including
Sidewalks only within the Right-of-way along the Street, integrating a well thought out pedestrian
circulation system throughout a site can reduce impervious surface while potentially lowering the
construction cost and raising the stormwater management benefits of the overall site. Incorporating
a strategic system of Pedestrian Walkways linking key destinations within a site (in conjunction
with aligning connections for travel outside the site) will increase usability of walkway networks.
Additionally, incorporating materials such as mulch, gravel, or other pervious material can further
reduce the hard surface runoff. When adding Sidewalks to one or both sides of every street, often
important pedestrian connections are not made, the Sidewalks themselves are under (if-at-all)
utilized, and excessive impervious surfaces are created.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 132
Article 5: Green Infrastructure (GI) Options
Section 5.3: Elements of Integrated Stormwater Management
Figure 5.3-E: Illustration of Pedestrian Walkways as a Design Element
(E) Planter Boxes
Planters are long narrow, often rectangular landscaped areas with vertical walls and flat, unsloped
bottoms, and are able to store a greater volume of water than swales, because they are typically
deeper, and provide more capacity. Water flows into the planter, absorbs into the topsoil and
plants, fills to a predetermined overflow elevation, and discharges into the overflow system
provided. Two types of planters are used for stormwater management.
(1) Flow-through Planters
Flow-through planters have a sealed bottom and sides and absorb only as much water as the
soil and plants in the planter can accommodate. They allow water to slowly travel through
the soil profile prior to overflowing into a subsurface underdrain system. See Figure 5.3-F.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 133
Article 5: Green Infrastructure (GI) Options
Section 5.3: Elements of Integrated Stormwater Management
Figure 5.3-F: Illustration of a Flow-Through Planter Box
(2) Infiltration Planters
The bottom of an infiltration planter is open to the native soil. Water in the planter is
absorbed by topsoil, and infiltrates into native soils below. See Figure 5.3-G.
Figure 5.3-G: Illustration of Infiltration Planter Box
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 134
Article 5: Green Infrastructure (GI) Options
Section 5.3: Elements of Integrated Stormwater Management
(F) Permeable Pavement
If underlying soils allow for the natural infiltration of rain water, constructing pavement using
permeable materials can allow for stormwater to filter through the pavement and into the natural
ground water system while still providing the structural integrity necessary for the site’s
automobile and pedestrian traffic. The use of Permeable Pavement can mitigate the overall impact
of the development to the piping infrastructure systems while maintaining full functionality of the
developed site. See Figure 5.3-H, Figure 5.3-I, and Figure 5.3-J.
Figure 5.3-H: Illustration of Permeable Pavers
Figure 5.3-I: Illustration of Permeable Pavement
Figure 5.3-J: Illustration of Permeable Pavement with an Underdrain
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 135
Article 5: Green Infrastructure (GI) Options
Section 5.3: Elements of Integrated Stormwater Management
(G) Preserving Existing Trees and Planting New Trees
Preserving trees and planting new trees on a site adds to the ability to effectively slow, absorb, and
filter rainwater. Trees naturally work to physically slow the flow of water through a site by
intercepting stormwater on their leaf surfaces as well as through their root structure. Not only do
trees collect water for their growth, their physical presence on the landscape intercepts the flow of
water downhill and slows its movement. See Figure 5.3-K.
Figure 5.3-K: Illustration of Preserving Existing Trees and Planting New Trees
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 136
Article 5: Green Infrastructure (GI) Options
Section 5.4: Criteria for Integrated Stormwater Management
Criteria for I Section 5.4: ntegrated Stormwater Management
5.4-1 Staff will approve the use of Integrated Stormwater Management provided the following criteria have
been substantiated:
(A) The Integrated Stormwater Management is proposed to utilize the landscape’s ability to reduce,
slow, filter, and/or absorb stormwater runoff from Streets, parking lots, and buildings by
maintaining key elements of the natural flow regime and minimizing impacts to receiving streams.
(B) The Integrated Stormwater Management is consistent with Sanitation District No. 1’s Stormwater
Rules and Regulations.
(C) The Integrated Stormwater Management has been designed by a Professional Engineer.
(D) For Integrated Stormwater Management within the public Right-of-way, the element(s) shall be
approved by the authority designated by the applicable Legislative Body in writing.
Section 5.5: Elements of Integrated Stormwater Management allowed
By-Right
5.5-1 The following two Integrated Stormwater Management elements are permitted to be used in two separate
and distinct methods. These elements are permitted to be used as elements of Integrated Stormwater
Management anywhere in Kenton County when the criteria outlined in Section 5.4-1 have been
substantiated. However, the “by-right” use of the following Integrated Stormwater Management
elements can be utilized without requiring that any special conditions be met, as long as the element is
being used in the specific applications outlined as follows:
(A) Narrower Pavement Widths
Narrowing pavement widths is a significant opportunity to reduce stormwater runoff by reducing
the total amount of impervious surface and therefore, reducing the amount of stormwater requiring
collection into pipe infrastructure for maintenance off-site. The use of narrower pavement widths
is allowed by-right when used in conjunction with a Rural Development type. Rural Development
types are single and two-family residential developments that contain lot widths equal to or greater
than 300 feet and contain no on street parking. See Subsection 4.1-10: Allowable Pavement
Design.
(B) Grassy Swales and Shoulders Without Curb and Gutter
Swales are long and narrow depressions in the landscape which incorporate vegetation to gradually
move stormwater through a site by use of gentle slopes to guide runoff through the system. Swales
are primarily used to slow the speed of stormwater runoff as it moves through a site though some
infiltration can occur when slopes (less than five percent) and soils are favorable. When used
without curb and gutter systems, swales can more easily collect stormwater uninhibited by the
physical barriers created by traditional Curbs. Additionally, without the traditional gutter system,
stormwater can more easily flow directly into swales (infiltration systems) rather than into manmade
stormwater management system. Grassy swales and shoulders without curb and gutter is
allowed by-right when used in certain situations such as: (1) in developments that prohibit on-street
parking and contain minimum Lot widths that equal or exceed 300 feet; or (2) along streets that
serve as an entrance to the development and contain no residences and no parking. See Subsection
4.1-13: Roadside Swales.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 137
Article 6: Geotechnical Exploration and Earthwork Construction Requirements
Section 6.1: Geotechnical Explorations
Article 6: Geotechnical Exploration and
Earthwork Construction Requirements
Section 6.1: Geotechnical Explorations
6.1-1 Purpose
This section fulfills the infrastructure requirements of Kentucky Revised Statutes (KRS) 100.273 through
100.292 by determining that: (1) important in situ Subdivision soils and geologic features that will impact
the functional use of public and private improvements have been identified; and (2) that soils and
geologic aspects of the design and construction of public and private improvements within the Public
Street Right of way or Private Street easements meet the support requirements of their intended use.
(A) All earthwork and geotechnical exploration requirements within Article 6 shall apply to areas
within the Public Street Right-of-way and Private Street easements, and areas structurally
supporting the Public Street Right-of-way and Private Street easements;
(B) All Geotechnical Engineering and Geotechnical Technician work and reporting required under this
Article shall be provided by the Applicant of the proposed Subdivision. The Geotechnical
Technician must be under the direction and control of the Geotechnical Engineer who has been
employed by the Applicant for the proposed Subdivision. The proposed Subdivision’s
Geotechnical Engineer shall have substantial professional engineering discretion to determine
when the Geotechnical Engineering intent of the requirements of this Article is being met.
(C) The Applicant shall submit all Geotechnical Engineering and Geotechnical Technician reports and
testing results to staff at the appropriate submittal time, as noted in this Article.
6.1-2 Geotechnical Explorations Outside of the Public Right-of-Way, Private Street Easements, and
Areas Structurally Supporting the Public Street Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements
(A) Prior to the approval of the preliminary plat, a geotechnical engineer shall complete a preliminary
report that addresses the soil and bedrock types and any existing slope stability issues that are
expected in the proposed Subdivision.
(1) The Geotechnical Engineer’s preliminary report will render a preliminary engineering
opinion about the suitability of those soil and bedrock types and existing slopes to provide
the necessary support for the intended private property use of the Subdivision.
(2) The opinion of expected soil and bedrock types and opinion of soil support suitability can be
based on the Geotechnical Engineer’s local soil and bedrock knowledge, USGS maps, and a
visual field reconnaissance.
(B) The requirement for preliminary and final geotechnical explorations outside of the Public Right-ofway
may be further regulated by the applicable legislative body’s zoning ordinance.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 138
Article 6: Geotechnical Exploration and Earthwork Construction Requirements
Section 6.1: Geotechnical Explorations
Geotechnical Explorations Within the Public Street Right-of-Way, 6.1-3 Private Street Easements, and
Areas Structurally Supporting the Public Street Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements
(A) Preliminary Geotechnical Exploration
(1) Prior to the approval of the preliminary plat a geotechnical engineer shall complete a
preliminary geotechnical exploration report. The report will address the soil and bedrock
types that are expected on the project site, and present an engineering opinion about the
suitability of the soil and bedrock types—when properly prepared and constructed—to
provide adequate proposed Public Street Right-of-way structural support, including the
minimum required CBR (subgrade support) values for asphalt and/or concrete pavements
described herein.
(2) The opinion of expected soil and bedrock types and opinion of Subgrade support suitability
can be based on the Geotechnical Engineer’s local soil and bedrock knowledge, USGS maps,
and a visual field reconnaissance.
(3) Kenton County soil types that may require replacement or other form of remediation during
Subgrade construction in order to provide the minimum required CBR values for Concrete
and Asphalt pavement designs shown in Table 4.4-1 are non-plastic silts (soils that classify
ML according to the Unified Soil Classification System (USCS)) and highly plastic silts and
clays (MH and CH soils) with standard Proctor maximum dry densities less than 100 pounds
per cubic foot and plasticity indices greater than 30 percent.
(B) Final Geotechnical Exploration
Prior to approval of the Improvement Plans or Grading Plans a Geotechnical Engineer shall
complete a final geotechnical exploration report that identifies the soil and bedrock types present
on the project site covered by the Improvement Plans or Grading Plans and presents a written
engineering opinion about the suitability of the soils and bedrock to provide stable Right of way
earthwork construction, and to provide the minimum CBR values for Asphalt and Concrete
pavement.
(1) This written report shall be submitted to staff and be based on the results of soil borings, test
pits, field and laboratory soil testing, etc. that are sufficient for the Geotechnical Engineer to
render his/her engineering opinion.
(2) If the soils are not suitable to provide the minimum CBR values, the Geotechnical Engineer
shall include recommendations in the written report for subgrade improvement or alternate
pavement designs.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 139
Article 6: Geotechnical Exploration and Earthwork Construction Requirements
Section 6.2: Earthwork Specifications, Evaluation, Material Testing and Reporting for Earthwork Within the Public Street
Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements, and Areas Structurally Supporting the Public Street Right-of-Way and Private
Street Easements
Earthwork Specifications, Section 6.2: Evaluation, Material Testing
and Reporting for Earthwork Within the Public Street
Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements, and Areas
Structurally Supporting the Public Street Right-of-Way
and Private Street Easements
6.2-1 Purpose
The purpose of this section is to establish the appropriate earthwork specifications and material testing
requirements so that the Public Street Right-of-way and Private Street easements have adequate
earthwork structural support and the required pavement subgrade support.
6.2-2 Earthwork Excavations
The following shall apply to earthwork excavations other than trenches or temporary excavations:
(A) All topsoil shall be stripped from proposed cut, fill and pavement areas.
(B) Excavations shall be made to approximate grade or Subgrade elevations consistent with approved
plans.
(C) Final cut slopes shall not be steeper than a slope of 3.0 horizontal to 1.0 vertical unless otherwise
designed by a Geotechnical Engineer, but in no case shall be steeper than 2.0 horizontal to 1.0
vertical.
(D) Any spongy, unstable, or organic material that is exposed at the finished Subgrade level must be
removed to expose stiff, non-yielding, non-organic soils and the excavated material replaced with
soils capable of producing the required Subgrade CBR for the pavement design being used for the
project (see Section 4.4: Pavement Design Method and Required Thicknesses of these regulations).
(E) When excavating at the cut/fill transition during earthwork, remove spongy or unstable material,
organic matter, or other unsuitable materials that are exposed. The Contractor shall remove same
to expose stiff, non-yielding, non-organic soils and shall replace with approved materials, placed
and compacted in accordance with these regulations and the recommendations of the geotechnical
engineer.
(F) Excavations can be backfilled with the same soils that were removed, provided they meet the
requirements of Subsection 6.2-3: Controlled Fill, Subsection 6.2-4: Trench Backfill, Subsection
6.2-5: Shallow Trench Backfill, and Subsection 6.2-6: Deep Trench Backfill.
6.2-3 Controlled Fill Other than Trench Backfill
(A) Construction of controlled fills shall be observed and tested by a Geotechnical Technician. Density
testing and reporting is required at a minimum frequency of one density test per 500 cubic yards.
(B) Organic or vegetative soils shall not be used in the construction of the controlled fill.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 140
Article 6: Geotechnical Exploration and Earthwork Construction Requirements
Section 6.2: Earthwork Specifications, Evaluation, Material Testing and Reporting for Earthwork Within the Public Street
Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements, and Areas Structurally Supporting the Public Street Right-of-Way and Private
Street Easements
(C) Controlled fills shall be constructed of natural soils or bedrock to approximate Subgrade elevation
in level lift thicknesses that are approved by the Geotechnical Engineer. All shale used in
controlled fills shall be pulverized to a soil-like consistency and moisture-conditioned the same as
a soil. Limestone shall be laid flat and shall be broken up and dispersed in the fill so that it does
not nest or impede compaction. The incorporation of limestone floaters in the fill shall be in
accordance with the recommendations of the Geotechnical Engineer.
(D) Except for the top one foot of earthwork finished grades, which is the pavement subgrade,
controlled fills shall be constructed with soils that are within two percent below to three percent
above their optimum moisture content and compacted to a firm, non-yielding condition and to dry
densities at least 95 percent of the maximum dry density, as determined by the standard Proctor
moisture-density test (ASTM D698, latest edition), or 87 percent of maximum dry density as
determined by the modified Proctor moisture-density test (ASTM D1557, latest edition).
(E) Clean granular soils that do not exhibit a well-defined moisture-density curve shall be compacted
to a firm, non-yielding condition and to at least 75 percent relative density as determined by the
testing methods contained in ASTM D4253 and D4254, latest edition.
(F) Controlled fill slopes shall not be steeper than 3.0 horizontal to 1.0 vertical unless otherwise
designed by a Geotechnical Engineer. See Figure 6.2-A. In no case shall unreinforced fill slopes
be steeper than 2.5 horizontal to 1.0 vertical.
Figure 6.2-A: Illustration of the maximum slope for controlled fills
(G) Lime stabilization in controlled fills is prohibited unless designed and approved by a Geotechnical
Engineer.
(1) Prior to using lime stabilization, staff shall approve the recommended lime stabilization
specifications from a Geotechnical Engineer.
(2) The Geotechnical Engineer shall be required to monitor the lime stabilization process in the
field to determine that it is consistent with their recommended specifications.
(3) A letter from the Geotechnical Engineer shall be submitted to staff confirming that the lime
stabilization process used in the field was consistent with their written recommendations.
(H) Heavy equipment used for compaction shall be capable of producing the required controlled fill
densities without lamination.
(1) Cohesive soils shall be compacted with kneading type compaction equipment.
(2) Cohesionless soils shall be compacted with smooth face vibratory equipment.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 141
Article 6: Geotechnical Exploration and Earthwork Construction Requirements
Section 6.2: Earthwork Specifications, Evaluation, Material Testing and Reporting for Earthwork Within the Public Street
Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements, and Areas Structurally Supporting the Public Street Right-of-Way and Private
Street Easements
6.2-4 Trench Backfill
The following general information shall apply to all trench backfill:
(A) Trench backfill is defined as the backfill material used to refill the trench excavation above the
initial utility conduit bedding and cover that is a part of underground utility installation.
(B) Natural non-organic soils, bedrock, approved aggregates, and Controlled Low Strength Material
shall be used to backfill utility trenches as defined herein.
(C) Backfill shall not be flushed with water to obtain compaction.
(D) A Geotechnical Technician shall observe, test and report on the trench backfill compaction at least
once per day when said trench backfill operations are occurring.
6.2-5 Shallow Trench Backfill
The following shall apply to shallow trench backfill:
(A) Shallow trenches are defined as the utility trenches where the backfill material (the material above
the granular utility conduit bedding and cover material) is less than three feet deep to finish
earthwork grade.
(B) Shallow trench backfill under the pavement and within a 1 horizontal to 1 vertical projection
downward from the bottom edge of curb shall be dense graded aggregate (DGA), No. 57 crushed
limestone (only when connected to a Drainage structure) or controlled low strength material
(CLSM) as set out in Figure A.1-A: Detail #1 and Figure A.1-B: Detail #2. Aggregates shall be
compacted as shown in the above noted details.
(C) Shallow trench backfill within the Right of Way but outside of the pavement and beyond a 1.0
horizontal to 1.0 vertical projection downward from the bottom edge of curb shall be natural, nonorganic
soil or bedrock (no pieces of limestone thicker than six inches or more than 12 inches
long/wide or specified aggregates as set in Figure A.1-A: Detail #1 and Figure A.1-B: Detail #2.
(1) All shale shall be pulverized to a soil-like consistency and moisture-conditioned as a soil.
(2) All limestone shall be laid flat, broken up, and dispersed so it does not nest or impede
compaction.
(3) All backfill shall be moisture-conditioned to within two percent below to three percent above
the optimum moisture content for compaction, shall be placed in layers of 8 to 10 inches in
thickness, and each lift shall be thoroughly compacted to densities not less than 90 percent of
the standard Proctor maximum dry density, or 82 percent of the modified Proctor maximum
dry density for that soil.
(4) Backfill method shall be either a sheepsfoot roller attachment on a track mounted excavator
or a self-propelled kneading-type compactor operating longitudinally in the trench
excavation.
6.2-6 Deep Trench Backfill
The following shall apply to deep trench backfill:
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 142
Article 6: Geotechnical Exploration and Earthwork Construction Requirements
Section 6.2: Earthwork Specifications, Evaluation, Material Testing and Reporting for Earthwork Within the Public Street
Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements, and Areas Structurally Supporting the Public Street Right-of-Way and Private
Street Easements
(A) Deep trench backfill is defined as any trench with backfill deeper than shallow trench backfill.
(B) Deep trench backfill shall consist of natural non-organic soil or bedrock (no pieces of limestone
thicker than six inches or more than 12 inches long/wide) or specified aggregates as set out in
Figure A.1-A: Detail #1 and Figure A.1-B: Detail #2.
(1) All shale shall be pulverized to a soil-like consistency and moisture-conditioned as a soil.
(2) All limestone shall be laid flat, broken up and dispersed so that it does not nest or impede
compaction.
(3) All backfill shall be moisture-conditioned to within two percent below to three percent above
the optimum moisture content for compaction.
(4) Backfill lifts shall be 10 inches thick or less (unless otherwise specified by the Geotechnical
Engineer), and compacted to not less than 95 percent of the standard Proctor maximum dry
density for that soil.
(5) Backfill method shall be either a sheepsfoot roller attachment on a track mounted excavator
or a self-propelled kneading-type compactor operating longitudinally in the trench
excavation.
(C) Where depths of trenches are more than four feet and worker safety is at risk, the technician shall
observe the compaction process in layers with an appropriate type of compaction equipment and
document observations until worker safety is assured when compaction testing, as required, is
resumed.
6.2-7 Street Pavement Subgrade
(A) Subgrade Preparation During Excavation
Subgrade is defined as the top one foot of the soils under the pavement. The pavement Subgrade
must provide adequate support for the pavement structure as defined in these regulations.
(1) During earthwork and initial pavement subgrade preparation, the Geotechnical Engineer or
Geotechnical Technician shall evaluate in situ pavement subgrade materials on the site and
develop an opinion about their suitability to provide the minimum CBR values when
compacted to the required densities at the specified moisture contents.
(2) Any soils identified as unsuitable to prove the minimum CBR values will be removed from
the subgrade and replaced with suitable soils, or otherwise improved as recommended by the
Geotechnical Engineer.
(B) Final Subgrade Preparations and Testing
(1) At the time of final Subgrade preparation, density testing and proofrolling before paving, the
Subgrade shall be within two percent of its optimum moisture content and compacted to a
firm, non-yielding condition and to dry densities at least 98 percent of the maximum dry
density, determined by the standard Proctor moisture-density test (ASTM D698, latest
edition) or 89 percent of the maximum dry density as determined by the modified Proctor
moisture-density test (ASTM D1557, latest edition). Cohesive Subgrade material shall be
properly knit together and free of loose, dry, crumbly, baked or crusted soil material.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 143
Article 6: Geotechnical Exploration and Earthwork Construction Requirements
Section 6.2: Earthwork Specifications, Evaluation, Material Testing and Reporting for Earthwork Within the Public Street
Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements, and Areas Structurally Supporting the Public Street Right-of-Way and Private
Street Easements
(2) The Subgrade shall consist of cohesive soils, clean #57 crushed limestone, crushed stone
base, or Controlled Low Strength Material (CLSM). Any aggregate material used to replace
part of the cohesive Subgrade soil must be drained, per Figure A.1-W: Detail #21 so that no
standing water can collect and be held in the aggregate Subgrade.
(3) Clean granular soils that do not exhibit a well-defined moisture-density curve shall be
compacted to a firm, non-yielding condition and to at least 80 percent relative density as
determined by the testing methods contained in ASTM D4253 and D4254, latest edition.
(4) The Subgrade shall be shaped to plan elevation and cross-section and checked by the Staff
inspector for conformity with the cross section shown on the approved Improvement
Drawings immediately prior to placing the pavement. Pavement shall not be placed on any
part of the Subgrade which does not conform to the cross section shown on the approved
Improvement Drawings.
(C) Final Subgrade Proofrolling
(1) Proofrolling is the final test to be performed immediately prior to beginning the paving
operations.
(2) Prior to the placement of pavement materials and after confirming proper density and
moisture content of the Subgrade soils, all Street Subgrades shall be proofrolled to test the
stability and uniformity of Subgrade materials.
(3) Proofrolling shall be performed with a dual axle dump truck fully loaded with clayey soils or
aggregate.
(4) Proofrolling shall be performed at walking speed with at least two passes made in each drive
lane direction with the outside wheel generally traveling along the inside line of the future
Curb during one pass, and the wheel-paths offset one-half of the truck width during the
second pass to maximize subgrade coverage. Extra proofroll passes shall be made at the
discretion of the Staff inspector.
a) Where proofrolling indicates areas of soft or unsuitable Subgrade soils or areas of nonuniform
Subgrade stability, the area shall be delineated and repaired.
b) Areas of soft or unsuitable Subgrade soils or areas of non-uniform Subgrade stability
shall be identified by observing Pumping and/or Rutting (See Definitions Subsection
2.3-95: Pumping (or deflection) and Subsection 2.3-102: Rutting).
c) Rutting in excess of one inch in depth shall be deemed a Subgrade failure requiring
Subgrade repair.
d) Pumping or deflection of less than one inch is acceptable so long as the Subgrade soil
rebounds back to its original position after the wheel load passes. Pumping or
deflection greater than one inch or areas of permanent deflections shall be deemed a
Subgrade failure requiring Subgrade repair.
e) For larger areas of subgrade proofroll failure, the alternative pavement design
procedures in Subsection 4.4-2(B) can be implemented by the Applicant.
(5) Subgrade repairs shall be performed by scarifying, aerating and recompacting the Subgrade
soils. As an alternative, the failed Subgrade soils can be removed and replaced with properly
compacted soils capable of producing the required CBR value.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 144
Article 6: Geotechnical Exploration and Earthwork Construction Requirements
Section 6.2: Earthwork Specifications, Evaluation, Material Testing and Reporting for Earthwork Within the Public Street
Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements, and Areas Structurally Supporting the Public Street Right-of-Way and Private
Street Easements
(6) In all cases, repaired areas shall be retested for compaction and proofrolled again before
proceeding with the placement of pavement materials. Rutting can typically be repaired by
scarifying, aerating, and recompacting, while areas of pumping will more likely require a
more significant repair with depth often including the removal and replacement of unsuitable
Subgrade materials.
(D) Final Subgrade Inspection Testing and Reporting Requirements
(1) Both the Staff inspector and the Geotechnical Technician have final Subgrade review,
testing, and reporting responsibilities.
(2) The Geotechnical Engineer shall provide soil testing to develop an opinion of adequate
bearing characteristics of the final Subgrade soils. Those tests will include, but are not
limited to, moisture content testing, density testing, and verification of soil types being
adequate to produce the required CBR values for the pavement. Moisture content testing,
density testing, and verification of soil types being adequate to produce the required CBR
values for the pavement shall be performed by the Geotechnical Engineer at intervals no less
than one test per 100 lineal feet of Street for Streets of 500 lineal feet or less, or one test per
200 lineal feet for Streets over 500 lineal feet.
(3) The Geotechnical Technician and the Staff Inspector shall review the proofrolling described
in Subsection 6.2-7(C): Final Subgrade Proofrolling and determine whether the Subgrade
passes the proofroll.
(4) Paving operations shall only be permitted to begin after passing inspection results are
achieved from Subsection 6.2-7: Street Pavement Subgrade, Subsection 6.2-7(C): Final
Subgrade Proofrolling, and Clause 6.2-7(D)(2). Inspection reports referenced in Clause 6.2-
7(D)(1) and Clause 6.2-7(D)(2) shall be placed in the Staff project file and Staff shall make
their inspection records available to the Developer.
(5) Street paving shall occur within 30 hours after passing inspection results are achieved from
Clause 6.2-7(D)(1) and Clause 6.2-7(D)(2). A ¼ inch rain event or sub-freezing temperature
occurrence between a passing proofroll and Street paving shall void the proofroll and
geotechnical testing and shall require re-evaluation.
(6) For concrete pavements, small pours of up to one hundred square yards to complete
intersections, cul-de-sacs, etc. do not require subgrade re-proofrolling after initially passing a
proofroll as part of a large subgrade preparations and testing. Moisture conditioning and rerolling
may be required.
Controlled 6.2-8 Low Strength Material
(A) CLSM may be used in place of compacted clayey soils to uniformly backfill utility trenches,
manholes, etc.
(B) CLSM shall not be used in place of clean, free-draining #57 crushed limestone specified for and
intended as Drainage backfill around catch basins and manholes or in trench drains, such as
between catch basin pairs.
(C) CLSM shall be transported by mixing truck to ensure proper suspension when placed. Constant
agitation is required.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 145
Article 6: Geotechnical Exploration and Earthwork Construction Requirements
Section 6.2: Earthwork Specifications, Evaluation, Material Testing and Reporting for Earthwork Within the Public Street
Right-of-Way and Private Street Easements, and Areas Structurally Supporting the Public Street Right-of-Way and Private
Street Easements
(D) Flotation of pipes should be avoided by backfilling in 8 to 12 inch lifts until fluid head subsides.
(E) Adequate separation from aluminum pipe, such as a bituminous coating, is required.
(F) CLSM shall extend from the top of compacted bedding or other backfill to bottom of pavement
structure.
(1) CLSM placement shall begin no greater than six inches above the top of the pipe.
(G) CLSM shall have a minimum excavatable strength of 20 pounds per square inch at three days and
30 pounds per square inch at 28 days. CLSM shall have a maximum excavatable strength of 100
pounds per square inch at 28 days for potential future excavatability.
Construction E 6.2-9 quipment on Paved Surfaces
Only rubber tired or rubber tracked equipment shall be used on paved surfaces.
6.2-10 Work Adjacent to Plastic Concrete
Grading operations adjacent to Concrete Curb are prohibited for a minimum of 24 hours after Concrete
placement has been completed.
6.2-11 Final Geotechnical Reporting
After the completion of all earthwork covered under this Article, for each Subdivision section that is
constructed and is to be recorded, the Geotechnical Engineer shall complete a final written report for that
Subdivision section. The report will include the following:
(1) All relevant construction inspection results; and
(2) A statement from the project Geotechnical Engineer that, to the best of his/her knowledge
and belief, all earthwork operations within the Public Street Right-of-way, Private Street
easements and areas structurally supporting the Public Street Right-of-way and Private Street
easements were performed in general conformance with the requirements of this Article and
the recommendations for the areas within the Public Street Right-of-way, Private Street
easements and areas structurally supporting the Public Street Right-of-way and Private Street
easements contained in the associated geotechnical exploration report.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 146
Article 7: Traffic Impact Studies
Section 7.1: Purpose of the Traffic Impact Study
Article 7: Traffic Impact Studies
Purpose o Section 7.1: f the Traffic Impact Study
7.1-1 The purpose of a Traffic Impact Study (TIS) is to protect the function of the Street system while
providing appropriate access to a proposed development.
7.1-2 The objectives of a TIS are to:
(A) Determine the appropriate location, spacing, and design of Access Points necessary to serve the
proposed development and minimize impact to the public transportation system.
(B) Determine the extent of Improvements to the adjacent and nearby Street system necessary to
maintain a satisfactory level of service and safety.
Section 7.2: Need for a Traffic Impact Study
A TIS shall be required when the full build out potential of the proposed development requesting access meets any
or all of the criteria identified in Subsections 7.2-1 through 7.2-4. The full build out potential shall be defined as
the proposed development and future development for which connections are accommodated in the development
plan as required in Subsection 4.1-18: Geometric Design of Streets, of these Subdivision regulations. Future
development shall be assumed to be that which is identified and recommended by the Comprehensive Plan.
7.2-1 The proposed development is expected to generate greater than 100 trips per hour during its peak hour of
operation based on trip generation estimates according to the most recent edition of the Institute of
Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation Manual methodologies.
7.2-2 The proposed access location does not meet applicable access control regulations as set forth in Article 8:
Access Control Regulations.
7.2-3 The access plan proposes a change in the Traffic Control on an existing Public Street including:
(A) Installation, removal, or relocation of a stop or yield sign;
(B) Installation, removal, or relocation of a traffic signal; or
(C) Changes in the timing and/or phasing of an existing traffic signal or signal system.
7.2-4 The proposed development does not meet the conditions of Subsections 7.2-1 through 7.2-3 above, but is
deemed necessary by Staff for conditions including but not limited to the presence of congested locations
identified in previous studies or plans, the presence of high crash locations identified by the Kentucky
Transportation Cabinet (KYTC), OKI, or the applicable Legislative Body, or proximity to major planned
Street Improvements in the area.
7.2-5 In the case where a TIS has already been completed as part of the approval process, an addendum to the
original report shall be required under the following circumstances:
(A) The original report was completed more than two years prior to the initial construction phase of the
development.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 147
Article 7: Traffic Impact Studies
Section 7.3: Study Area
(B) A change in the application, or proposed land use has caused the generated vehicle trips per hour to
increase or modify the proposed Street or access configuration.
(C) There have been major Street Improvements or significant changes in development in the area
since the original approval or major changes in traffic flow as determined by Staff. Major Street
Improvements involve any Improvements that have an effect on the Street capacity or have caused
any changes in traffic flow patterns. This may include construction or installation of a new Traffic
Control device, change in cross-section of the Street or significant changes in the Street network.
Section 7.3: Study Area
The following subsections identify the minimum study area to be addressed by a TIS. Staff may adjust the
minimum study area as appropriate to the development size, specific site conditions, and/or local and regional
issues and policies. The Applicant may extend the minimum study area described below to demonstrate potential
benefits of the proposed access plan to the community.
7.3-1 When a development meets the criteria established in Clause 7.2-1 due to traffic volumes, the study area
for the TIS shall include all proposed Access Points to the development and shall include the first
signalized Access Points in all directions, on the adjacent Street network, within a two-mile radius of the
proposed site. The closest Unsignalized Access Points to the proposed Access Points in all directions
shall also be included.
7.3-2 When a development meets the criteria established in Clause 7.2-2 due to access control deviations, the
study area for the TIS shall include all proposed Access Points to the development, and shall include all
Access Points on both sides of the Street within the distance specified by the applicable regulation, from
the proposed Access Point, which does not meet the spacing standard.
7.3-3 When a development meets the criteria established in Subsection 7.2-3 due to modifications to Traffic
Controls, the study area for the TIS shall include:
(A) All Access Points to the proposed development;
(B) All Unsignalized Access Points adjacent to the proposed Access Points; and
(C) All Access Points, with Traffic Controls, on the adjacent Street network in all directions, within a
two-mile radius of the proposed site.
7.3-4 When Staff determines that the signal modification will affect the operation of a coordinated signal
system, the study area shall include all affected signals within the system. A coordinated signal system
may be considered to be affected when:
(A) The proposed signal would require a different cycle length than currently in use to attain an
acceptable Level of Service (LOS) as defined in Section 7.5: Mitigation.
(B) The proposed signal would require adjustment of existing intersection offsets to attain acceptable
corridor performance as defined in Section 7.5: Mitigation.
7.3-5 When a TIS is required by Staff as outlined in Clause 7.2-4, the study area shall be established to address
the specific issues for which the study was required.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 148
Article 7: Traffic Impact Studies
Section 7.4: Study Requirements
Section 7.4: Study Requirements
7.4-1 Analysis Scenarios
(A) The TIS shall examine the before and after conditions within the study area to a degree sufficient to
document the operational and safety impacts of the proposed development and access plan. The
before and after conditions shall be termed the “No Build” and “Build” conditions.
(B) The “No Build” condition shall include:
(1) Existing traffic volumes forecasted to the appropriate analysis year;
(2) Existing Street geometry,
(3) All applicable Traffic Control devices;
(4) Any traffic generated by proposed adjacent developments;
(5) Any funded Improvements within the study area; and
(6) Any Transportation System Management (TSM) Improvements, such as signal timing and/or
phasing optimization and reconfiguration of existing lane uses that may improve the
operation of the transportation system.
(C) The “Build” condition shall include:
(1) “No Build” traffic volumes;
(2) Site generated traffic; and
(3) Any Street Improvements proposed with the development.
(D) “No Build” and “Build” analysis shall be conducted for the anticipated year of opening and a
design year assuming a 10-year horizon. Opening year “Build” analysis should only include that
portion of development which is anticipated to be completed at opening. Design year analysis
shall include the full build-out potential of the development. In the event that the full build-out of
the development is anticipated to extend beyond the 10-year horizon, the design year shall be the
anticipated year of full build-out.
(E) All scenarios evaluated shall include analysis of the weekday AM and PM peak hours. The
Applicant should work with Staff to determine whether the peak hour of the development or the
peak hour of the adjacent Street traffic is to be analyzed to evaluate the worst-case scenario. When
a proposed development is anticipated to generate a high volume of traffic during non-traditional
peaks, such as a noon peak, late night or weekend peak period, these periods should also be
examined. The need to study additional periods of operation shall be at the discretion of Staff.
7.4-2 Data Collection
The data collection efforts for the study shall be consistent with the level of analysis required. At a
minimum this shall include two-hour turning movement counts conducted in 15-minute intervals at all
study intersections for all peak periods examined. When traffic patterns are affected by the presence of
non-traditional peaks such as school trips, the peak hour turning movement count shall be expanded to
include both peak periods. The peak hours should be determined by a 24-hour count of the adjacent
Street traffic on a typical weekday (i.e., Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday). Previously collected data
and traffic volumes may be used in the analysis at the discretion of Staff.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 149
Article 7: Traffic Impact Studies
Section 7.4: Study Requirements
7.4-3 Future Traffic Volumes
Future traffic volumes used to evaluate the opening year (if different from existing year) and design year
conditions shall be determined by applying an appropriate growth rate to reflect anticipated changes in
demand on the Street network. This growth rate shall be determined from comparison of historical traffic
volumes in the study area. Other methods of forecasting traffic volumes, such as socio-economic
analysis and the use of travel demand models may also be used to determine future traffic growth rates at
the discretion of Staff.
7.4-4 Trip Generation and Distribution
(A) Trips generated by the proposed development shall be calculated using the most current edition of
the ITE Trip Generation Manual methodologies.
(B) Trips generated by the development should be distributed onto the Public Street network consistent
with existing traffic patterns in the area, identified by origin destination studies of adjacent
developments or traffic counts of adjacent Streets. This methodology may be replaced with more
refined trip distribution approaches derived from market research studies, travel demand models, or
other methodologies at the discretion of Staff.
7.4-5 Operational Analysis
Operational analysis shall be conducted for all intersections within the study area for all analysis
scenarios identified in Subsection 7.4-1: Analysis Scenarios. At a minimum, operational analysis shall
include, but is not limited to:
(A) Intersection Level of Service LOS analysis for all intersections in the study area. LOS analysis
should be consistent with Highway Capacity Manual (HCM)/Highway Capacity Software (HCS)
methodologies for unsignalized and signalized intersections. Roundabout analysis shall utilize
RODEL/ARCADY analytical procedures. Analysis results should be summarized with LOS and
delay by lane group and intersection totals. For roundabout analysis, LOS shall be determined
using both signalized and unsignalized HCM thresholds.
(B) Analysis shall be evaluated using the following parameters unless justified by additional study at
the discretion of Staff.
(1) Peak Hour Factor (PHF) = 0.90
(2) Lost Time = 2.0 sec
(3) No right turns on red (RTOR)
(4) HCS arrival type = 3
(5) Yellow and red clearance intervals shall be calculated based on ITE recommended
procedures.
(6) Pedestrian phases and minimum clearance times shall be accommodated for all potential
pedestrian crossings.
(7) Where applicable the minimum green time per phase shall be equal to or greater than the
minimum pedestrian clearance time.
(C) Queuing analysis shall be conducted for all controlled movements in the study area. Queuing
analysis should report 95th percentile queues for all scenarios and periods examined, and identify
any conflicts between adjacent queues and/or queues and permitted turning movements.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 150
Article 7: Traffic Impact Studies
Section 7.5: Mitigation
(D) Turn lane analysis shall be conducted for all Unsignalized Access Points to the proposed
development. This analysis shall determine if a right or left-turn lane is warranted at a location to
improve operations or safety and shall identify the proper length of turn lane to accommodate any
storage or deceleration requirements. Turn lane analysis shall be conducted in accordance with
KYTC design and permit standards.
(E) Signal warrant analysis shall be conducted for all existing and proposed traffic signals providing
access to the development. Signal warrant analysis shall also be required before any existing
traffic signal is removed. Signal warrant analysis shall be conducted in accordance with most
recent version of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD).
(F) When a TIS is required under the conditions of Subsection 7.2-3, corridor level analysis shall also
be provided. Corridor analysis shall estimate average travel speed along each contiguous Street or
Street(s) in the study area, and shall include all controlled Access Points in the study area defined
in Subsection 7.2-3. Corridor analysis shall be conducted using the latest version of Synchro
software.
7.4-6 Safety Analysis
When the study area includes a corridor or intersection which has been identified as a high accident
location by KYTC, OKI, Staff, or the applicable Legislative Body, safety analysis shall be conducted and
included in the TIS. Safety analysis shall be conducted using the three most recent years of crash data
available. Engineering judgment shall be used when reviewing and analyzing existing crash patterns in
areas where Improvements have been implemented within the period of the crash data. At a minimum
safety analysis shall include but is not limited to:
(A) Determination of crash rates for the subject location;
(B) Statistical analysis of crash data by time, light conditions, day of week, pavement conditions, crash
type, and contributing factors;
(C) Development of crash diagrams based on crash reports. This shall also include analysis of the
Street environment to identify factors which may contribute to significant recurring crashes at the
location; and
(D) Identification and analysis of potential impacts associated with site traffic and/or the proposed
access plan on the existing crash patterns.
Section 7.5: Mitigation
7.5-1 When a proposed development and/or access plan is shown to result in an unacceptable LOS, or reduce
the LOS of adjacent Access Points, intersections or corridors, as defined in Subsection 7.5-3: Operational
Thresholds, the Applicant shall identify the extent of mitigation Improvements necessary to offset the
impact of the development.
7.5-2 Mitigation Improvements may include, but are not limited to, modification to signal systems,
construction of turn lanes or Medians, access Streets, shared Access Drives, etc. When mitigation
Improvements are proposed analysis shall be conducted for the “Build” condition for the year of opening
and the design year with the proposed Improvements. This analysis shall be consistent with and in
addition to the “No Build” and “Build” analysis required in Section 7.4: Study Requirements.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 151
Article 7: Traffic Impact Studies
Section 7.6: Administration
7.5-3 Operational Thresholds
(A) The following provisions shall be used to define thresholds for acceptable operational performance
for the “Build” condition within the study area.
(B) At existing intersections the intersection LOS shall not be lower than the “No Build” LOS.
Individual turning movements at the intersection shall not operate at LOS E or F. In such cases
where individual turning movements are shown to operate at LOS E or F under the “No Build”
condition, the turning movement delay shall not increase.
(C) Proposed intersections shall operate at intersection LOS C or better. No individual turning
movements may operate at LOS E or F.
(D) On existing corridors, as identified in Clause 7.4-5(F), the average travel speed of the corridor shall
not be less than 75 percent of the “No Build” travel speed.
(E) On proposed corridors, as defined in Clause 7.4-5(F), the average travel speed shall not be less than
half of the allowable speed limit.
Section 7.6: Administration
7.6-1 Responsibility for the Traffic Impact Study
The completion of the TIS is the responsibility of the Developer/Applicant of the subject property. The
report shall be completed by a Professional Engineer, licensed within the Commonwealth of Kentucky,
with previous experience and knowledge in traffic operations and analytical studies. Each report shall
contain the stamp, signature, and date of the responsible Engineer.
7.6-2 Pre-Study Meeting
(A) It is required that a pre-study meeting be conducted prior to starting a TIS. The Applicant will be
required to provide:
(1) A conceptual layout of the proposed Subdivision/development;
(2) An aerial of the proposed site including proposed Access Points; and
(3) A map of the Street network within a two-mile radius surrounding the proposed site.
(B) At this meeting the following parameters of the TIS will be determined:
(1) Study area;
(2) Proposed ITE Trip Generation Land Use
(3) Background and build-out study year;
(4) Adjacent developments;
(5) Traffic growth rates;
(6) Future highway projects in study area; and
(7) Operational analysis parameters.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 152
Article 7: Traffic Impact Studies
Section 7.6: Administration
(C) It is at this meeting, that any potential issues regarding the report shall be discussed. Following the
meeting Staff will prepare a memorandum of understanding summarizing the conclusions and
parameters established in the pre-study meeting that shall be used to complete the study.
(D) It is the responsibility of the Developer/Applicant to schedule this meeting prior to submission.
Pre-study meetings shall be scheduled with Staff at least one week in advance.
(E) If a pre-study meeting is not conducted, the report may not be accepted.
Study Assumptions 7.6-3 Memorandum of Understanding
Following the Pre-Study Meeting and prior to the submission of the final report, the applicant should
submit a Memorandum of Understanding that details:
(A) Existing Traffic Data
(B) Trip Generation Results
(C) Trip Distribution
7.6-4 Documentation
The results of the TIS shall be documented in the TIS report. This report shall contain:
(A) A summary of proposed development;
(B) Data collection methodologies;
(C) A summary of existing traffic conditions;
(D) Raw traffic data (may be included in appendix);
(E) Trip generation calculations and summaries;
(F) Trip generation/distribution methodology (shall include graphics showing existing traffic volumes,
generated trips and total trips for all scenarios);
(G) Adjacent developments included in the background traffic;
(H) Traffic/safety analysis methodologies;
(I) A summary of traffic analysis results;
(J) Full output/calculations from traffic/safety analysis (may be included in appendix);
(K) A summary of recommended Improvements; and
(L) A concept plan showing proposed Improvements. The concept plan shall show proposed
Improvements over aerial (if available) to a measurable scale not greater than one inch is equal to
100 feet.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 153
Article 8: Access Control Regulations
Section 8.1: Purpose
Article 8: Access Control Regulations
Section 8.1: Purpose
The location and design of Access Points shall be in accordance with the access control regulations in this article in
order to:
8.1-1 Promote greater safety of passage between Streets, Sidewalks, and land;
8.1-2 Improve the convenience and ease of movement of travelers and pedestrians on Streets and Sidewalks;
and
8.1-3 Permit reasonable speeds and economy of travel, and increase and protect the capacity of Streets.
Section 8.2: Applicability
These regulations shall apply to all Street classifications as outlined in the adopted Comprehensive Plan, or in the
case of new or proposed Streets, as identified on the submitted Application.
Section 8.3: Conditions for the Provision of Access Points
The following regulations shall apply unless otherwise approved by Staff after completion of a TIS that shall
document that the proposed Improvements will not adversely impact the safety or capacity of the primary Street,
with the exception of Sight Distance requirements, which must be met. Requirements for a TIS are outlined in
Article 7: Traffic Impact Studies.
8.3-1 Access Spacing
(A) All proposed Access Points shall meet the minimum spacing standards in Table 8.3-1.
TABLE 8.3-1:ACCESS SPACING STANDARDS
FUNCTIONAL
CLASSIFICATION
SIGNALIZED
INTERSECTION
SPACING
NONRESIDENTIAL
(FULL ACCESS)
NONRESIDENTIAL
(PARTIAL ACCESS)
RESIDENTIAL
ACCESS
Arterial [2] 2,400 2,400/1,200 [1] 1,200/600 [1] 600
Collector [2] 1,200 600 300 300
Local (not applicable to
residential Driveways) [2] 1,200 150 N/A N/A
NOTE:
[1] For Streets with speed limits greater than or equal to 45 miles per hour (mph), use the larger values. For Streets with
speed limits of less than 45 mph, use the lower values.
[2] For existing streets the functional classification shall be based upon the classification indicated in the Kenton County
Comprehensive Plan. For proposed streets the functional classification shall be based upon Table 4.1-1.
(B) Spacing standards shall be determined as measured from centerline of the Access Point to
centerline of the Access Point as shown in Figure 8.3-A.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 154
Article 8: Access Control Regulations
Section 8.3: Conditions for the Provision of Access Points
Figure 8.3-A: Illustration of access spacing management
(C) No Access Point shall be permitted within 300 feet from the edge of pavement of an arterial Street
nor within the limits of auxiliary left or right turn lanes at intersections as shown in Figure 8.3-B.
Figure 8.3-B: Illustration of access spacing from Arterial Streets
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 155
Article 8: Access Control Regulations
Section 8.3: Conditions for the Provision of Access Points
(D) If a Tract of land has no means of access that would meet the requirements of this section, a
Restricted Access Point shall be permitted. The Restricted Access Point shall be placed so as to
maximize spacing from adjacent Access Points.
Coordination o 8.3-2 f Access Points
Access points shall be designed, located, and constructed in a manner to provide and make possible the
coordination of access with, and between, adjacent properties to maximize the efficient utilization of
Access Points. Coordination of Access Points shall be regulated as follows:
(A) With the exception of residential Driveways, Access Points on opposite sides of a Street shall be
located directly opposite each other. Where ‘T’ type intersections are used, a minimum centerline
offset of 150 feet shall be maintained on Local Streets. On collector and arterial Streets, a
minimum centerline offset capable of accommodating required left and right turn lanes shall be
maintained. When no auxiliary turn lanes are required, a minimum centerline offset of 200 feet on
collector and arterial streets shall be maintained. See Figure 8.3-C, Figure 8.3-D, and Figure 8.3-E.
Figure 8.3-C: Illustration of preferred coordination of Access Points
Figure 8.3-D: Illustration of permitted coordination of Access Points
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 156
Article 8: Access Control Regulations
Section 8.3: Conditions for the Provision of Access Points
Figure 8.3-E: Illustration of prohibited coordination of Access Points
(B) In cases where access spacing greater than the minimum would prohibit future access to adjacent
Parcels, Access Points may not exceed the minimum spacing requirements, except where
topographical or exceptional physical conditions exist.
(C) In cases where access coordination is not possible, turning movement restrictions may be imposed
by Staff.
8.3-3 Access Width
(A) Driveways intended for residential uses shall meet the access width requirements identified in
Subsection 4.1-24: Access Drives. All other Access Points shall not be less than 12 feet nor more
than 48 feet in width.
(B) Access width shall be measured from the edge of pavement to edge of pavement, excluding the
Curb radius as shown in Figure 8.3-F.
Figure 8.3-F: Illustration of the access width measurement
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 157
Article 8: Access Control Regulations
Section 8.4: Traffic Control
8.3-4 Access Throat Length
(A) The Access Throat length shall be maintained to avoid the overlapping of Driveway entrance and
parking lot circulation conflicts. The Access Throat length shall be measured from the edge of the
intersecting Street to the edge of pavement on the parking lot access or adjacent drive as shown in
Figure 8.3-G.
(B) Minimum Access Throat lengths shall not be required for residential Driveways or for Access
Points on Local Streets, Private Streets, or Access Drives.
(C) A minimum throat length of 50 feet shall be required for Access Points which intersect a Public
Street, or as otherwise required to accommodate exiting queue lengths as determined by a TIS.
(D) The Access Throat length shall be separated from vehicular and pedestrian movements adjacent to
parking facilities and drives through the construction of a raised Median, landscaping, or other
non-traversable feature.
Figure 8.3-G: Illustration of Access Throat length measurement
Section 8.4: Traffic Control
Installation of any Traffic Control measures on an existing Public Street shall not be permitted unless otherwise
approved by Staff after completion of a TIS.
8.4-1 Except as herein provided, turning movements prohibited at Partial Access Points or Restricted Access
Points shall be controlled through the use of proper Channelization. Channelization shall be constructed
in the form of a raised non-traversable Median in the center of the primary Street, sufficiently designed to
obstruct the prohibited movement. See Figure 8.4-A.
8.4-2 When the construction of a Median on the primary Street is not possible, the prohibited movements shall
be controlled through the use of a raised non-traversable channelizing island constructed on the Access
Point approach. The channelizing island shall be of sufficient size and design so as to obstruct the
prohibited movement. See Figure 8.4-A.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 158
Article 8: Access Control Regulations
Section 8.5: Provision of Auxiliary Turn Lanes
Median islands not designed to function as a channelizing island (i.e. an entrance 8.4-3 landscape island) shall
be designed and constructed in accordance with Figure A.1-DD: Detail #28.
Figure 8.4-A: Illustrations of Channelization techniques
Section 8.5: Provision of Auxiliary Turn Lanes
The need for and design of auxiliary turn lanes shall be determined by auxiliary turn lanes warrants and design
standards defined or identified by the Kentucky Transportation Cabinet. See Figure 8.5-A and Figure 8.5-B.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 159
Article 8: Access Control Regulations
Section 8.5: Provision of Auxiliary Turn Lanes
Figure 8.5-A: Illustration of a left turn requirement
Figure 8.5-B: Illustration of a right turn requirement
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 160
Article 8: Access Control Regulations
Section 8.6: Provision of Access Easement and Access Drives for Nonresidential Uses
Provision of Access Section 8.6: Easement and Access Drives for
Nonresidential Uses
8.6-1 Except as herein provided, each Parcel located directly adjacent to or abutting a Street classified as either
an arterial or collector in the Comprehensive Plan, shall provide an Easement and shared Driveway or
Private Street connecting to adjacent properties.
8.6-2 The access Easement shall be unobstructed from physical features constructed on the Parcel.
8.6-3 When adjacent Parcels with existing Easements and/or Access Drives exist, the access Easement shall be
provided in coordination with existing interconnected access provision on the adjacent Parcels.
8.6-4 When adjacent Parcels are not developed, the Easement shall be provided at a location capable of:
(A) Providing cross access to adjacent Parcels; and
(B) Meeting all applicable access spacing standards specified in these Subdivision regulations.
Section 8.7: Pedestrian Access Points
8.7-1 Development along Arterial or Collector Streets shall provide pedestrian Access Points that shall connect
to any adjacent public Sidewalk and transit stops.
8.7-2 If no public Sidewalk exists along the adjacent arterial or Collector Street at the time a new development
is proposed, a Sidewalk shall be provided, along with the required pedestrian Access Points.
8.7-3 Any expansion or improvement of an existing Parking Area shall be required to be in compliance with
this section if the following applies:
(A) The new Parking Area is directly adjacent to the Arterial or Collector Street;
(B) A public Sidewalk or transit stop already exists along the Arterial or Collector Street; and
(C) The expansion will add 10 or more off-Street parking spaces that are to be located adjacent to an
Arterial or Collector Street. If a public Sidewalk already exists, then pedestrian Access Points shall
be provided.
8.7-4 The requirements of this section may be waived if sufficient proof is presented that there is not adequate
room and/or adequate need for pedestrian Access Points.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 161
Appendix A: Standard Construction Drawings
Appendix A: Standard Construction Drawings
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 162


ASPHALT BASE SHALL BE A MINIMUM OF 4”
THICK UNDER THE CURB UNLESS APPROVED PER
SECTION 4.4 ALTERNATIVE PAVEMENT DESIGN
ASPHALT WITH STONE BASE
ASPHALT WITH STONE BASE & GEOGRID
FULL DEPTH ASPHALT
CONCRETE
ASPHALT WITH STONE BASE
ASPHALT WITH STONE BASE & GEOGRID

6" BARRIER CURB & GUTTER
SLOPED CURB
FOR RESIDENTIAL STREETS ONLY
6" BARRIER INTEGRAL CURB
SLOPED INTEGRAL CURB
FOR RESIDENTIAL STREETS ONLY





R=100'
32.5'
R=25'
52.5'
52.5'
R=25'
R=25' R=25'
15'
15' 11' 2'
11'
R=25'
R=25'
2'
14' O.C.
15' O.C. Max.
11'
15'
11'
15'
8'+_
2'
8'+_
GENERAL RULES OF TOOLED CONTRACTION
JOINT LAYOUT
1.) Skew joints 2' in each 12.5' lane; 2'-4" skew in each 14' lane.
2.) Always have the driver's side front wheel of the vehicle hit the skewed
joint first.
3.) Maximum joint spacing = 15'; adjust joint spacing as necessary to
keep spacing above a 8' minimum.
4.) On horizontal curves, layout joint spacing along centerline at 14' O.C.;
visually determine a radial line from the centerline back to the curb;
measure back (forward) from that point 2' to set the skew, remembering
the driver's side front wheel of the vehicle hits the skewed joint first. Tool
the joint at the skewed line.
5.) At intersections, catch basins and cul-de-sacs, follow joint layout
shown.
TYPICAL SKEWED JOINT
AND C BENT BAR LAYOUT
SCALE: N.T.S
JOINT LAYOUT FOR PAIRED CATCH BASINS
NOTE:
ALL CONSTRUCTION JOINTS
ARE DOWELED JOINTS.
L








”
”






Appendix B: Surety Templates
Appendix B: Surety Templates
1. Use the following one-page template when an insurance company issues a Subdivision bond.
SUBDIVISION BOND
BOND NO. _____________
The undersigned _________________________ as Principal (hereinafter called Principal) and
_____________________ as Surety (hereinafter called Surety) are held and firmly bound unto the Kenton County
Planning Commission in the penal sum of ($ _____________) Dollars, for the payment of which well and truly be
made, we hereby jointly and severally bind ourselves, our heir, executors, administrators, successors and assigns.
THE CONDITIONS OF THIS OBLIGATION ARE SUCH THAT
WHEREAS, the Principal has presented for the approval of the Oblige a plat of a Subdivision of Lots and lands to
be known as _________________________________. .
WHEREAS, before said plat can be given final approval, it is required under ordinance or regulations of said
Oblige that the project Improvements described in the attached Engineer’s Estimate shall have been completed or
that, in lieu of such completion, the Subdivider shall furnish to the Oblige a bond guaranteeing that such
Improvements will be completed in accordance with the applicable specifications and within the period of time
allowed under the Subdivision Regulations. If the completion is not made in accordance with Subdivision
Regulations, the Commission (“Oblige”) may use said Bond proceeds to complete all Improvements required.
NOW, THEREFORE, if said principal shall fully and faithfully perform all of the work specified to be done within
the time prescribed and in accordance with the plans and specifications therefore, to which reference is hereby
made, the same being a part hereof as though fully incorporated herein; then this obligation shall be void, otherwise
to remain in full force and effect until the public Improvements are completed.
SIGNED AND DATED THIS ___________ DAY OF ________________ 20______.
Principal:
By: __________________________________________
Title
Printed
Name: _______________________________________
Surety:
By: __________________________________________
Title
Attachments:
(1) Insurance Company Power of Attorney
(2) Estimate of Costs
Figure B.1-A: Subdivision Bond Issued by Insurance Company
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 194
Appendix B: Surety Templates
2. Use the following two-page template when an Irrevocable Standby Letter of Credit is used for a Subdivision
bond.
(BANK LETTERHEAD)
Irrevocable Standby Letter of Credit No. ___________________ Date: __________________
Kenton County Planning Commission
2332 Royal Drive
Fort Mitchell, Kentucky 41017
To the Kenton County Planning Commission:
We hereby issue our Irrevocable Standby Letter of Credit # ____________________________ in your favor for the
account of (Name and Address of Developer), up to an aggregate amount of U.S. $ _______________ available
by our draft(s) at sight drawn on (Name of Bank).
We are informed that this Letter of Credit is to ensure performance by (Name of Developer) with respect to
completing (Describe Work) in Section _________________ Subdivision ____________________.
, Kentucky.
Draft(s) must be marked “Drawn under (Name of Bank) Credit No. _____________________________ dated
___________________.
We hereby agree with you that the drafts drawn under and in compliance with the terms of this credit will be duly
honored by us upon presentation at this office on or before 24 months from the date hereof.
Except as otherwise expressly stated herein, this Letter of Credit is subject to Uniform Customs and Practice for
Documentary Credit (1983 Revision), International Chamber of Commerce Publication No. 400.
(BANK)
By:________________________________
Signature
Page 1 of 2
Figure B.1-B: Subdivision Bond via Irrevocable Standby Letter of Credit
(Continued on next page)
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 195
Appendix B: Surety Templates
(Continued from previous page)
SUBDIVISION BOND
We, (Name of Developer), as principal and surety, are held firmly bound unto the Kenton County Planning
Commission in the sum $_________________ dollars (_____________________) for the payment of which well
and truly to be made we do hereby severally bond our company, our successors, executors and administrators
firmly by these presents. Said Bond to be secured by a Letter of Credit from the (Name of Bank) to remain in
effect until completion of the project, or of Developer fails to timely complete the project, this Letter of Credit will
be renewed to remain in effect up to 24 months.
The conditions of this obligation are the completion of Public Improvements, in (Subdivision Name), as shown on
the Engineer’s estimate of costs. If completion is not made in accordance with the Subdivision Regulations, the
Commission may draw on said Letter of Credit to complete all work needed to finish the project.
Now, if the principal shall well and duly perform the completion of the Public Improvements, and shall indemnify
and hold harmless the Commission for or on account of any injury or damage to persons or property arising from or
growing out of said work, then this obligation shall be void and the Letter of Credit shall be released to the
principal upon authorization of the Commission; otherwise this obligation shall remain in full force and effect until
the Public Improvements are completed.
WITNESS my/our signatures this ____________ day of ___________ , 20
_____.
(NAME OF DEVELOPER)
By: ________________________________
Title: ______________________________
COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY
COUNTY OF KENTON
Subscribed, sworn to and acknowledged before me, a Notary Public, this_________________ day of
______________, 20_______.
___________________________________
NOTARY PUBLIC
My Commission Expires:_________________
Attachments:
(1) Original Letter of Credit
(2) Estimate of Cost
Page 2 of 2
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 196
Appendix B: Surety Templates
3. Use the following one-page template when cash, a check, a money order, or a cashier’s check is used for a
Subdivision bond.
SUBDIVISION BOND
The undersigned as Principal (hereinafter called Principal) and (cash, check, money
order or cashier’s check – circle correct one) as Surety (hereinafter called Surety) are held and firmly bound unto
the Kenton County Planning Commission in the penal sum of ($ ) Dollars, for the payment of
which well and truly be made, we hereby jointly and severally bind ourselves, our heir, executors, administrators,
successors and assigns.
THE CONDITIONS OF THIS OBLIGATION ARE SUCH THAT
WHEREAS, the Principal has presented for the approval of the Oblige a plat of a Subdivision of Lots and lands to
be known as .
WHEREAS, before said plat can be given final approval, it is required under ordinance or regulations of said
Oblige that the project Improvements described in the attached Engineer’s Estimate shall have been completed or
that, in lieu of such completion, the Subdivider shall furnish to the Oblige a surety guaranteeing that such
Improvements will be completed in accordance with the applicable specifications and within the period of time
allowed under the Subdivision Regulations. If the completion is not made in accordance with Subdivision
Regulations, the Commission (“Oblige”) may use said surety proceeds to complete all Improvements required.
NOW, THEREFORE, if said principal shall fully and faithfully perform all of the work specified to be done within
the time prescribed and in accordance with the plans and specifications therefore, to which reference is hereby
made, the same being a part hereof as though fully incorporated herein; then this obligation shall be void, otherwise
to remain in full force and effect until the public Improvements are completed.
SIGNED AND DATED THIS DAY OF 20 .
Principal:
By:
Title
Printed
Name: _____________________________
Attachments: $___________Check #_______________
(1) Cash / Check in the amount of
(2) Estimate of Costs
Figure B.1-C: Subdivision Bond via Cash, Check, Money Order, or Cashier’s Check
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 197
Appendix B: Surety Templates
4. Use the following three-page template when a Certificate of Deposit is used for a Subdivision bond.
SUBDIVISION BOND
We (Company Name), as principal and surety, are held firmly bound unto the Kenton County Planning
Commission in the sum of $ dollars ( ) for the payment of which well and truly
to be made do hereby severally bond our company, our successors, executors and administrators firmly by these
presents. Said bond to be secured by a certificate of deposit from the (Name of Bank) to remain in effect until
completion of the project, or if Developer fails to timely complete the project, this certificate of deposits will be
renewed to remain in effect up to 24 months.
Page 1 of 3
Figure B.1-D: Subdivision Bond via Certificate of Deposit (Continued below and on next page)
(Continued below)
(Use Corporate Letterhead)
Date
INSERT BANK NAME HERE
AND ADDRESS HERE
Correspondent:
This letter is in reference to the Certificate of Deposit (hereafter called CD), which was issued by your bank in the
amount of ($ ). The CD was issued as a guarantee from ( Name of
Company) as it relates to the completion of public Improvements at the Subdivision,
Section . You are hereby notified that (Name of Company) is waiving its signature to the withdrawal of
funds in the event that the public Improvements are not completed. (Name of Company) also agrees that no funds
may be withdrawn without authorization from the Kenton County Planning Commission.
Sincerely,
_____________________________________
Title
cc: Kenton County Planning Commission
Page 2 of 3
(Continued on next page)
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 198
Appendix B: Surety Templates
(Continued from previous page)
(Use Bank Letterhead)
Date
Kenton County Planning Commission (Insert Company Name
2332 Royal Drive and Address Here)
Fort Mitchell, KY 41017
To Whom It May Concern:
Our Bank acknowledges the issuance of a $ Certificate of Deposit in the above names. The
Certificate Number is and it will mature on . In order for any withdrawal to
be processed it will require specific authorization of the Planning Commission.
The Company as co-holder of the Certificate of Deposit be separate letter attached hereto has waived its signature
to the withdrawal of funds in the event that the public Improvements are not completed. This Certificate of Deposit
is to serve as surety for the Subdivision Performance Bond which is attached, specifying the dollar amount and the
specific Subdivision project involved.
Thank You,
Title
Page 3 of 3
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 199
Appendix C: Engineers Committee Final Report
Appendix C: Engineers Committee Final Report
REPORT TO THE KENTON COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION
FROM THE KENTON COUNTY STREET STANDARDS ENGINEERS COMMITTEE (SSEC)
Members: Mark Brueggemann, P.E.; Joe Kramer, P.E.; Jim Viox, P.E.; Ted Vogelpohl, P.E.;
Henry Fischer, Chairman
BACKGROUND
In 2008 the Kenton County Planning Commission (KCPC) initiated an effort to update the Kenton County
Subdivision Regulations. As a part of the update process, input was solicited from various interested groups in
Kenton County. Among those responding, the Kenton County Mayors’ Group, the Kenton County Judge
Executive, the Land Development Council of the Home Builders Association of Northern Kentucky (HBANKY),
and the Northern Kentucky Society of Professional Engineers (NKSPE) were particularly active in their response.
By mid-2013, there was consensus agreement among the interested groups and the KCPC staff on most parts of the
updated draft regulations. The area where there remained substantial disagreement among the parties mentioned
above was that part of the regulation draft that dealt with requirements for future subdivision street pavements.
During the late stages of this community discussion, at the suggestion of the Kenton County Judge Executive and
several city Mayors, and authorization of the Planning Commission Chairman, a committee of five local pavement
professionals with over 150 years of collective experience in the design, construction, reconstruction, and
maintenance of subdivision pavements was formed and took on the name of Kenton County Street Standards
Engineers Committee (SSEC). The committee members are listed above. This committee was asked, as a
voluntary community service, to do the following: analyze existing subdivision pavement performance, evaluate
that performance compared to reasonable expectations for pavement performance, and make recommendations that
would improve pavement customer value in future subdivision pavements. All earlier community discussion on
pavement performance was to be considered as input into their process.
The committee established a problem analysis and decision making approach with the objective of providing
Kenton County subdivision pavement customers (home purchaser/owner, home occupant, taxpayer, citizen)
maximized long-term pavement value. Over the course of a year, the committee met for two hour meetings,
normally twice weekly, to generate their analysis and recommendations. In addition, there were meetings and
conversations with many other individuals and groups seeking their advice, input, and consensus agreement. Those
groups included:
• The Kenton County Planning Commission Subdivision Regulations Committee
• Kenton County Planning Commission
• Kenton County Mayors’ Group Subdivision Regulation Review Committee
• Various Northern Kentucky city and county engineers
• Various Northern Kentucky city and county public works officials
• Brian Wood, P.E. – Executive Director of Plantmix Asphalt Industry of Kentucky
• Local concrete and asphalt producers
• Local subdivision improvement contractors
• The Northern Kentucky Society of Professional Engineers continuing education session (Feb. 24, 2014)
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 200
Appendix C: Engineers Committee Final Report
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR IMPROVEMENT IN
THE KENTON COUNTY SUBDIVISION REGULATION STREET STANDARDS
The following represents the consensus problem identification and recommendations for improvement in Kenton
County subdivision street regulations by the SSEC. Besides many hours of analysis and discussion by our
Committee, input into the analysis and decision making process was solicited, received, and considered from a
broad spectrum of those involved in the design, construction and maintenance of subdivision streets, especially
those who have been involved in the KCPC subdivision regulation update process. In addition, many sources from
the professional pavement design and maintenance literature were considered and used.
It is noteworthy that the recommendations contained in this report are the unanimous recommendations of the
members of the SSEC.
The SSEC hereby respectfully requests that the KCPC accept the following analysis and incorporate these
recommendations into the revised Subdivision Regulation street standards now under their consideration.
PROBLEM IDENTIFICATION
Realistic problem solving requires accurate definition of the problems and their root causes. That is the aim of the
following as it relates to problems in existing Kenton County subdivision pavements and improvements for the
design and regulation of future pavements.
The following is a list of the most critical problems and opportunities for improvement that have been identified in
Kenton County subdivision pavements installed from roughly 1985 (28 years old) to 2000 (13 years old). The
significance of 1985 is that, in 1985, there was a substantial effort by the Northern Kentucky engineering,
homebuilding, and local government community to improve new subdivision pavement performance. This 1985
effort resulted in a substantial upgrade and standardization of subdivision pavement regulations across Northern
Kentucky, including Kenton County. The subdivision pavements built from 1985 to 2000 in Kenton County were
built under those 1985 regulations. There was little to no change in the pavement regulations during that period.
Jim Viox, Henry Fischer, and Thelen Associates, Inc. (George Thelen then and Ted Vogelpohl now) have been
participants in both the 1985 update effort and this current update effort. This continuity has benefitted this current
effort greatly. It is also noteworthy that very significant improvements in pavement performance and citizen/
homeowner/ taxpayer pavement value resulted from that 1985 effort. Hopefully, as much or more value can be
gained from this current effort.
PROBLEMS COMMON TO ASPHALT AND CONCRETE PAVEMENT
1. Pavement performance standards are not clear in the current regulations. Pavement design parameters,
performance expectations, and procedures for and the importance of proper pavement maintenance are not
set out. This has often resulted in unclear and unrealistic expectations for pavement performance and
maintenance within the Kenton County community.
2. Quality assurance efforts in pavement construction in some cases have been lacking, leading to premature
pavement failure. Related to this problem is the fact that some construction and material specifications in
the current subdivision regulations are inadequate to insure quality pavement performance. In other
instances, the existing regulations don’t provide an adequate description of material and construction
specification tolerances that can be achieved using good material control and construction practices. This
lack of proper tolerances leads to ambiguity, confusion, and arbitrary decision making during construction
on what the acceptable material and construction standards are. Various aspects of this quality assurance
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 201
Appendix C: Engineers Committee Final Report
effort are the responsibility of the developers, the design and geotechnical engineers, the construction
contractor, and the KCPC and its designated inspection agency.
3. In many cases, subdivision streets in Kenton County communities have not been adequately maintained by
their owners, thus shortening pavement life and substantially increasing ultimate customer long-term
pavement costs.
4. There is no consideration given in existing regulations pavement design of how to extend pavement life
beyond the 20 year design life.
5. Subgrade strength is, in some cases, being degraded because of water penetrating into and weakening the
subgrade. There is a need for improvement in the drainage characteristics of subdivision pavements (both
surface and subsurface); there are design shortfalls as well as construction quality control and maintenance
shortfalls. This problem is much more critical in asphalt pavements because of asphalt’s high reliance on
subgrade strength as compared to concrete’s reliance on uniform subgrade support.
6. Pavement failures caused by utility ditch settlement under the street. This is a more costly per occurrence
but less frequent problem for concrete pavements.
7. Existing subdivision regulation standards for streets in industrial and commercial subdivisions are often
inadequate for the heavy truck traffic loading these streets must support.
PROBLEMS SPECIFIC TO ASPHALT STREET PAVEMENTS
8. When asphalt pavements came into common use in Kenton County in the early 1990’s, there was a failure
to recognize and address the fact that asphalt pavements are more dependent on subgrade strength than
concrete pavements. Often there was an assumption that subgrade strength that was good enough for
concrete was good enough for asphalt. This isn’t true. This assumption led to some asphalt pavement
failures caused by inadequate subgrade preparation and/or inadequate subgrade materials.
9. Asphalt pavement subgrade weakening caused by inadequate pavement surface and subsurface storm water
management. Root causes include inadequate subgrade and surface cross slope, both in design and
inadequate quality control; water penetrating the asphalt/curb apron interface due to the asphalt being
finished below the curb apron; inadequate curb apron cross slope to the gutter line; the asphalt subgrade
being cut lower than the adjacent curb subgrade, thus trapping water under the asphalt; water penetrating
the subgrade from the area outside the curb; and inadequate sealing and maintenance of the asphalt/curb
apron interface. Another problem in this area relates to the improper use of more brittle asphalt materials
designed specifically for highway use. When more brittle asphalt materials are used in subdivision
pavements, premature surface cracks develop in the body of the pavement, allowing water to penetrate
through the pavement into the subgrade and accelerating deterioration of the pavement subgrade.
10. There are inadequate quality assurance requirements in the current regulations for asphalt material and no
asphalt in-place density requirements or testing.
11. In some limited cases, there have been excessive premature asphalt street concrete curb and gutter failures.
Some causes include: improper or inadequate isolation joints at structures (catch basins); inadequate curb
cross section bending strength and/or inadequate subgrade support; and inadequate concrete material
quality leading to D-cracking and other freeze-thaw concrete deterioration.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 202
Appendix C: Engineers Committee Final Report
PROBLEMS SPECIFIC TO CONCRETE STREET PAVEMENTS
12. Premature pavement failures caused by in-place concrete not being resistant enough to natural multi-year
freeze-thaw and expansion/contraction cycles. Causes include:
a) Concrete mixes (coarse aggregate type and cement content) that are not resistant enough to concrete Dcracking
and the use of appropriate de-icers. Note that some inappropriate de-icers will cause concrete
deterioration even with appropriate concrete mixes. The D-cracking problem leads to deterioration at
the joints as well as total concrete failure in the body of the concrete slabs.
b) Excessive concrete street lengthening or “growth” problems that are caused by the use of expansion
joints in the pavement, expansive gravel 57’s coarse aggregate, premature load transfer failures at
contraction joints, joint seal failure and poor maintenance. Another pavement condition that can
contribute to the problem is where pavement lengthening is relatively unrestricted, such as at the end of
downhill cul-de-sacs. Measures to manage potential pavement growth impacts on private property
outside of the pavement can also be improved.
13. Premature contraction joint load transfer failure which causes rough vehicle ride and eventual slab failure.
This problem is caused by the separation of the contraction joints due to the use of expansion joints and
more recently (since 1990) by the use of substantial amounts of #8 gravel in pavement concrete mixes. The
addition of #8 gravel and corresponding reduction in 57’s gravel decreases the percentage of total aggregate
above ½” in size, and thus decreases the aggregate interlock across the contraction joint. Inadequate joint
seal maintenance is another contributing factor to this problem. This type failure also contributes
significantly to concrete problems described in number 12 above.
RECOMMENDATION OBJECTIVE
The most serious and improvable existing subdivision pavement problems have been identified along with their
root causes. The objective now is to find solutions to those problems that yield the pavement customer (house
purchaser, home owner, occupant, taxpayer, citizen) the lowest possible 50 year net present value for the pavement
life cycle costs. Net present value accounts for the time value of money, which is the basis for evaluating any
pavement option. Initial construction costs, pavement joint maintenance, localized failure repair, and resurfacing
costs are the primary life cycle costs. 50 years was selected as the reasonable period to evaluate pavement use,
performance, and maintenance. It is anticipated that the life of most subdivision pavements as designed here can be
extended beyond 50 years when properly constructed and maintained with additional refurbishment and repair
some time after 50 years.
The following Committee recommendations are consistent with this preceding objective. Note that local suburban
subdivision streets, which represent the bulk of subdivision streets built in Kenton County, are used as examples in
many of these recommendations and exhibits. These recommendations are easily adapted to other classes of
subdivision streets.
RECOMMENDATIONS
1. For all engineering, material, and construction specifications in the subdivision regulations, including those
recommended herein, establish realistically achievable definitions, including allowable variances and
tolerances.
Benefit: Meeting this objective will substantially help clarification of pavement expectations for all
involved in the subdivision process. It will also help minimize ambiguity and arbitrary decision making on
as-constructed pavement variances in the future.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 203
Appendix C: Engineers Committee Final Report
2. Include a Pavement Performance and Design section in the subdivision regulations that sets out a 20-year
design life and 50-year life cycle maintenance and resurfacing plan. Also include other subdivision
regulation pavement design parameters, the proper expectations for pavement performance, the differences
in performance characteristics between asphalt and concrete, the need for maintenance, and other related
subjects. Figure C.1-A:Exhibit A contains the SSEC parameter selection and example design calculations
for subdivision pavements. Exhibit B contains the SSEC 50-year life cycle expected minimum
maintenance requirements.
Benefit: Addresses problem #1 and helps address problems #3 and #4.
3. After revised regulations are adopted, establish an effort whereby a group of local engineers, contractors,
developers and governmental officials collaborate to improve the governmental pavement construction
inspection program. The focus should be to determine those factors or items that are most important to be
inspected to insure proper pavement performance. Then once those factors are determined, train inspection
personnel how to inspect those factors and document those inspections. The formation of a longer term
inspection oversight group should also be considered.
Benefit: Addresses problem #2.
4. Suggest to the Kenton County Mayors’ Group that a pavement management system such as the one used
currently by the City of Florence would be a good idea for implementation in Kenton County. Properly
implemented, this type of system will significantly improve long-term customer pavement value.
Benefit: Helps solve problem #3.
5. Adopt a structural subgrade strength minimum for the standard subdivision pavement design of CBR = 2 or
greater for concrete and CBR = 3 or greater for asphalt. Require site specific improvements in design and
construction of the subgrade and/or pavement by a Registered Engineer where these CBR requirements
can’t be met with the proposed subdivision’s natural soils and proper compaction.
Benefit: Help address problems 5 and 8.
6. Adopt a requirement for geotechnical reports regarding pavement design and subgrade support at multiple
stages of subdivision approval, as described in Exhibit C. These reports will also address other important
soil slope stability and structural issues.
Benefit: Assures adequate subgrade structural support for pavements. Helps address problems 5 and 8.
7. Establish minimum subdivision regulation pavement design for industrial and commercial subdivisions
with stated design parameters, including ESAL loading. Require planned traffic (ESAL) loading analysis
by a registered engineer for all commercial and industrial subdivisions. Where planned traffic loading
exceeds standard design loading or where minimum required CBR’s are not met, require the necessary
improvements in pavement design and construction. See Exhibit A for proposed industrial/commercial
pavement designs.
Benefit: Solves problem #7.
8. Increase subgrade cross slope from the current 2%. Use a subgrade cross slope of 3% for concrete and
4.5%+ for asphalt pavements (see Exhibit D, Exhibit E, and Exhibit F).
Benefit: Helps solve problems 5 and 9.
9. Increase finish surface cross slope of all pavements from 2% to 3% (see Exhibit D, Exhibit E, and Exhibit
F).
Benefit: Helps solve problems 5 and 9.
10. Use concrete sloped curb (see Exhibit E) and eliminate use of current concrete rolled curb.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 204
Appendix C: Engineers Committee Final Report
Benefit: Helps solve problems 4 and 11 and improves vehicle ride when accessing driveways.
11. Use ODOT 6” chair back curb or equivalent instead of KTC 6” vertical curb. Allow horizontally sawed
driveway apron cuts in this curb type.
Benefit: The ODOT curb is more approachable when parking a car adjacent to the curb and less likely to
damage wheel rims.
12. Require that the front top edge of the sidewalk along the street be constructed 6” +1” above the top of
sloped curb (see Exhibit G).
Benefit: Help solve problem #4 by allowing for future significant asphalt overlays while still maintaining
adequate street drainage (see Exhibit H).
13. Require edge drains along all curb lines as depicted in Exhibit D, Exhibit E, and Exhibit F.
Benefit: Helps solve problems 5 and 9.
14. Require that telephone and electric crossovers under the street and three feet beyond the street to be
installed as follows: Separate the parallel ducts by at least 2” horizontally using spacers; cover with 6” of
fill sand; properly compact with a vibratory plate compactor; add additional conduit as necessary, properly
separated. Cover with fill sand properly compacted. Backfill remaining trench with KTC dense grade
aggregate (DGA) properly compacted up to subgrade (see Exhibit G). Other shallow utility ditches under
the pavement, other than those described in 15 below, are to be similarly bedded, covered, and backfilled.
Benefit: Helps solve problem #6.
15. Require storm catch basins and catch basin storm crossovers to be bedded, covered, backfilled, and drained
into one catch basin as depicted on Exhibit H. Make sure 57’s crushed stone is exposed to the base of the
pavement. Properly compact all materials.
Benefit: Helps solve problems 5, 6 and 9.
16. Adopt subdivision street classifications, including number of lots served, street width, subgrade slope,
pavement thicknesses, and curb type, as shown in Exhibit I.
Benefit: Helps solve problems 1, 4, 5 and 9.
17. Adopt the standard of always having the pavement base course, whether stone-based or full-depth asphalt,
extend under the curb as shown in Exhibit D and Exhibit E.
Benefit: Allows for the required use of a 24-inch wide curb instead of the current standard 30-inch wide
curb and helps solve problems 5, 9 and 11.
18. Adopt asphalt material standards which more narrowly define those KTC asphalt material standards which
are appropriate for residential subdivision pavements. Set out testing requirements for asphalt aggregate
and liquid asphalt content. Also establish density testing requirements for in-place pavement. Use KTC
crushed stone base material for stone-based pavements. Require regular reporting and passing results of
KTC gradation requirement from base material sources.
Benefit: Helps solve problems #2 and #10.
19. For asphalt pavements, increase the cross slope of the apron of the 24” concrete curb and gutter section to
6% (see Exhibit D and Exhibit E). Require the asphalt surface at the apron to be finished 1/4” + 1/8” above
the apron and properly sealed.
Benefit: Helps solve problems 5 and 9.
20. Install finish course of asphalt no later than one year from the date of installation of the asphalt base and
intermediate course (see Exhibit D and Exhibit E). When the finish course of asphalt is installed
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 205
Appendix C: Engineers Committee Final Report
immediately as a part of initial construction, asphalt base material may be substituted for intermediate base
material.
Benefit: Insures that asphalt streets are completed on a timely basis.
21. Specify concrete mixes used for concrete pavements to have six bags of cement per cubic yard. Require all
large aggregates (above #8’s) to be crushed limestone. Require that #4 limestone be included in the
pavement mix. A maximum aggregate size of 57’s is appropriate for concrete curb and gutter. Require
KTC approval of hardness requirements for crushed limestone aggregate sources. See Exhibit J for SECC
recommended concrete aggregate content and a discussion of the importance of large aggregate size in
concrete pavement.
Benefit: Helps solve problems 12 and 13.
22. Eliminate expansion joints in concrete pavements. Use skewed contraction joints as shown in Exhibit K.
Place contraction joints at a maximum spacing of 15’ O.C.
Benefit: Helps solve problems 12 and 13.
23. For concrete pavements, provide 3” of expansion joint material in the driveway apron area within the right
of way (see Exhibit L) to provide for the management of any concrete pavement growth that does occur.
Inspect placement when inspecting driveway apron/sidewalk construction. City/County street maintenance
personnel will monitor any closing of expansion joints, as a part of normal street maintenance, and take
appropriate action.
Benefit: Provides for management of street growth problems outside of the pavement, when they do occur
(problem #12.b).
24. Use pavement lugs in concrete pavement as shown in Exhibit M to help minimize potential pavement
growth in critical pavement geometric conditions. These critical conditions, which are identified in Exhibit
N and Exhibit O, have historically been the pavement geometric conditions where subdivision pavement
growth problems have been more likely to occur.
Benefit: This should help mitigate the problem described in problem #12.b.
25. The KCPC should consider the merits of replacing the current cul-de-sac design with the Hamilton County
teardrop cul-de-sac design (see Exhibit P).
Benefit: This teardrop design might make turn around for public service vehicles easier than the current
design.
The preceding represents our group consensus problem identification and recommendations for improvement in
future Kenton County subdivision pavements.
DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS
As a part of the SECC’s work, they solicited and received the cooperation from three local developers (Arlinghaus,
Drees, and Fischer), several local governmental entities, local construction contractors, and material suppliers in the
construction of several pavement demonstration projects. These demonstration projects were built in 12 different
new subdivision sections throughout Northern Kentucky during the period of September 2012 through July 2014.
The purpose of these demonstration projects was to evaluate the constructability, ease of quality control, cost,
and—to the extent possible—probable long-term performance characteristics of various material specifications,
construction methods, and construction details. Included among the tested alternatives were many of the final
recommendations of this report which have been suggested for adoption in the Revised Subdivision Regulations for
Kenton County. There were also alternatives tested that were not used in the SECC’s final recommendations.
These demonstration projects greatly enhanced the confidence of the SSEC in their final recommendations.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 206
Appendix C: Engineers Committee Final Report
Among the final SSEC recommendations contained in this report that were tested in these demonstration projects
were critical parts of recommendations number 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 22, 23 and 24.
CONCLUSION
The recommendations for improvement are in the areas of design, construction standards, construction quality
control, and maintenance of pavements, which are interdependent and all necessary to insure good
homeowner/taxpayer pavement value. The SECC also recognizes that proper pavement performance expectation
setting for all involved in the regulation, design, construction, and maintenance of subdivision pavements is a
critical component of obtaining good pavement value. Hopefully, our work here will help improve communication
in this regard.
Our work on problem definition and recommendations is now complete. We now respectfully ask the Commission
to accept our work product and have your staff help us incorporate this work product into the current Kenton
County draft subdivision regulations which will be considered for adoption by the KCPC at public hearing.
Thank you for your consideration.
The undersigned members of the Kenton County Street Standards Engineers Committee,
Mark Brueggeman, P.E. Joseph Kramer, P.E.
Henry Fischer James Viox, P.E.
Ted Vogelpohl, P.E.
After this report was submitted to the Kenton County Planning Commission in draft form, the Commission
Chairman asked this Committee to work with the KCPC Staff to integrate these recommendations into the KCPC
draft subdivision regulations for consideration of adoption by the Planning Commission. This Committee did so, as
requested.
Kenton County Subdivision Regulations November 6, 2015
Page 207
EXHIBIT A
PARAMETER SELECTION AND EXAMPLE
CALCULATIONS FOR SUBDIVISION PAVEMENTS
Parameter selection and example calculation references include:
• American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO)
Guide For Design of Pavement Structures, 1986 and 1993.
• Pavement Analysis and Design, Yang H. Huang, University of Kentucky, Prentice
Hall, 1993.
• The Asphalt Institute Manual Series No. 1 (MS-1), September 1981.
• Kentucky Transportation Cabinet, Pavement Design Guide (2007 Revision),
Division of Highway Design, Pavement Branch, February 2007.
• Pavement Design Manual, Ohio Department of Transportation, Office of
Pavement Engineering, July 2008.
• American Concrete Pavement Association.
• Pavement Design & Analysis, Life Cycle Cost Analysis, created by Thomas P.
Harman, M.S.C.E., in conjunction with Randall C. Riley, P.E., William Feltz, P.E.,
American Concrete Pavement Association, and The Ohio Ready Mixed Concrete
Association, 1988.
• Asphalt Institute, SW-1 Asphalt Pavement Thickness Design Software, User’s
Guide, 2005.
PARAMETER SELECTION
The subdivision pavement design parameters used in this document are presented in
Table 4.4-1, which is also included here for reference.
This space intentionally left blank.
2
TABLE 4.4-1 - SUBDIVISION PAVEMENT DESIGN PARAMETERS USING AASHTO
METHOD
DESIGN VALUES
PARAMETER CONCRETE ASPHALT
Design Life 20 years 20 years
Life Cycle Analysis 50 years 50 years
Drainage Coefficient 1.0 --
Reliability 80% 80%
Deviation 0.35 0.45
Initial Serviceability 4.2 4.5
Terminal Serviceability 2.5 2.5
Modulus of Rupture 600 psi --
Modulus of Elasticity 3,600,000 psi --
CBR, Minimum 2 (K=50 pci) 3 (MR=2700 psi)
Load Transfer 4.4 (no dowels) --
Load Transfer 3.2 (dowels) --
20 Year ESAL, Residential Local Street, ≤ 199 lots served 81,000 81,000
20 Year ESAL, Residential Subcollector Street, 200-500 lots
served
203,000 203,000
20 Year ESAL, Residential Collector Street, 501-1000 lots
served
406,000** 406,000**
20 Year ESAL, Commercial/Industrial Street 3,500,000* 3,500,000*
Year 17 to Year 34 and Year 34 to Year 50
ESAL, Residential Local Street, ≤ 199 lots served 53,000 53,000
Year 17 to Year 34 and Year 34 to Year 50
ESAL, Residential Subcollector Street, 200-500 lots served 133,000 133,000
Year 17 to Year 34 and Year 34 to Year 50
ESAL, Residential Collector Street, 501-1000 lots served 265,000** 265,000**
ESAL, Arterial Per KYTC Specification
Asphalt Surface Layer Coefficient 0.44
Asphalt Base Layer Coefficient 0.40
Crushed Stone Base Layer Coefficient 0.14
Crushed Stone Base with Tensar TX5 Geogrid Layer
Coefficient
0.25 for CBR ≥ 3
0.21 for 2≤ CBR < 3
Thickness conversion factor, 17 year old asphalt 0.7
Thickness conversation factor, 34 year old asphalt 0.6
*Engineer shall submit documentation of project-specific design ESAL for each commercial/industrial
Subdivision pavement. If project-specific 20-year ESAL are less than 3,500,000, the required street thicknesses
in Table 4.4-2 shall be used. If project-specific 20-year ESAL loading is greater than 3,500,000, a project-specific
pavement design is required.
**Project specific design required for developments with more than 1,000 lots
This space intentionally left blank.
3
Design Life: The service or performance period before a new
pavement requires rehabilitation, or the time during which
a new pavement deteriorates from its initial serviceability
to its terminal serviceability. Selected as 20 years.
Life Cycle Analysis: The extended pavement service or analysis period
including maintenance, resurfacing and rehabilitation
beyond the Design Life. Selected as 50 years.
Drainage Coefficient: Selected as 1.0 based on poor quality of drainage and
pavement structure being exposed to moisture levels
approaching saturation up to 5 percent of the time.
Reliability: Factor that incorporates some degree of certainty that the
designs will last for the pavement design life and life
cycle. Selected 80 percent.
Deviation: Standard deviation that accounts for reliability of AASHTO
Road Test data for local conditions. Selected 0.35 for
concrete pavement and 0.45 for asphalt pavement.
Initial Serviceability: Serviceability is described as the ability of a pavement to
serve its intended traffic. The AASHTO serviceability
scale is 0 to 5, with 5 being a flawless pavement and 0
being a pavement that is impossible to travel. Initial
serviceability is a function of pavement type and
construction quality. Selected 4.2 for concrete and 4.5 for
asphalt.
Terminal Serviceability: The lowest serviceability that will be tolerated before
rehabilitation. Selected 2.5 for concrete and asphalt
4
pavements.
Modulus of Rupture: Average 28-day third point flexural strength of concrete.
Selected as 600 psi.
Modulus of Elasticity: Selected as 3,600,000 psi for concrete.
CBR: California bearing Ratio of subgrade soils. Selected 2
(minimum) for concrete pavements and 3 (minimum) for
asphalt pavements. Selected a modulus of subgrade
reaction (K) of 50 pci to correlate with CBR = 2 for
concrete pavements. Selected a resilient modulus (MR)
of 2,700 psi to correlate with a CBR = 3 for asphalt
pavements, which accounts for seasonal environmental
and climatic factors, roadbed soil quality and roadbed soil
moisture and freeze-thaw conditions.
Load Transfer: Load transfer factor for transverse joints in concrete
pavement. Selected 4.4 for undoweled joints and
aggregate interlock only, and 3.2 for doweled joints.
Equivalent 18,000-pound
Single Axle Loads
(ESAL):
The estimated average truck traffic for site development
work, average truck traffic for single-family house
construction, and average post-construction residential
traffic are presented in the following Tables 1-3.
This space intentionally left blank.
5
TABLE 1
Average Truck Traffic for Site Development Work for 25-Lot Subdivision Street
Equipment/Material
Delivered
Number of
Non-Steering Tandem
Axles
ESAL Per
Loaded
Truck
Trips Per
Loaded
Truck
ESAL Per
25 Lots
Pans, Off-Road Trucks,
Excavator, Compactor, Dozers 3 17 6 102
Loader, Small Dozer,
Gravel/Sand, Structures,
Manholes, Pipe, Asphalt
2 2.379 89 212
Concrete, Loader, Backhoe,
Paver, Rollers 2 1.695 33 56
TOTAL ESAL PER 25 LOTS = 370
TABLE 2
Average Truck Traffic for One Single-Family House Construction
Equipment/Material
Delivered
Number of
Non-
Steering
Tandem
Axles
Number of
Non-
Steering
Single
Axles
ESAL Per
Loaded
Truck
Trips Per
Loaded
Truck ESAL
Trusses - 2 1.473 - 1.5
Concrete and Gravel 2 - 2.379 16 38.1
Gravel, Brick, Stone/Cultured
Stone, Sand, Shingles 2 - 1.600 8 12.8
Steel (Beams/Columns),
Lumber, Drywall 1 - 1.419 9 12.8
Misc. Construction Deliveries - 1 0.0927 25 2.3
Heavy Construction
Equipment, 953 Loader, etc. 1 1 0.998 8 8.0
Light Construction Equipment,
Backhoe, D3, etc. 1 1 0.129 16 2.1
Dumpsters 1 - 0.714 2 1.4
TOTAL ESAL PER HOUSE CONSTRUCTED = 79
(EST. 80)
TABLE 3
Average Post-Construction Residential Traffic Per 100 Lots
Vehicle ESAL Per Vehicle
Vehicle Trips Per 20 Year
Design Life
ESAL Per 20
Years
Garbage Truck 4.189 4,160 17,426
School Bus 1.699 8,000 13,592
Car 0.0014 73,000 102
TOTAL POST-CONSTRUCTION
ESAL PER 100 LOTS PER 20 YEARS = 31,120
6
The 20-year design ESAL values are:
Residential local street serving ≤199 lots:
( ) ( ) ( )( )
80424ESAL
31,120ESAL 199Houses 80ESAL House
100Lots
1 370ESAL 199Lots
25Lots
ESAL 199 Lots
=
+  


 

+  


 

= −
Residential subcollector street serving 200 to 500 lots:
( ) ( ) ( )( )
202,630 ESAL
31,120ESAL 500Houses 80ESAL House
100Lots
1 370ESAL 500Lots
25Lots
ESAL 500Lots
=
+  


 

+  


 

= −
Residential collector street serving 501 to 1000 lots:
( ) ( ) ( )( )
405,630 ESAL
31,120ESAL 1000Houses 80ESAL House
100Lots
1 370ESAL 1000Lots
25Lots
ESAL 1000Lots
=
+  


 

+  


 

= −
Commercial/Industrial Street
Reviewed several existing Northern Kentucky commercial/industrial subdivisions to
evaluate truck traffic. Selected 3,500,000 ESAL for 20-year design life as base value
for commercial/industrial pavements. Each project to have documentation of projectspecific
ESAL. If project-specific ESAL greater than 3,500,000, then a project-specific
design is required.
Year 17 to Year 34 and
Year 34 to Year 50 ESAL:
For residential streets, 85% (17/20) of average 20-year
post-construction ESAL, without site development work
and house construction traffic. For commercial/industrial,
85% of 20-year ESAL.
Layer Coefficients: Selected asphalt and crushed stone base layer structural
coefficients for relating layer thicknesses to Structural
Number.
7
Thickness Conversion
Factors:
Selected factors for estimating equivalent thicknesses of
aged asphalt.
PAVEMENT THICKNESS CALCULATION
The pavement thicknesses in the following table were calculated for each of the street
classifications using the AASHTO pavement design methods:
TABLE 4
Calculated Pavement Thicknesses for Street Classifications
Street Classification ESAL
Structural
Number Pavement Type
Calculated
Thickness (in.)
Local
(≤199 Lots) 81,000 3.07
Full-Depth Asphalt 1.25/6.5*
Asphalt Over
Stone Base 1.5/3.5/7**
Asphalt Over
Stone Base Over
TX5 Geogrid
1.25/2.5/6***
Concrete 5.75
Subcollector
(200-500 Lots) 203,000 3.54
Full-Depth Asphalt 1.25/7.5*
Asphalt Over
Stone Base 1.5/4.75/7**
Asphalt Over
Stone Base Over
TX5 Geogrid
1.25/3.75/6***
Concrete 6.75
Collector
(501-1000 Lots) 406,000 3.93
Full-Depth Asphalt 1.25/8.5*
Asphalt Over
Stone Base 1.5/5.75/7**
Asphalt Over
Stone Base Over
TX5 Geogrid
1.25/4.0/6***
Concrete 7.5
Commercial/Industrial 3,500,000 5.34
Full-Depth Asphalt N/A
Asphalt Over
Stone Base 1.5/9.25/7**
Asphalt Over
Stone Base Over
TX5 Geogrid
1.5/7.25/7***
Concrete Over
Stone Base 9/4****
* Asphalt Surface Course / Asphalt Base Course
** Asphalt Surface Course / Asphalt Base Course / Crushed Stone Base
*** Asphalt Surface Course / Asphalt Base Course / Crushed Stone Base / TX5 Geogrid
**** Doweled Joint Concrete / Crushed Stone Base
8
50-YEAR LIFE CYCLE CONSIDERATION
Full-depth asphalt subcollector street example:
New: Thickness
(inch)
Structural
Coefficient
Structural
Number
1.25” Surface Course 1.25 0.44 0.55
7.5” Base Course 7.5 0.40 3.00
3.55 > 3.54
Year 17:
From Table 4.4-1, use 133,000 ESAL from Year 17 to Year 34. Required Structural
Number =3.32
Thickness
(inch)
Aged Asphalt
Factor
Structural
Coefficient
Structural
Number
2” Surface Course Overlay 2.0 1.0 0.44 0.88
1.25” Old Surface Course 1.25 0.7 0.44 0.39
7.5” Old Base Course 7.5 0.7 0.40 2.10
3.37 > 3.32
Year 34:
From Table 4.4-1, use 133,000 ESALS from Year 34 to Year 51. Required Structural Number
=3.32
Thickness
(inch)
Aged Asphalt
Factor
Structural
Coefficient
Structural
Number
2” Mill & Surface Course
Overlay 2.0 1.0 0.44 0.88
1.25” Old Surface Course 1.25 0.6 0.44 0.33
7.5” Old Base Course 7.5 0.6 0.40 1.80
3.01 < 3.32
Need more initial pavement structural capacity to achieve the required 50-year life
cycle. Increase the asphalt base course thickness for the initial 20-year design life from
7.5” to 8.75”. Then:
Year 34: Thickness
(inch)
Aged Asphalt
Factor
Structural
Coefficient
Structural
Number
2” Mill & Surface Course
Overlay 2.0 1.0 0.44 0.88
1.25” Old Surface Course 1.25 0.6 0.44 0.33
8.75” Old Base Course 8.75 0.6 0.40 2.10
3.31 ≅ 3.32
9
Concrete Commercial/Industrial Street Example:
Using applicable parameters from Table 4.4-1, the calculated doweled concrete
pavement thickness for 3,500,000 ESAL (20-year Design Life) is 9 inches. For a
50-year Life Cycle, the total ESAL are:
(3,500,000 ESAL) 8,750,000 ESAL
20 Years
ESAL 50 Years 50 = 



= 
Increasing the doweled concrete pavement thickness to 10 inches yields a
calculated ESAL = 8,982,500, which is greater than ESAL50 (8,750,000).
After the asphalt and concrete pavement thickness adjustments for 50-year Life Cycle
considerations are made, the calculated thicknesses in Table 4 become the required
thicknesses in Table 4.4-2.
1Average thickness. Varies from 1 inch less at centerline to 1 inch greater at gutter apron
2 Plain Concrete, tooled skewed transverse Contraction Joints without dowels (see Appendix A Detail #12 and Detail #13)
3 Plain Concrete, with doweled and sawed (non-skewed) transverse Contraction Joints (see Appendix A Detail #11)
4 6-8 inch KYTC crushed stone base for residential pavements to be installed in one lift (pug milled) and properly compacted (one
lift). Any crushed stone base greater in thickness than the above noted 6-8 inches must be installed in two lifts. Asphalt base can
be replaced with a structurally equivalent thickness of crushed stone base as long as the following minimum asphalt thicknesses are
maintained: minimum total Asphalt thickness equals 4.5 inches local, 5.5 inches subcollector, 6.5 inches residential collector, and
7.5 inches commercial/industrial
5 Number of lots served for a particular Street is defined as the number of lots which that Street serves as the sole access or, where
a number of Lots are served by more than one access, it is an approximation of the number of lots served that is equivalent to one
access.
- Example 1: A particular section Street serves as the sole access to less than 200 Lots. That Street would then be a
Local Street.
- Example 2: An area of existing and future residential development of 450 Lots is served by more than one access Street.
Only those Streets that will carry traffic and ESAL loading higher than a Subdivision Street that provides sole access to
more than 200 Lots will be classified as a subcollector Street.
6 Geogrid shall be Tensar TX5 triaxial geogrid.
TABLE 4.4-2 REQUIREDSUBDIVISION STREET THICKNESSES
Street
Classification
With Number of
Lots Served5
Concrete
Concrete
Over 4”
Crushed
Stone Base
Full-Depth Asphalt Asphalt Over Crushed Stone
Base (CSB)
Asphalt Over Crushed Stone
Base (CSB) + Geogrid6
Surface Base1 Surface Base CSB1 Surface Base CSB1
Residential
Local
≤199 Lots
7”2 NA 1.25” 8” 1.5” 5” 7”4 1.5” 3” 7”4
Residential
Subcollector
200 – 500 Lots
8”2 NA 1.25” 8.75” 1.5” 6” 7”4 1.5” 4” 7”4
Residential
Collector
501 – 1,000 Lots
9”2 NA 1.25” 10.5” 1.5” 7.75” 7”4 1.5” 5.75” 7”4
Commercial/
Industrial Not
Permitted 10”3 Not
Permitted
Not
Permitted 1.5” 14” 7” 4 1.5” 12” 7”4
Arterial Per KYTC Specifications
10
ALTERNATE PAVEMENT DESIGNS
The above calculations are based upon a CBR of 2 for concrete pavements and a CBR
of 3 for asphalt pavements, per Table 4.4-1. The following Table 5 presents the
Structural Numbers for Alternate Asphalt Pavement Designs for CBR values ranging
from 2 to 7, for use in Alternate Designs when the documented CBR value is not 3.
Design for CBR values less than 2 is not recommended; rather, the subgrade soils
should be improved to CBR = 2 or greater. The Structural Numbers in Table 5 include
the adjustment for the 50-year Life Cycle consideration.
TABLE 5
Structural Numbers for Alternative Asphalt Pavement Designs
Street Classification STRUCTURAL NUMBER
CBR 2 CBR 3 CBR 4 CBR 5 CBR 6 CBR 7
Local
(≤199 Lots) 4.09 3.75 2.85 2.50 2.24 2.04
Subcollector
(200-500 Lots) 4.92 4.05 3.52 3.14 2.84 2.60
Collector
(501-1000 Lots) 5.60 4.69 4.09 3.65 3.34 3.07
Commercial/
Industrial 8.40 7.24 6.47 5.92 5.47 5.12
The calculated concrete pavement thicknesses for CBR values between 2 and 7 are
presented in Table 6.
TABLE 6
Calculated 20-Year Concrete Thicknesses
Street Classification
CALCULATED CONCRETE THICKNESS (INCH)
20 Year
ESAL CBR 2 CBR 3 CBR 4 CBR 5 CBR 6 CBR 7
Local
(≤199 Lots) 81,000 5.62 5.29 5.16 5.09 4.99 4.95
Subcollector
(200-500 Lots) 203,000 6.68 6.37 6.24 6.17 6.08 6.03
Collector
(501-1000 Lots) 406,000 7.55 7.26 7.15 7.08 7.00 6.96
Commercial/
Industrial 3,500,000 8.98* 8.71* 8.61* 8.55* 8.49* 8.45*
* Doweled Joints
11
The thicknesses in Table 6 illustrate that there is very little variation in calculated
pavement thicknesses with changes in CBR. For all street classifications, there is only
0.53” to 0.67” variation in concrete thickness when the CBR changes from 2 to 7.
Therefore, it is recommended that all alternative concrete pavement designs use the
same required thicknesses as the base or standard designs. The required thicknesses
for each street classification, adjusted for 50-year Life Cycle considerations, are given in
Table 7.
TABLE 7
Required Concrete Pavement Thicknesses
Street Classification
20 Year
ESAL CBR Required Concrete Thickness (inch)
Local
(≤199 Lots) 81,000 2-7 7.01
Subcollector
(200-500 Lots) 203,000 2-7 8.01
Collector
(501-1000 Lots) 406,000 2-7 9.01
Commercial/
Industrial 3,500,000 2-7 10.02
1Plain concrete, tooled skewed transverse Contraction Joints without dowels.
2Plain concrete, on at least 4 of crushed stone base, with doweled and sawed (non-skewed) transverse
Contraction Joints.
EXHIBIT B
50 YEAR LIFE CYCLE MAINTENANCE STRATEGY
ASPHALT PAVEMENT
Minor Maintenance
• Joint and crack seal every three (3) years
• Spot curb repair
• Spot pavement repair
Major Maintenance – at approximately +17 years
• Spot curb repair, as necessary
• Spot base repair
• Mill asphalt 2 inches deep at the concrete curb apron to 0 inches at 6 feet out
from the curb apron
• Install new 2 inch asphalt surface with a 4 percent curb apron to centerline
cross slope
• Seal the asphalt/curb apron interface
Major Maintenance – at approximately +34 years
• Spot curb repair
• Spot base repair
• Pavement fabric over joint between asphalt and curb
• New 2 inch asphalt surface overlay
CONCRETE PAVEMENT
Minor Maintenance
• Joint and crack seal every three (3) years
• Inspect driveway apron expansion material for signs of pavement lengthening;
take remedial action as necessary
• Localized failure repairs
Major Maintenance – at approximately +17 years
• Spot curb repair
• Spot slab repair
Major Maintenance – at approximately +34 years
• Spot curb repair
• Spot slab repair
• Inspect for erosion (tunneling) under pavement, mud jack as necessary
• Mill concrete 2 inches deep at or near the concrete gutter line to 0 inches deep
out from the gutter line
• Install asphalt skim coat and Stress Absorbing Asphalt Membrane Interlayer
(SAMI) over the width of the pavement
• Install 1½ inch deep asphalt surface overlay with a 4 percent gutter line to
centerline cross slope
EXHIBIT C
SUBGRADE QUALITY VERIFICATION
A qualified geotechnical engineer will provide the verification of the site specific subgrade support. The City of
Cincinnati’s list of qualified geotechnical engineers will be used as the base “approved” list for geotechnical
engineers with the ability of KCPC to add to or delete from that list. The following steps will be taken:
a. At the preliminary subdivision plan stage, the geotechnical engineer will use his local soils
knowledge, USGS soils mapping, and a visual field reconnaissance to report on the likelihood of soils
on that specific site meeting the minimum CBR values for subgrade. The report will also include
observations relative to the site’s suitability for building support.
b. At construction drawing submittal, the geotechnical engineer will submit a report on the soil types,
the expected CBR of those soil types that exist on that section of lots being submitted (or possibly
on the subdivision as a whole). This submittal will also include information on other issues of
structural subsurface stability for proposed subdivision public land improvements planned for the
site. These judgments will be based on the results of soil borings, open trench exploration, soil
testing, etc. that are sufficient for the geotechnical engineer to render his engineering opinion.
c. During mass earthwork, subgrade materials will be evaluated as to their meeting required densities
and as to the subgrade materials being used being capable of producing the CBR required to meet
the base subdivision street design when compacted to the required densities. Reports as to these
results will be submitted by the geotechnical engineer to the KCPC prior to the installation of
pavement. If subgrade soils are substandard, remedial subgrade/pavement enhancement will be
designed and submitted to KCPC.
d. Prior to pavement being installed, the subgrade will be tested for density, moisture content, proof
rolled, inspected for uniformity and proper subgrade profile according to approved procedures of
the KCPC by properly qualified and supervised inspectors.
EXHIBIT "D"
EXHIBIT "E"
EXHIBIT "F"
EXHIBIT "G"
EXHIBIT "H"
1
EXHIBIT I
RECOMMENDED SUBDIVISION STREET CLASSIFICATIONS AND THICKNESSES*
*The Design criteria are contained in Exhibit A of this report
1Average thickness. Varies from 1 inch less at centerline to 1 inch greater at gutter apron
2 Plain Concrete, tooled skewed transverse Contraction Joints without dowels (see Exhibit K)
3 Plain Concrete, with doweled and sawed (non-skewed) transverse Contraction Joints
4 6-8 inch KYTC crushed stone base for residential pavements to be installed in one lift (pug milled) and properly compacted (one
lift). Any crushed stone base greater in thickness than the above noted 6-8 inches must be installed in two lifts. Asphalt base can
be replaced with a structurally equivalent thickness of crushed stone base as long as the following minimum asphalt thicknesses
are maintained: minimum total Asphalt thickness equals 4.5 inches local, 5.5 inches subcollector, 6.5 inches residential collector,
and 7.5 inches commercial/industrial
5 Number of lots served for a particular Street is defined as the number of lots which that Street serves as the sole access or, where
a number of Lots are served by more than one access, it is an approximation of the number of lots served that is equivalent to one
access.
- Example 1: A particular section Street serves as the sole access to less than 200 Lots. That Street would then be a
Local Street.
- Example 2: An area of existing and future residential development of 450 Lots is served by more than one access Street.
Only those Streets that will carry traffic and ESAL loading higher than a Subdivision Street that provides sole access to
more than 200 Lots will be classified as a subcollector Street.
6 Geogrid shall be Tensar TX5 triaxial geogrid.
7 Parking one side
8 No on-street parking
9 All residential collector streets serving above 1,000 lots and industrial or commercial streets are to include heavy vehicle (ESAL)
traffic analysis.
Street
Classification
With Number of
Lots Served5
Concrete
Concrete
Over 4”
Crushed
Stone Base
Full-Depth Asphalt Asphalt Over Crushed Stone
Base (CSB)
Asphalt Over Crushed Stone
Base (CSB) + Geogrid6 Street
Surface Base1 Surface Base CSB1 Surface Base CSB1 Width
Residential
Local
≤199 Lots
7”2 NA 1.25” 8” 1.5” 5” 7”4 1.5” 3” 7”4 25’7
Residential
Subcollector
200 – 500 Lots
8”2 NA 1.25” 8.75” 1.5” 6” 7”4 1.5” 4” 7”4 28’7
Residential
Collector
501 – 1,000 Lots
9”2 NA 1.25” 10.5” 1.5” 7.75” 7”4 1.5” 5.75” 7”4 30’7 28’8
Commercial/
Industrial9 Not
Permitted 10”3 Not
Permitted
Not
Permitted 1.5” 14” 7” 4 1.5” 12” 7”4 28’8
Arterial Per KYTC Specifications
EXHIBIT J
RECOMMENDED AGGREGATE TYPE AND WEIGHT
FOR SUBDIVISION CONCRETE MIXES
Concrete Use #57 Crushed
Limestone
#57
Gravel
#4 Crushed
Limestone
#8
Gravel
Concrete
Sand
Street pavement 1,100# 400# 300# 1,310#
Curb & gutter asphalt pavement 1,500# 300# 1,320#
Driveway aprons and public sidewalks
1,500# 300# 1,320#
OR
1,413# 350# 1,280#
There are numerous issues to consider in the selection of aggregate type and distribution in concrete
mixes. In un-reinforced concrete pavement with non-doweled contraction joints (all Kenton County Sub
Reg pavements except commercial/industrial), having a relatively high percentage of large, angular
aggregate supports good long-term contraction joint performance. The comparative measure of
aggregate size distribution used for concrete is the percentage retained on various size sieves.
The following table compares aggregate distribution for typical pavement mixes used in Northern
Kentucky in the 1980’s and earlier, the mid 1990’s through today, and the SSEC recommended
pavement aggregate mix.
AGGREGATE COMPARISON, CUMULATIVE PERCENT RETAINED
ON VARIOUS SIZE SIEVES
Sieve Size 1980’s Mix Mid-1990’s to Current SSEC Recommended
Pavement Mix
1” 0% 0% 8%
¾” 5% 6% 15%
½” 28% 21% 32%
⅜” 46% 31% 40%
Passing ⅜” 54% 69% 60%
R=100'
32.5'
R=25'
52.5'
52.5'
R=25'
R=25' R=25'
15'
15' 11' 2'
11'
R=25'
R=25'
2'
14' O.C.
15' O.C. Max.
11'
15'
11'
15'
8'+_
2'
8'+_
GENERAL RULES OF TOOLED CONTRACTION
JOINT LAYOUT
1.) Skew joints 2' in each 12.5' lane; 2'-4" skew in each 14' lane.
2.) Always have the driver's side front wheel of the vehicle hit the skewed
joint first.
3.) Maximum joint spacing = 15'; adjust joint spacing as necessary to
keep spacing above a 8' minimum.
4.) On horizontal curves, layout joint spacing along centerline at 14' O.C.;
visually determine a radial line from the centerline back to the curb;
measure back (forward) from that point 2' to set the skew, remembering
the driver's side front wheel of the vehicle hits the skewed joint first. Tool
the joint at the skewed line.
5.) At intersections, catch basins and cul-de-sacs, follow joint layout
shown.
TYPICAL SKEWED JOINT
AND C BENT BAR LAYOUT
SCALE: N.T.S
JOINT LAYOUT FOR PAIRED CATCH BASINS
CONCRETE PAVEMENT JOINT PLAN
NOTE:
ALL CONSTRUCTION JOINTS
ARE DOWELED JOINTS.
L
EXHIBIT K
RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAY APRON
SLOPED CURB
EXHIBIT L
PAVEMENT LUG DETAIL EXHIBIT M
EXAMPLE PAVEMENT LUG LOCATION EXHIBIT N
EXAMPLE PAVEMENT LUG LOCATION EXHIBIT O
EXHIBIT "P"
 
 
 
 
 
 




 


