CITY OF LEBANON, KENTUCKY
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2019 S-18 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 2018-06, passed 6-11-18; and
State legislation current through 2018 Acts
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING CORPORATION
One West Fourth Street, 3rd Floor Cincinnati, Ohio 45202 (800) 445-5588
LEBANON, KENTUCKY
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
10. Rules of Construction; General Penalty
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
30. Mayor-Council Plan
31. City Officials
32. City Council
33. Finance and Revenue
34. Public Records
35. Taxation
36. Commissions
37. Police and Fire Departments
38. Code of Ethics
39. Personnel
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
50. Sewers
51. Water
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
70. General Provisions
71. Traffic Rules
72. Parking Regulations
73. Bicycles and Motorcycles
74. Traffic Schedules
75. Parking Schedules
1
2 Lebanon - Table of Contents
Chapter
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
90. Animals and Livestock
91. Streets and Sidewalks
92. Nuisances
93. Fireworks; Fire Prevention
94. Littering
95. Parks and Recreation
96. Trees
97. Junked Appliances and Motor Vehicles
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
110. Occupational License Tax
111. Peddlers, Itinerant Merchants, and Solicitors
112. Pawnbrokers
113. Insurance Companies
114. Flea Markets and Yard Sales
115. Precious Metals
116. Alcoholic Beverages
Appendix A: Outdoor Dining Permit Agreement
Appendix B: Outdoor Dining Permit Agreement, Alcoholic Beverage Sales
117. Amusements
118. Adult Entertainment
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
130. Offenses Against Municipal Regulations
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
150. Building Regulations
151. Flood Damage Prevention
152. Unfit Dwellings
153. Subdivision Regulations
154. Zoning Regulations
Appendix A: Permitted Uses
155. Property Maintenance Code Enforcement
2010 S-10
Table of Contents 3
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
I. Annexations
II. Bond Issues
III. Franchises
IV. Intergovernmental Agreements
V. Zoning Map Changes
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Kentucky Revised Statutes
References to Ordinances
INDEX
2006 S-7
4 Lebanon - Table of Contents
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
Chapter
130. OFFENSES AGAINST MUNICIPAL REGULATIONS
1
2 Lebanon - General Offenses
CHAPTER 130: OFFENSES AGAINST MUNICIPAL REGULATIONS
Section
130.01 Curfew for minors; parental responsibility
130.02 Regulation of Halloween activities
130.03 Wearing hoods or masks
130.04 Use of firearms, slingshots
130.05 Throwing missiles
130.06 Sound amplifying equipment
130.07 Police radios in vehicles
130.08 Making bonfire in public street
130.09 False fire alarms
130.10 Unlawful fires
130.11 Alarms
130.12 Panhandling
130.99 Penalty
' 130.01 CURFEW FOR MINORS; PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ALLOW. Either permit or neglect to refrain or prevent. It requires actual or constructive knowledge on
the part of the parent or guardian, that is the parent or guardian must actually know about the minor
violating this section, or the circumstances must be such that a reasonably prudent parent or guardian
should have known the minor was violating this section.
MINOR. Any person under the age of 18 years.
PARENT. Any person having legal custody of a minor as a natural or adoptive parent, as a legal
guardian, as a person who stands Ain loco parentis@ or as a person to whom legal custody has been granted
by order of a court.
REMAIN. To stay behind, to tarry, or to stay unnecessarily upon or in any public assembly, building,
place, street or highway.
3
2015 S-15
4 Lebanon - General Offenses
(B) Curfew times. It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian having legal custody of a minor
knowingly to permit or by inefficient control to allow such minor to be on or remain in or upon any public
assembly, building, place, street or highway within the city during the curfew, which shall be in effect
during the following periods:
(1) For minors age 16 and 17.
12:01 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. on Saturday
12:01 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. on Sunday
10:00 p.m. on Sunday to 6:00 a.m. on Monday
10:00 p.m. on Monday to 6:00 a.m. on Tuesday
10:00 p.m. on Tuesday to 6:00 a.m. on Wednesday
10:00 p.m. on Wednesday to 6:00 a.m. on Thursday
10:00 p.m. on Thursday to 6:00 a.m. on Friday
(2) For minors under the age of 16. 10:00 p.m. each evening to 6:00 a.m. the following morning,
each day of the week.
(C) Exceptions. In the following exceptional cases, a minor in or upon any public assembly, building,
place, street or highway in the city during the hours set out in division (B) above shall not be considered in
violation of the curfew established by this section.
(1) When the minor is accompanied by his/her parent or guardian;
(2) When the minor is accompanied by an adult authorized in advance by the minor's parent or
guardian;
(3) When the minor is exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly, provided
that written notice signed by the minor and countersigned by the minor's parent or guardian is in the
possession of the minor and that such written notice specifies when, where and in what manner the minor
will be exercising his/her First Amendment rights;
(4) In case of reasonable necessity, but only after the minor's parent or guardian has
communicated to the investigating police officer the facts establishing such reasonable necessity;
(5) When the minor is on the sidewalk of the place where the minor resides, or on the sidewalk of
either next door neighbor and such next door neighbor has not communicated an objection to the minor's
presence to a police officer or to the Police Department.
(6) When the minor is returning to his/her home by a direct route from and within one hour of the
termination of a school activity, or any activity of a religious or other voluntary association, provided that
satisfactory justification indicating the place and time of termination of said event is given to the
investigating police officer;
Offenses Against Municipal Regulations 5
(7) When authorized by regulation issued by or through the Mayor or the Mayor's designee in
cases of reasonable necessity involving more minors than may reasonably be dealt with on an individual
basis. Such regulation shall be issued sufficiently in advance to permit publicity through the news media
and through other agencies such as the schools and the Police Department. The regulation shall define the
activity, the scope of the use of the public assembly, building, place, street or highway permitted, and the
period of time involved, not to extend more than one hour beyond the time for termination of the activity,
and the reason for finding that such regulation is reasonably necessary.
(8) When engaged in a business or occupation which the laws of Kentucky authorize a person
under 18 years of age to perform;
(9) When the minor is, with parental consent, in a motor vehicle with a lawfully authorized
driver;
(10) When the minor, who is a duly authorized and licensed driver, is operating a motor vehicle
within the city for the purpose of passing through, by direct route, from one location to another either
within or out of the city, and this exception shall include all minors who may also be within the vehicle.
(D) Questioning by police. A police officer, upon finding or being notified of a minor, or an
individual reasonably believed to be a minor, in or upon any public assembly, building, place, street or
highway during the curfew hours and not being subject to one or more of the exceptions set out in division
(C) hereof, and whose parent or guardian is reasonably believed to be in violation of this section, may stop
and question such minor and request such information as the minor's name, age, and the name and address
of the minor's parent or guardian, having legal custody of or standing in loco parentis for the minor.
(Ord. 94-13, passed 8-9-94) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.02 REGULATION OF HALLOWEEN ACTIVITIES.
(A) Public Atrick-or-treat@ and Halloween activities shall take place only on that date annually
determined by the City Council for such Halloween activities. All such Atrick-or-treat@ activities not
conducted within a private residence or within a public building shall begin no earlier than 5:00 p.m.,
prevailing time, and shall conclude no later than 7:00 p.m., prevailing time, on that same date.
(B) With the exception of activities carried out entirely within a private residence or within a public
building, no person 13 years of age or older shall, at any time on the date designated by the City Council for
the celebration of Halloween, wear any hood, mask or device whereby a substantial portion of the wearer's
face is hidden or covered so as to conceal the identity of the wearer.
(Ord. 91-16, passed 1-13-92) Penalty, see ' 130.99
6 Lebanon - General Offenses
' 130.03 WEARING HOODS OR MASKS.
(A) Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
PUBLIC PLACE. All walks, alleys, streets, boulevards, avenues, lanes, roads, highways, or other
ways or thoroughfares dedicated to public use or owned or maintained by public authority, all grounds and
buildings owned, leased or operated for the use of organizations enjoying all tax-exempt privileges as a
charitable use.
(B) Wearing hoods or masks in a public place. No person or persons shall, while wearing any hood,
mask, or device whereby a substantial portion of the face is hidden or covered so as to conceal the identity
of the wearer, enter, be, or appear in any public place within the city.
(C) Wearing hoods or masks on the property of another. No person shall, while wearing any hood,
mask, or device whereby a substantial portion of the face is hidden or covered so as to conceal the identity
of the wearer, demand entrance or admission, enter or come upon or into, or be upon or in the premises,
enclosure or house of any other person in the city, unless he shall have first obtained the permission of the
owner and the occupant of such property.
(D) Exemptions. The following are exempted from the provisions of divisions (B) and (C) of this
section:
(1) Any person under 16 years of age;
(2) Any person wearing traditional holiday costumes in season;
(3) Any person using masks in theatrical productions including use in mardi gras celebrations and
masquerade balls;
(4) Any person lawfully engaged in trades or employment or in a sporting activity where a mask
or facial covering is worn for the purpose of ensuring the physical safety of the wearer, or because of the
nature of the occupation, trade or professional or sporting activity;
(5) Any person wearing a gas mask in drills, exercises or emergencies.
(Ord. 80-13, passed 12-8-80)
' 130.04 USE OF FIREARMS, SLINGSHOTS.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person, adult or infant, to fire within the limits of the city any firearm
of any kind or character for any purpose whatsoever except in the enforcement of law, provided that the use
of firearms in the destruction of rodents, pigeons, squirrels or similar animals or birds or reptiles that are
considered to be a menace to public health or property may be permitted by special
2002 S-4
Offenses Against Municipal Regulations 7
permission of the Mayor and prior notice to the City Council. It shall be further unlawful for any person to
use any slingshot or other instrument for the purpose of throwing stones, shot or other hurtful missiles
within the city limits.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or furnish any minor or infant with any sling or slingshot
or other instrument for the purpose of throwing stones, shot, or other hurtful missiles within the city limits,
or to furnish any minor or infant with stone, shot, or other hurtful missiles for said sling, slingshot, or other
instrument.
(C) Any sling, slingshot, or other instrument for the purpose of throwing stones, shot, or other hurtful
missiles, which may be involved or used in violating any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to
confiscation, in addition to the fine provided for in ' 130.99.
(D) Nothing herein shall be interpreted to regulate the ownership, possession, manufacture, sale,
purchase, taxation, transfer, carrying, storage, or transportation of firearms, ammunition, components of
firearms, components of ammunition, firearms accessories, or combination thereof.
(Ord. 1020.4, passed 6-20-69; Am. Ord. 20-01, passed 3-13-00; Am. Ord. 2013-08, passed 12-9-13)
Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.05 THROWING MISSILES.
It shall be unlawful within the city to commit or aid or abet in the commission of throwing any stone,
snowball or other missile upon or at any vehicle, building, tree or other public or private property or upon
or at any person in any public or private way or place or enclosed or unenclosed ground.
(Ord. 1020.5, passed 4-19-76) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.06 SOUND AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT.
(A) It shall be unlawful within the city to commit or aid or abet in the commission of any of the
following:
(1) To operate or cause to be operated any aircraft for any purpose in or over the city with sound
amplifying equipment in operation.
(2) To operate any vehicle containing sound amplifying equipment causing a sound louder than
normally operative automobile radio equipment without first obtaining a permit from the chief of Police
and a license from the City Clerk and paying a license fee of $25 for each day or portion of each day that
the sound equipment shall be in operation, provided, however, that no such sound equipment shall be
operated between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. (Ord. 1020.5, passed 4-19-76)
(B) No person or person shall use, either from a stationary or fixed position, in any building or
elsewhere or in or on any vehicle, an amplifier or Aloud speaker@ for the amplification of sounds to be
heard upon the public streets or sidewalks in the city without having first obtained the approval of the City
Council for the use thereof. (Ord. 1020.2, passed 3-9-51)
2014 S-14
8 Lebanon - General Offenses
' 130.07 POLICE RADIOS IN VEHICLES.
It shall be unlawful within the city to commit or aid or abet in the commission of any of the following:
(A) To equip or operate any motor vehicle with a high frequency police radio receiving set, unless
such motor vehicle is being used by the federal, state or city government, a police officer, or unless a permit
for the use of same shall be granted by the Chief of Police upon written application stating the name of the
applicant, the license number, engine number, model and make of the motor vehicle in which it will be
installed, the name and address of the applicant and the reason why the applicant desires to install such set;
provided, however, that the Police Chief shall not issue a permit unless he finds that the application shows
a need for the issuance of same, that the set will be used for a lawful purpose and that the public interest
will be served by the granting of the application and unless the applicant shall pay a fee of $25 per year so
long as said set shall be installed within the vehicle.
(B) To transfer the permit referred to above.
(Ord. 1020.5, passed 4-19-76) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.08 MAKING BONFIRE IN PUBLIC STREET.
It shall be unlawful within the city to commit or aid or abet in the commission of making any bonfire in
or upon any public street or place without the permission of the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 1020.5, passed 4-19-76) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.09 FALSE FIRE ALARM.
It shall be unlawful within the city to commit or aid or abet in the commission of intentionally making,
turning in or giving a false alarm of fire, or of need for police or ambulance assistance.
(Ord. 1020.5, passed 4-19-76) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 130.10 UNLAWFUL FIRES.
(A) It shall be unlawful to kindle or maintain any outdoor fire or authorize any outdoor fire to be
kindled or maintained on any property except in accordance with this section.
(B) No outdoor fire shall be kindled or maintained or authorized to be kindled or maintained on any
property unless such fire is begun and contained behind the set-back lines established for that property
under the Zoning Ordinance, without regard to any variances or nonconforming uses.
2004 S-5
Offenses Against Municipal Regulations 9
(C) With prior, specific approval given by the Chief of the Fire Department, or his or her designee,
Aopen burning@ shall be permitted for the purposes hereinafter set forth in this section. Appropriate
advance notice shall be provided to the Chief prior to any proposed open burning, and the Chief shall
authorize such open burning only upon his finding that the public health, safety and property will not be
endangered, that excessive, unusual or noxious smoke will not be created, and that no extraneous materials,
such as tires or heavy oil, that tend to produce dense smoke will be used to cause ignition or aid
combustion. The Chief may at any time require an open burning in progress to be extinguished. For
purposes of this section, the term Aopen burning@ shall mean the burning of any matter without an
approved burn chamber and a stack or chimney with approved control devices. Purposes for which open
burning is allowed under the terms of this section are as follows:
(1) Fires set for the disposal of trees and tree limbs felled by storms, provided such trees and tree
limbs originated from that particular property. The burning of leaves is not allowed;
(2) Fires set for the cooking of food for human consumption;
(3) Fires set for recreational or ceremonial purposes;
(4) Fires set by construction and other workers for comfort heating purposes;
(5) Fires set for the purpose of weed abatement, disease and pest prevention;
(6) Fires set for the prevention of a fire hazard, including the disposal of dangerous materials if
no safe alternative is available;
(7) Fires set for the purpose of bona fide instruction and training of public and industrial
employees in the methods of fighting fires;
(8) Fires set for recognized agricultural, silvicultural, range and wildlife management practices;
(9) Fires set for the purpose of disposing of accidental spills or leaks of crude oil, petroleum
products or other organic materials, and the disposal of absorbent material used in their removal, if no other
economically feasible means of disposal is available and practical. Permission shall be obtained from the
Commonwealth of Kentucky Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Cabinet prior to such
burning; and
(10) Heating ropes that are set on fire to repair steel rails during cold weather.
(D) That the kindling and maintaining of an outdoor fire with an approved burn chamber and a stack or
chimney with approved control devices is authorized without advance notice to or approval by the Chief of
the Fire Department for the purpose of disposing any item that is not eligible for deposit at the Marion
County landfill under applicable laws and regulations.
2004 S-5
10 Lebanon - General Offenses
(E) That notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, no outdoor fire shall be kindled or
maintained or authorized to be kindled or maintained on any property if such fire would violate any federal
law or regulation or any law or regulation of the Commonwealth of Kentucky or any order of the State Fire
Marshal.
(F) That the provisions hereof shall not be applicable to burning by any federal, state, county or city
government or agency.
(Ord. 02-04, passed 12-9-02)
' 130.11 ALARMS.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ALARM SITE. Area controlled by a single alarm system, including those alarms which are
designed to elicit a response from the Lebanon Police Department and/or the Lebanon Fire Department.
ALARM SYSTEM. Any alarm device which automatically causes a contact with the Lebanon
Police Department for the purpose of reporting an active alarm.
(B) Alarm registration.
(1) No person shall install an alarm system or use or possess an operative alarm system without
first notifying the Lebanon Police Department. The Department shall require detailed information regarding
the alarm system.
(2) Any alarm company servicing equipment in the city limits shall:
(a) Obtain a business license at the office of the City Clerk.
(b) Submit a list of alarm customers within the city limits to the Lebanon Police Department.
(c) Keep a log of requests for service for each alarm system. These logs shall be available for
review by the Lebanon Police Department and/or the Lebanon Fire Department and shall be kept for a
period no less than 120 days from the date that service was requested by the alarm user.
(C) False alarms permitted, fees charged.
(1) Each alarm user shall be permitted six false alarms per alarm site per calendar year per
department (i.e., six false fire alarms and six false police-response (i.e. burglary) alarms each year). After
the sixth false alarm, the Lebanon Police Department will notify the alarm user that further alarms will be
billed a per run fee to defray the cost of the excessive number of runs/responses to the city. The
2006 S-7
Offenses Against Municipal Regulations 11
alarm user shall inform the Lebanon Police Department of action taken to prevent further false alarms. For
each additional false alarm responded to by the Lebanon Police and/or Lebanon Fire Department during the
year, the alarm user shall be billed a Response Run Fee according to the following schedule, to-wit:
Lebanon Police Department false alarm responses per calendar year
0-6 false alarms $0.00
7-12 false alarms $50.00 each response run
13 or more false alarms $100.00 each response run
Lebanon Fire Department false alarm responses per calendar year
0-6 false alarms $0.00
7-12 false alarms $250.00 each response run
13 or more false alarms $500.00 each response run
If fees could be assessed by both the Lebanon Police Department and the Lebanon Fire Department
responding simultaneously to an excessive false alarm, the alarm user will only be billed for one response
run, whichever of the two is greatest in expense to the city.
(2) Service call, penalty. After an alarm user experiences two false alarms per alarm site per
calendar year, the alarm user shall notify his/her/its alarm service provider of the recurring malfunction and
shall produce proof to the Lebanon Police Department of the service call conducted by the alarm service
provider within ten days of the false alarm. Any alarm user who violates this section by failing to present
such proof within the stated time period shall be penalized by acceleration of the fee schedule set forth
above such that every false alarm following the second false alarm shall result in a response run fee of $50
per Lebanon Police Department response run and $250 per Lebanon Fire Department response run until the
seventh false alarm response run at which time the fee schedule above shall apply.
(3) Exceptions. No alarm user shall be subject to a per run fee for false alarms that result from
acts of God, civil disturbance or abnormal weather conditions. Nor shall a fee be charged if the activation
was a result of an alarm company's failure to provide service within 24 hours of reporting a malfunction
and requesting service. It shall, however, be the burden of the alarm user to provide reasonable proof that
service was requested.
(D) Duties of alarm protective service providers.
(1) Any and all persons, firms, corporations or other business entities providing alarm protective
services to alarm sites within the city limits of Lebanon shall within 30 days following enactment of this
section notify and inform alarm systems users for whom the alarm protective service provider installed an
alarm system or otherwise provides services, that the alarm system user must obtain an alarm permit from
the city on or before the operational date of this section. The operational date of this section shall be
September 1, 2006.
2006 S-7
12 Lebanon - General Offenses
(2) Any and all persons, firms, corporations or other business entities providing alarm protective
services shall, before installing, servicing, repairing, maintaining or replacing an alarm system at an alarm
site within the city limits of Lebanon, notify and inform the alarm system user for whom such services are
to be performed that said alarm system user must obtain an alarm permit from the city and produce same to
the alarm protective service provider prior to the performance of said service.
(3) No person shall install, service, repair, maintain or replace an alarm system at an alarm site
without the alarm system user having first obtained a valid alarm permit in accordance with the provisions
of this section.
(E) Registration of alarm protective service personnel.
(1) Any and all persons who own, have or acquire an interest in any business entity which
provides alarm protective services or who are employed by such business entity shall, prior to acquiring
said interest or commencing business or such employment, register with the city by completing application
for and obtaining a business license authorizing the conduct of business within the city limits of Lebanon.
(F) Alarm permit application.
(1) No person shall operate, cause to be operated or permit the operation of an alarm system at an
alarm site unless a valid alarm permit has been issued by the city, with exception of an alarm protective
service provider unless the alarm protective system provider is the owner, agent or person in control of the
property which the alarm system is designed to protect.
(2) An alarm system user shall obtain an alarm permit for each alarm site. There is no fee paid by
the alarm system user-applicant for the alarm permit or the application.
(3) Application for an alarm shall be obtained from and submitted for approval to the Lebanon
Police Department. Said application shall require the following information:
(a) The name, address and telephone number of the alarm system user;
(b) The street address of the alarm site and the name and telephone number of the occupant
thereof;
(c) The name, address and telephone number of the alarm protective service provider or
providers who will install and/or service the alarm system; and
(d) The name, address and telephone number of at least three persons on behalf of the alarm
system at any time upon notification from the city should same become necessary, a minimum of two of the
named three persons must be Marion County residents.
(4) The permit holder shall immediately notify in writing the Lebanon Police Department,
Dispatch, of any and all changes in the information provided on said application.
2006 S-7
Offenses Against Municipal Regulations 13
(5) An alarm permit shall not be transferable.
(Ord. 06-04, passed 7-12-06)
' 130.12 PANHANDLING.
(A) No person shall engage in panhandling, or aggressive panhandling, in any of the following
circumstances:
(1) In a menacing manner in any public place as prescribed by KRS 508.050. No person shall
engage in aggressive panhandling, as defined under this section, at any time in any public place.
(2) On private or residential property after having been asked to refrain from panhandling or
aggressive panhandling by the owner or other person lawfully in possession of such property.
(3) Within 20 feet of an automated teller machine. Provided, however, that when an automated
teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from
the entrance or exit of the facility.
(4) When a person is an operator or occupant of a motor vehicle on a public street in exchange for
blocking, occupying, or reserving a public parking space, or directing the operator or occupant to a public
parking space.
(5) When a person is an operator or occupant of a motor vehicle on a public street unless pursuant
to a permit issued by the city for fundraising efforts, regardless if said vehicle is in motion, parked or
stopped.
(6) In any public transportation vehicle or facility, or within 20 feet of any public parking lot or
structure.
(7) Within 20 feet of any outdoor dining area or outdoor merchandise area, if such areas are in
active use at the time.
(8) Within 20 feet of any school building or school playground when school is in session or
school related activities are taking place on the premises.
(9) Within 20 feet of an entrance to any public restroom.
(10) Within a crosswalk, street, road, or highway, unless doing so in accordance with a permit
issued by the city for fundraising efforts.
(11) In a manner that impedes or blocks the flow of pedestrian traffic on a sidewalk or public
right-of-way.
2015 S-15
14 Lebanon - General Offenses
(12) Within 20 feet of entry or exits of a public entertainment venue.
(13) Within six feet from the edge of a street, roadway or intersection of the same where traffic is
impacted.
(B) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION or AGGRESSIVE PANHANDLING for purposes of this
subsection are interchangeable and shall mean requesting an immediate donation of money or other thing of
value from another person regardless of the solicitor's purpose or intended use of the money or other thing
of value, in one of the following manners: in a way that creates a reasonable fear of imminent bodily harm,
using obscene/profane/abusive language, intimidating a person, threatening a criminal act, approaching a
person before sunrise or after sundown, following a person who has refused to donate, asking again of a
person who has refused to donate, blocking or impeding a pedestrian path or entrance, approaching a person
in a group of two or more persons, within six feet from the edge of a roadway, or approaching a person for
donations while under the influence of alcohol or drugs. Such definition does not include standing
passively, sitting or performance art or a sign or other silent indicia that a donation is being sought.
PANHANDLING. For purposes of this section, shall mean requesting an immediate donation of
money, or other thing of value from another person regardless of the solicitor's purpose of intended use of
the money or other thing of value sought in any manner.
(Ord. 2014-09, passed 9-8-14)
' 130.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any parent or guardian violating the provisions of ' 130.01 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50 and not more than $500 and/or to imprisonment for a period of
not to exceed six months. (Ord. 94-13, passed 8-9-94)
(B) Any person who violates any provision of ' 130.02 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be
fined no more than $100 and/or imprisoned no longer than 30 days. (Ord. 91-16, passed 1-13-92)
(C) Any person who violates any provision of ' 130.03 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be
fined no more than $100 and/or imprisoned for no longer than 50 days. (Ord. 80-13, passed 12-8-80)
(D) Any person violating the provisions of ' 130.04 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
fined not less than $10 nor more than $500 for each offense. (Ord. 1020.4, passed 6-20-69)
2015 S-15
Offenses Against Municipal Regulations 15
(E) Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of '' 130.05 through 130.09(A)
shall be guilty of a violation and shall be fined no less than $25 and nor more than $100 for each violation
and each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 1020.5, passed 4-19-76)
(F) Any person or persons violating the provisions of ' 130.09(B) shall be guilty of a violation and
shall be fined not less than $5 nor more than $25 for each offense. (Ord. 1020.2, passed 3-9-51)
(G) Any person violating the terms of ' 130.10 shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500
for each offense and each day in which a violation of ' 130.10 shall occur shall be deemed to constitute a
separate offense. Provided, however, the Chief shall have the discretion to issue a written or verbal warning
in lieu of a citation for violations of this ' 130.10. (Ord. 02-04, passed 12-9-02; Am. Ord. 03-04, passed
6-9-03)
(H) Any alarm system user violating ' 130.11 by failure to obtain permit shall be given one warning
by the Lebanon Police Department after one alarm response run to an alarm site for which the alarm system
user has failed to obtain an alarm permit; thereafter, each response run to the alarm site by either, or both
of, the Lebanon Police Department or Lebanon Fire Department shall result in a penalty of $50 per run
payable by the alarm system user. Any penalty assessed hereunder shall be in addition to any applicable
response run fee imposed under ' 130.11 (C). (Ord. 06-04, passed 7-12-06)
2015 S-15
16 Lebanon - General Offenses
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
Chapter
30. MAYOR-COUNCIL PLAN
31. CITY OFFICIALS
32. CITY COUNCIL
33. FINANCE AND REVENUE
34. PUBLIC RECORDS
35. TAXATION
36. COMMISSIONS
37. POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS
38. CODE OF ETHICS
39. PERSONNEL
1
2 Lebanon - Administration
CHAPTER 30: MAYOR-COUNCIL PLAN
Section
30.01 Form of government
30.02 Governing officers
§ 30.01 FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
The form of government provided for this city shall be known as the “Mayor-Council Plan.”
(KRS 83A.130 (1))
§ 30.02 GOVERNING OFFICERS.
(A) The city shall be governed by an elected executive who shall be called Mayor and by an
elected legislative body which shall be called the City Council, and by such other officers and
employees as are provided for by statute or city ordinance.
(KRS 83A.130 (2))
(B) The City Council shall be composed of six members.
(KRS 83A.030 (1)) (Ord. 120.1, passed 6-12-78)
3
4 Lebanon - Administration
CHAPTER 31: CITY OFFICIALS
Section
General Provisions
31.01 Oath; bond
31.02 Compensation
31.03 Removal from office
Elected Officials
31.20 Election procedure
31.21 Mayor
31.22 Councilmembers
31.23 Continuity of government
Non-elected City Officials
31.35 Establishment of non-elected city offices
31.36 City Clerk
31.37 Assistant City Attorney
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 OATH; BOND.
(A) Oath. Each officer of the city shall, before entering upon the discharge of duties of his office,
take the following oath: “I do solemnly swear (or affirm, as the case may be) that I will support the
Constitution of this Commonwealth, and the Constitution of the United States, and be faithful and true
to the Commonwealth of Kentucky, so long as I continue a citizen thereof, and that I will faithfully
execute, to the best of my ability, the office of , according to law; and I do further solemnly
swear (or affirm) that, since the adoption of the present Constitution, I being a citizen of this United
States, have not fought a duel with deadly weapons within this State, nor out of it, nor have I sent or
accepted a challenge to fight a duel with deadly weapons, nor have I acted as a second in carrying a
challenge, nor aided or assisted any person thus offending, so help me God,” as established by section
228 of the Kentucky Constitution.
(B) Bond. Official bonds shall, if required, meet the standards of KRS 62.060.
5
2004 S-5
6 Lebanon - Administration
§ 31.02 COMPENSATION.
(A) City Council shall establish the compensation of every elected city officer not later than the
first Monday in May in the year in which the officer is elected. An elected officer's compensation shall
not be changed after his election or during his term of office.
(1) In order to equate the compensation of Mayors and Councilmembers with the purchasing
power of the dollar, the State Finance and Administration Cabinet computes by the second Friday in
February of every year the annual increase or decrease in the consumer price index of the preceding
year by using 1949 as the base year in accordance with section 246 of the Constitution of Kentucky,
which provides that the Mayor in cities of the first class shall be paid at a rate no greater than $12,000
per annum and Mayors in cities other than the first class and Councilmembers shall be paid at a rate no
greater than $7,200 per annum.
(2) The City Council shall set the compensation of these officers in accordance with KRS
83A.070 at a rate no greater than that stipulated by the State Finance and Administration Cabinet.
(3) The salary of the Mayor shall be fixed at the sum of $750 per month. The salaries of the
members of the City Council shall remain at the sum of $100 per month. (Ord. 88-7, passed 7-11-88)
(B) The City Council shall establish the compensation of city employees and non-elected city
officers in accordance with the personnel and pay classification plan ordinance of the city.
(C) All fees and commissions authorized by law shall be paid into the city treasury for the benefit
of the city and shall not be retained by any officer or employee.
Statutory reference:
Compensation, see KRS 83A.070 and 83A.075
§ 31.03 REMOVAL FROM OFFICE.
(A) Elected officers. Any elected officer, in case of misconduct, inability, or willful neglect in the
performance of the duties of his office, may be removed from office by a unanimous vote of the
members of the City Council exclusive of any member to be removed, who shall not vote in the
deliberation of his removal. No elected officer shall be removed without having been given the right to
a full public hearing. The officer, if removed, has the right to appeal to the circuit court of the county
and the appeal shall be on the record. No officer so removed is eligible to fill the office vacated before
the expiration of the term to which originally elected.
2002 S-4
City Officials 7
(B) Non-elected officers. Non-elected city officers may be removed by the Mayor at will, unless
otherwise provided by state law or ordinance. Upon removal of a non-elected officer at will, the
Mayor shall give the officer a written statement setting forth the reason or reasons for the removal.
However, this requirement shall not be construed as limiting in any way the at-will dismissal power of
the Mayor.
Statutory reference:
Removal of elected officers, see KRS 83A.040(9)
Removal of non-elected officers, see KRS 83A.080(2)
ELECTED OFFICIALS
§ 31.20 ELECTION PROCEDURE.
(A) Election of city officers shall be conducted by nonpartisan elections, as provided for in KRS
83A.050 and KRS 83A.170 and other applicable statutes. (Ord. 87-2, passed 2-9-87)
(1) The nonpartisan primary election for the nomination of candidates to elected city offices
is hereby eliminated as authorized by KRS 83A.045(2)(b).
(2) All candidates for elected city offices shall file their nomination papers with the Marion
County Clerk no later than the second Tuesday in August.
(3) All nomination papers shall be filed no later than 4:00 prevailing local time when filed on
the last day on which such papers are permitted to be filed.
(4) The election of candidates to all elected city offices shall be governed by the provisions
of this division (A) and by the applicable provisions of KRS Chapter 83A and Chapters 116 to 121.
(Ord. 89-1, passed 1-30-89)
(B) The city may change the manner of election of city officers within the provisions of division
(A) of this section by ordinance, except that no change shall be made earlier than five years from the
last change.
(C) The city shall pay the costs of city elections only if city elections are held at a time other than
prescribed by law for elections generally.
(D) Each appointed and elected city office existing on July 15, 1980, shall continue until abolished
by ordinance, except that the offices of Mayor and City Councilmembers may not be abolished.
(E) No abolition of any elected office shall take effect until expiration of the term of the current
holder of the office.
2002 S-4
8 Lebanon - Administration
(F) No ordinance abolishing any elected office shall be enacted later than 240 days preceding the
regular election for that office, except in the event of a vacancy in the office.
(G) The city may not create any elected office. Existing elected offices may be continued under
provision of divisions (D), (E), and (F) above, but no existing elected office may be changed.
Statutory reference:
Election of city officers, see KRS 83A.050
Creation, abolishment of city offices, see KRS 83A.080(3), (4)
§ 31.21 MAYOR.
(A) Election; term of office. The Mayor of this city shall be elected by the voters of the city at a
regular election. A candidate for mayor shall be a resident of the city for not less than one year prior to
his or her election. His term of office begins on the first day of January following his election and
shall be for four years and until his successor qualifies. If a person is elected or appointed as mayor in
response to a vacancy and serves less than four calendar years, then that period of service shall not be
considered for purposes of re-election a term of office.
(B) Qualifications. The Mayor shall be at least 21 years of age, shall be a qualified voter in the
city, and shall reside in the city throughout his term of office.
(C) Vacancy. If a vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor, Council shall fill the vacancy within 30
days. If for any reason, any vacancy in the office of Mayor is not filled within 30 days after it occurs,
the Governor shall promptly fill the vacancy by appointment of a qualified person who shall serve for
the same period as if otherwise appointed.
(KRS 83A.040 (1),(2),(6))
(1) When voting to fill a vacancy in the office of Mayor, a member of the City Council shall
not vote for himself. (KRS 83A.040(2)(c))
(2) When voting to fill a vacancy created by the resignation of the Mayor, the resigning
Mayor shall not vote on his successor. (KRS 83A.040(3))
(3) No vacancy by reason of a voluntary resignation in the office of Mayor shall occur unless
a written resignation which specifies the resignation date is tendered to the City Council. The
resignation shall be effective at the next regular meeting of the city legislative body. (KRS
83A.040(7))
(4) If a vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor which is required by law to be filled
temporarily by appointment, the City Council shall immediately notify in writing both the County
Clerk and the Secretary of State of the vacancy. (KRS 83A.040(8))
2013 S-13
City Officials 9
(5) (a) As soon as practicable after the commencement of the terms of office of the members
of the City Council, the Council shall select one of their number to serve as Mayor pro-tem in the
absence of the Mayor. Election of the Mayor pro-tem shall require the vote of a majority of the
members of the Council.
(b) In the event that neither the Mayor nor the Mayor pro-tem is present at any regular or
properly called special meeting, and a quorum being present, the remaining members of the Council
shall select a presiding officer, who shall preside for that meeting only. Selection of the presiding
officer shall require the vote of a majority of the Council members present at the meeting.
(c) The Mayor pro-tem selected pursuant to division (a) above, or the presiding officer
selected pursuant to division (b) above, shall have only such duties as are required for the orderly
conduct of the meeting and the execution of such lawful actions, other than the approval or rejection of
ordinances, as are taken at the meeting.
(Ord. 82-2, passed 1-11-82)
(D) Powers and duties.
(1) The executive authority of the city is hereby vested in and shall be exercised by the
Mayor. The Mayor shall enforce the Mayor-Council Plan, city ordinances and orders, and all
applicable statutes. He shall supervise all departments of city government and the conduct of all city
officers and employees under his jurisdiction and require each department to make reports to him as
required by ordinance or as he deems desirable.
(2) The Mayor shall maintain liaison with related units of local government respecting
interlocal contracting and joint activities.
(3) The Mayor shall report to the Council and to the public on the condition and needs of city
government as he finds appropriate or as required by ordinance, but not less than annually. He shall
make any recommendations for actions by the Council he finds in the public interest.
(KRS 83A.130(3))
(4) Subject to disapproval of the Council, the Mayor shall promulgate procedures to insure
orderly administration of the functions of city government and compliance with statutes or ordinances.
Upon promulgation or upon revision or rescission of the procedures, copies shall be filed with the
person responsible for maintaining city records. (KRS 83A.130(4))
(5) Any delegation of the Mayor's power, duties, or responsibilities to subordinate officers
and employees and any expression of his official authority to fulfill executive functions shall be made
by executive order. Executive orders shall be sequentially numbered by years and kept in a permanent
file. (KRS 83A.130(7))
(6) All bonds, notes, contracts, and written obligations of the city shall be made and executed
by the Mayor or his agent designated by executive order. (KRS 83A.130(8))
2002 S-4
10 Lebanon - Administration
(7) The Mayor shall be the appointing authority with power to appoint and remove all city
employees, including police officers, except as tenure and terms of employment are protected by
statute, ordinance, or contract and except for employees of the Council. (KRS 83A.130(9))
(8) The Mayor shall provide for the orderly continuation of the functions of city government
at any time he is unable to attend to the duties of his office by delegating responsibility for any function
to be performed, in accordance with division (D)(5) above. However, the Mayor may not delegate the
responsibility of presiding at meetings of the Council, and the authority to approve ordinances or
promulgate administrative procedures may only be delegated to an elected officer. With approval of the
Council, the Mayor may rescind any action taken in his absence under this section within 30 days of
such action. If for any reason the disability of the Mayor to attend to his duties persists for 60
consecutive days, the office of Mayor may be declared vacant by a majority vote of the Council and the
provisions of § 31.21(C) shall apply. (KRS 83A.130(10))
§ 31.22 COUNCILMEMBERS.
For provisions concerning City Council, see Chapter 32.
§ 31.23 CONTINUITY OF GOVERNMENT.
(A) The city deems it necessary to provide for the orderly succession of the office of Mayor in the
event of the absence or disability of the Mayor as defined in KRS 83A.130(7) when involving a
national, state or local emergency.
(B) Under Kentucky law, KRS 83A.040, any vacancy in the office of Mayor is filled by the City
Council within 30 days or, after 30 days, the Governor of the State of Kentucky shall appoint, and a
Mayor appointed in this manner serves in accordance with Section 152 of the Kentucky Constitution.
(C) The line of succession contained in this section is to insure that a city governmental official is
available to serve in the absence or disability of the Mayor.
(D) When the absence or disability of the Mayor shall prevent his serving in the office during a
national, state or local emergency, the duties and responsibilities of the Mayor shall be administered
temporarily by the City Administrator as set forth in KRS 83A.130(7) and KRS 83A.130(11).
(E) If neither the Mayor nor City Administrator is able to serve in the office of Mayor by reason
of absence or disability, the duties of the office of Mayor shall be assumed temporarily by a designee of
the Mayor as set forth in KRS 83A.130(7) and KRS 83A.130(11).
(Ord. 03-11, passed 12-8-03)
2004 S-5
City Officials 11
NON-ELECTED CITY OFFICIALS
§ 31.35 ESTABLISHMENT OF NON-ELECTED CITY OFFICES.
(A) All non-elected city offices shall be created by ordinance which shall specify:
(1) Title of office;
(2) Powers and duties of office;
(3) Oath of office; and
(4) Bond, if required.
(B) With the exception of the Police Chief and all city police officers, all non-elected city officers
shall be appointed by the Mayor with approval of City Council. The Police Chief and all city police
officers shall be appointed by the Mayor at will and such appointments need not be approved by City
Council.
(C) All non-elected officers may be removed by the Mayor at will unless otherwise provided by
statute or ordinance. Upon removal of a non-elected officer at will, the Mayor shall give the officer a
written statement setting forth the reason or reasons for the removal. However, this requirement shall
not be construed as limiting in any way the at-will dismissal power of the Mayor.
(D) The non-elected city offices shall be those of City Manager, City Administrator, City Clerk,
Assistant City Clerk, City Treasurer and Assistant City Treasurer, Chief of Police and Fire Chief, other
than a volunteer fire chief. The city may from time to time combine these offices as determined by
necessity and available personnel.
(1) The powers and duties of such non-elected city offices shall be those set forth in the
position descriptions adopted by the city as part of its current Policies and Procedures Manual, and the
pay and duties of said non-elected officers shall further be governed by the provisions of the city's
current Classification and Compensation Plan for City Employees.
(2) The City Clerk, Assistant City Clerk, City Treasurer and Assistant City Treasurer shall
take the oath of office prescribed by Section 228 of the Kentucky Constitution. The City Administrator
shall take the official oath prescribed for Mayors and members of the City Council. Each abovementioned
city officer, other than the Assistant City Treasurer, shall post bond in the amount of
$25,000. City officers shall be required to post only one bond.
(Ord. 88-8, passed 8-8-88)
Statutory reference:
Non-elected city offices, see KRS 83A.080(1),(2),(3)
2004 S-5
12 Lebanon - Administration
§ 31.36 CITY CLERK.
(A) The city hereby establishes the office of the City Clerk.
(B) The office of City Clerk may, by ordinance, be combined with any other nonelected city office
by inclusion of the title and duties of the office.
(C) The duties and responsibilities of the Clerk shall include, but are not limited to the following:
(1) Maintenance and safekeeping of the permanent records of the city;
(2) Performance of the duties required of the “official custodian” or “custodian” in
accordance with KRS 61.870 through 61.882;
(3) Possession of the seal of the city if used;
(4) No later than January 31 of each year, mail or electronically submit to the Department for
Local Government a list containing current city information, including but not limited to the following:
(a) The correct name telephone number, and electronic mail address of the Mayor,
legislative body members, and the correct name, telephone number, and electronic mail address for the
city’s appointed officials or employees who are serving in the following roles or substantially similar
roles as of January 1 of each year:
1. City Clerk;
2. City Treasurer or Chief Financial Officer;
3. City Manager or Administrator;
4. City Attorney;
5. Human Resources Director;
6. Police Chief;
7. Fire Chief;
8. Public Works Director;
9. Risk Manager;
2019 S-18
City Officials 12A
10. Information Technology Manager;
11. Public Relations or Communications officer; and
12. Planning and Zoning Administrator.
(b) The correct name of the city, mailing address for city hall, and telephone number of
the city hall; and
(c) The name and telephone number of either an elected or appointed official to serve as
a contact person that may be reached during normal business hours of 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.;
(5) Performance of all other duties and responsibilities required of the City Clerk by statute
or ordinance.
(KRS 83A.085)
(D) Compensation shall be in the amount as established by the City Council from time to time as
set forth in § 31.02.
(E) No person shall be appointed or act as the City Clerk unless such person has taken the oath
required by section 228 of the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Kentucky and has provided bond,
in the amount of $25,000 with corporate surety authorized to transact business in Kentucky and
conditioned upon the performance of the duties specified herein. (Ord. 8-88, passed 8-8-88)
§ 31.37 ASSISTANT CITY ATTORNEY.
There is hereby created the position of Assistant City Attorney, which shall be a non-elected and
non-compensated position. The Assistant City Attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor on the
recommendation of the City Attorney and with the advice and consent of the City Council. The
Assistant City Attorney’s employment shall be at the will of the Mayor and that the Assistant City
Attorney’s duties and obligations shall be identical to those of the City Attorney.
(Ord. 03-02, passed 2-10-03)
2019 S-18
12B Lebanon - Administration
CHAPTER 32: CITY COUNCIL
Section
General Provisions
32.01 Members; election, qualifications, compensation
32.02 Vacancies
32.03 Powers and duties
Rules of Procedure
32.20 Mayor as Presiding Officer
32.21 Meetings
32.22 Quorum
Ordinances
32.35 One subject; title
32.36 Introduction; enacting clause
32.37 Form of amendment
32.38 Reading requirement; exception for emergency
32.39 Approval, disapproval by Mayor
32.40 Adoption of standard codes by reference
32.41 Official city records
32.42 Indexing and maintenance requirements
32.43 Publication requirements
32.44 Additional requirements for adoption may be established by city
32.45 Periodic review required
32.46 Municipal orders
32.47 Proved by Clerk; received in evidence
32.48 Legislative immunity
13
14 Lebanon - Administration
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.01 MEMBERS; ELECTION, QUALIFICATIONS, COMPENSATION.
(A) Election; term of office. Each Councilmember shall be elected at-large by the voters of the
city at a regular election. A candidate for council shall be a resident of the city for not less than one
year prior to his or her election. Terms of office begin on the first day of January following the
election and shall be for two years.
(B) Qualifications. A member shall be at least 18 years of age, shall be a qualified voter in the
city, and shall reside in the city throughout his term of office.
(KRS 83A.040(4))
(C) Compensation. For provisions concerning compensation, see § 31.02.
§ 32.02 VACANCIES.
(A) Vacancies. If one or more vacancies on Council occur in a way that one or more members
remain seated, the remaining members shall within 30 days fill the vacancies one at a time, giving each
new appointee reasonable notice of his selection as will enable him to meet and act with the remaining
members in making further appointments until all vacancies are filled. If vacancies occur in a way that
all seats become vacant, the Governor shall appoint qualified persons to fill the vacancies sufficient to
constitute a quorum. Remaining vacancies are filled as provided in this section.
(KRS 83A.040(5))
(1) No vacancy by reason of a voluntary resignation of a member of the City Council shall
occur unless a written resignation which specifies a resignation date is tendered to the City Council.
The resignation shall be effective at the next regular or special meeting of the city legislative body
occurring after the date specified in the written letter of resignation.
(KRS 83A.040(7))
(2) If a vacancy occurs on the City Council which is required by law to be filled temporarily
by appointment, the City Council shall immediately notify in writing both the County Clerk and the
Secretary of State of the vacancy. (KRS 83A.040(8))
(B) Failure to fill vacancies. If for any reason, any vacancy on Council is not filled within 30
days after it occurs, the Governor shall promptly fill the vacancy by appointment of a qualified person
who shall serve for the same period as if otherwise appointed.
(KRS 83A.040(6))
Statutory reference:
Filling of vacancies for nonpartisan city office, see KRS 83A.175
2013 S-13
City Council 15
§ 32.03 POWERS AND DUTIES.
(A) The legislative authority of the city is hereby vested in and shall be exercised by the elected
Council of the city. The Council may not perform any executive functions except those functions
assigned to it by statute. (KRS 83A.130 (11))
(B) The Council shall establish all appointive offices and the duties and responsibilities of those
offices and codes, rules, and regulations for the public health, safety, and welfare. (KRS 83A.130 (12))
(C) The Council shall provide, by ordinance, for sufficient revenue to operate city government and
shall appropriate the funds of the city in a budget which provides for the orderly management of city
resources. (KRS 83A.130 (12))
(D) The Council may investigate all activities of city government. The Council may require any
city officer or employee to prepare and submit to it sworn statements regarding the performance of his
official duties. Any statement required by the Council to be submitted or any investigation undertaken
by the Council, if any office, department, or agency under the jurisdiction of the Mayor is involved,
shall not be submitted or undertaken unless and until written notice of the Council's action is given to
the Mayor. The Mayor may review any statement before submission to the Council and to appear
personally or through his designee on behalf of any department, office, or agency in the course of any
investigation.
(KRS 83A.130 (13))
RULES OF PROCEDURE
§ 32.20 MAYOR AS PRESIDING OFFICER.
(A) The Mayor shall preside at meetings of the Council. The Council has the authority to
establish, by ordinance, the manner in which one of its number may be selected to preside at meetings
of the Council in the absence of the Mayor.
(B) The Mayor may participate in Council proceedings, but shall not have a vote, except that he
may cast the deciding vote in case of a tie.
(KRS 83A.130 (5))
Cross-reference:
Council's responsibility to select one of its own members to preside when
there is vacancy in the office of Mayor, see § 31.21
16 Lebanon - Administration
§ 32.21 MEETINGS.
(A) Regular meetings of the Council shall be held at 7:00 p.m. on the first Monday after the first
Tuesday of each month at the city hall. However, if the regular meeting date falls on a legal holiday,
the meeting shall take place on the following Monday at the same hour and place. (Ord. 78-3, passed
6-12-78)
(B) Special meetings of the Council may be called by the Mayor or upon written request of a
majority of the Council. In the call, the Mayor or Council shall designate the purpose, time, and place
of the special meeting with sufficient notice for the attendance of Council members and for compliance
with KRS Chapter 61.
(C) At a special meeting no business may be considered other than that set forth in the designation
of purpose.
(D) The minutes of every meeting shall be signed by the person responsible for maintaining city
records as provided under § 31.36 and by the officer presiding at the meeting.
(KRS 83A.130 (11))
§ 32.22 QUORUM.
Unless otherwise provided by statute, a majority of the Council constitutes a quorum and a vote of
a majority of a quorum is sufficient to take action.
(KRS 83A.060 (6))
ORDINANCES
§ 32.35 ONE SUBJECT; TITLE.
Each ordinance shall embrace only one subject and shall have a title that clearly states the subject.
(KRS 83A.060 (1))
§ 32.36 INTRODUCTION; ENACTING CLAUSE.
Each ordinance shall be introduced in writing and shall have an enacting clause styled “Be it
ordained by the City of Lebanon.”
(KRS 83A.060 (2))
City Council 17
§ 32.37 FORM OF AMENDMENT.
No ordinance shall be amended by reference to its title only, and ordinances to amend shall set out
in full the amended ordinance or section indicating any text being added by a single solid line drawn
underneath it. Text that is intended to be removed shall be marked at the beginning with an opening
bracket and at the end with a closing bracket. The text between the brackets shall be stricken through
with a single solid line.
(KRS 83A.060 (3))
§ 32.38 READING REQUIREMENT; EXCEPTION FOR EMERGENCY.
(A) Except as provided in division (B) of this section, no ordinance shall be enacted until it has
been read on two separate days. The reading of an ordinance may be satisfied by stating the title and
reading a summary rather than the full text.
(B) In an emergency, upon the affirmative vote of two-thirds of the membership, the Council may
suspend the requirements of second reading and publication in order for an ordinance to become
effective by naming and describing the emergency in the ordinance. Publication requirements of §
32.43 shall be complied with within ten days of the enactment of the emergency ordinance.
(KRS 83A.060 (4),(7))
§ 32.39 APPROVAL, DISAPPROVAL BY MAYOR.
(A) All ordinances adopted by the Council shall be submitted to the Mayor who, within ten days
after submission, shall either approve the ordinance by affixing his signature or disapprove it by
returning it to the Council together with a statement of his objections.
(B) No ordinance shall take effect without the Mayor's approval unless he fails to return it to the
legislative body within ten days after receiving it or unless the Council votes to override the Mayor's
veto, upon reconsideration of the ordinance not later than the second regular meeting following its
return, by the affirmative vote of one more than a majority of the membership.
(KRS 83A.130 (6))
§ 32.40 ADOPTION OF STANDARD CODES BY REFERENCE.
The Council may adopt the provisions of any local, statewide, or nationally recognized standard
code and codifications of entire bodies of local legislation by an ordinance that identifies the subject
matter by title, source, and date and incorporates the adopted provisions by reference without setting
them out in full, if a copy accompanies the adopting ordinance and is made a part of the permanent
records of the city.
(KRS 83A.060 (5))
2015 S-15
18 Lebanon - Administration
§ 32.41 OFFICIAL CITY RECORDS.
(A) Every action of the Council is hereby made a part of the permanent records of the city and on
passage of an ordinance the vote of each member of the Council shall be entered on the official record
of the meeting.
(B) The Council has provided, under the provisions of §§ 31.36(C) and 32.42, for the maintenance
and safekeeping of the permanent records of the city. The City Clerk and the presiding officer shall
sign the official record of each meeting.
(KRS 83A.060 (8))
§ 32.42 INDEXING AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.
At the end of each month, all ordinances adopted in the city shall be indexed and maintained by
the City Clerk in the following manner:
(A) The city budget, appropriations of money, and tax levies shall be maintained and indexed so
that each fiscal year is kept separate from other years.
(B) All other city ordinances shall be kept in the minute book or an ordinance book in the order
adopted and maintained in this code of ordinances.
(KRS 83A.060 (8))
§ 32.43 PUBLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Except as provided in § 32.38(B), no ordinance shall be effective until published pursuant to
KRS Chapter 424.
(B) Ordinances may be published in full or in summary as designated by the legislative body. If
the legislative body elects to publish an ordinance in summary, the summary shall be prepared or
certified by an attorney licensed to practice law in the Commonwealth of Kentucky and shall include
the following:
(1) The title of the ordinance;
(2) A brief narrative setting forth the main points of the ordinance in a way reasonably
calculated to inform the public in a clear and understandable manner of the meaning of the ordinance;
and
(3) The full text of each section that imposes taxes or fees.
2006 S-7
City Council 19
(C) Ordinances that include descriptions of real property may include a sketch, drawing, or map,
including common landmarks, such as streets or roads in lieu of metes and bounds descriptions.
(KRS 83A.060 (9))
§ 32.44 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ADOPTION MAY BE ESTABLISHED BY
CITY.
The city may, by ordinance, specify additional requirements for adoption of ordinances in greater
detail than contained herein, but the city may not lessen or reduce the substantial requirements of this
chapter or any statute relating to adoption of ordinances.
(KRS 83A.060 (10))
§ 32.45 PERIODIC REVIEW REQUIRED.
Not less than once every five years all ordinances in this code of ordinances shall be examined for
consistency with state law and with one another and shall be revised to eliminate redundant, obsolete,
inconsistent, and invalid provisions.
(KRS 83A.060 (11))
§ 32.46 MUNICIPAL ORDERS.
(A) Council may adopt municipal orders. All municipal orders shall be in writing and shall be
adopted only at an official meeting. Orders may be amended only by a subsequent municipal order or
ordinance. All orders adopted shall be maintained in an official order book.
(B) In lieu of an ordinance, municipal orders may be used for matters relating to the internal
operation and functions of the city and to appoint or remove or approve appointment or removal of
members of boards, commissions, and other agencies over which the Council has control.
(KRS 83A.060 (12), (13))
§ 32.47 PROVED BY CLERK; RECEIVED IN EVIDENCE.
All ordinances and orders of the city may be proved by the signature of the City Clerk; and when
the ordinances are placed in this code of ordinances by authority of the city, the printed copy shall be
received in evidence by any state court without further proof of such ordinances.
(KRS 83A.060 (14))
2006 S-7
20 Lebanon - Administration
§ 32.48 LEGISLATIVE IMMUNITY.
For anything said in debate, Councilmembers shall be entitled to the same immunities and
protections allowed to members of the General Assembly.
(KRS 83A.060 (15))
Statutory reference:
Privileges of members of General Assembly, see KRS 6.050 and Ky. Const. § 43
2006 S-7
CHAPTER 33: FINANCE AND REVENUE
Section
Financial Administration
33.01 Definitions
33.02 Accounting records and financial reports
33.03 Annual budget ordinance
33.04 Annual audit of city funds
33.05 Official depositories; disbursement of city funds
33.06 Collection of delinquent city taxes, licenses, fees and other charges
Improvements
33.10 Definitions
33.11 Financing of improvements
33.12 Apportionment of cost
33.13 Comprehensive report required
33.14 Public hearing required
33.15 Adoption of ordinance; notice to affected owners
33.16 Affected owner may contest
33.17 When city may proceed; assessment constitutes lien
33.18 Effect of additional property or change in financing
FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION
§ 33.01 DEFINITIONS.
As used in this subchapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall
apply:
BUDGET. A proposed plan for raising and spending money for specified programs, functions,
activities, or objectives during a fiscal year.
DEBT SERVICE. The sum of money required to pay installments of principal and interest on
bonds, notes, and other evidences of debt accruing within a fiscal year and to maintain sinking funds.
21
22 Lebanon - Administration
ENCUMBRANCES. Obligations in the form of purchase orders or contracts that are chargeable
to an appropriation. An obligation ceases to be an encumbrance when paid or when the actual liability
is recorded.
FISCAL YEAR. The accounting period for the administration of fiscal operations.
GENERALLY ACCEPTED GOVERNMENTAL AUDITING STANDARDS. Those standards
for audit of governmental organizations, programs, activities and functions issued by the Comptroller
General of the United States.
GENERALLY ACCEPTED PRINCIPLES OF GOVERNMENTAL ACCOUNTING. Those
standards and procedures promulgated and recognized by the Governmental Accounting Standards
Board.
(KRS 91A.010)
§ 33.02 ACCOUNTING RECORDS AND FINANCIAL REPORTS.
(A) The city shall keep its accounting records and render financial reports in such a way as to:
(1) Determine compliance with statutory provisions; and
(2) Determine fairly and with full disclosure the financial operations of constituent funds and
account groups of the city in conformity with generally accepted governmental accounting principles.
(B) The municipal accounting system shall be organized and operated on a fund basis.
(KRS 91A.020)
§ 33.03 ANNUAL BUDGET ORDINANCE.
(A) The city shall operate under an annual budget ordinance adopted and administered in
accordance with the provisions of this section. No moneys shall be expended from any governmental
or proprietary fund except in accordance with a budget ordinance adopted pursuant to this section.
(B) Moneys held by the city as a trustee or agent for individuals, private organizations, or other
governmental units need not be included in the budget ordinance.
(C) If in any fiscal year subsequent to a fiscal year in which the city has adopted a budget
ordinance in accordance with this section, no budget ordinance is adopted, the budget ordinance of the
previous fiscal year has full force and effect as if re-adopted.
(D) The budget ordinance of the city shall cover one fiscal year.
(E) Preparation of the budget proposal shall be the responsibility of the Mayor.
2017 S-16
Finance and Revenue 23
(F) The budget proposal shall be prepared in such form and detail as prescribed by ordinance.
(G) The budget proposal together with a budget message shall be submitted to Council not later
than 30 days prior to the beginning of the fiscal year it covers. The budget message shall contain an
explanation of the governmental goals fixed by the budget for the coming fiscal year; explain important
features of the activities anticipated in the budget; set forth the reasons for stated changes from the
previous year in program goals, programs, and appropriation levels; and explain any major changes in
fiscal policy.
(H) (1) Council may adopt the budget ordinance making appropriations for the fiscal year in such
sums as it finds sufficient and proper, whether greater or less than the sums recommended in the budget
proposal. The budget ordinance may take any form that Council finds most efficient in enabling it to
make the necessary fiscal policy decisions.
(2) No budget ordinance shall be adopted which provides for appropriations to exceed
revenues in any one fiscal year in violation of Section 157 of the Kentucky Constitution.
(I) The full amount estimated to be required for debt service during the budget year shall be
appropriated, for all governmental fund types.
(J) Council may amend the budget ordinance at any time after the ordinance's adoption, so long
as the amended ordinance continues to satisfy the requirements of this section.
(K) Administration and implementation of an adopted budget ordinance shall be the responsibility
of the Mayor. Such responsibility includes the preparation and submission to Council of operating
statements, including budgetary comparisons of each governmental fund for which an annual budget
has been adopted. Such reports shall be submitted not less than once every three months in each fiscal
year.
(L) To the extent practical, the system utilized in the administration and implementation of the
adopted budget ordinance shall be consistent in form with the accounting system called for in § 33.02.
(M) No city agency, or member, director, officer, or employee of any city agency, may bind the
city in any way to any extent beyond the amount of money at that time appropriated for the purpose of
the agency. All contracts, agreements, and obligations, express or implied, beyond such existing
appropriations are void; nor shall any city officer issue any bond, certificate, or warrant for the
payment of money by the city in any way to any extent, beyond the balance of any appropriation made
for the purpose.
(KRS 91A.030)
§ 33.04 ANNUAL AUDIT OF CITY FUNDS.
(A) The city shall, after the close of each fiscal year, cause each fund of the city to be audited by
the Auditor of Public Accounts or a certified public accountant. The audits shall be completed by
February 1 immediately following the fiscal year being audited. Within ten days of the completion of
2017 S-16
24 Lebanon - Administration
the audit and its presentation to the city legislative body, in accordance with division (B)(5) of this
section, each city shall forward an electronic copy of the audit report to the Department for Local
Government for information purposes.
(B) The city shall enter into a written contract with the selected auditor. The contract shall set
forth all terms and conditions of the agreement which shall include, but not be limited to, requirements
that:
(1) The auditor be employed to examine the basic financial statements which shall include
the governmental wide and fund financial statements;
(2) The auditor shall include in the annual city audit report an examination of local
government economic assistance funds granted to the city under KRS 42.450 to 42.495. The auditor
shall include a certification with the annual audit report that the funds were expended for the purpose
intended.
(3) All audit information be prepared in accordance with generally accepted governmental
auditing standards which includes such tests of the accounting records and such auditing procedures as
considered necessary under the circumstances. Where the audit is to cover the use of state or federal
funds, appropriate state or federal guidelines shall be utilized;
(4) The auditor shall prepare a typewritten or printed report embodying:
(a) The basic financial statements and accompanying supplemental and required
supplemental information;
(b) The auditor’s opinion on the basic financial statements or reasons why an opinion
cannot be expressed; and
(c) Findings required to be reported as a result of the audit.
(5) The completed audit and all accompanying documentation shall be presented to Council
at a regular or special meeting.
(6) Any contract with a certified public accountant for an audit shall require the accountant to
forward a copy of the audit report and management letters to the Auditor of Public Accounts upon
request of the city or the Auditor of Public Accounts, and the Auditor of Public Accounts shall have the
right to review the certified public accountant's work papers upon request.
(C) A copy of an audit report which meets the requirements of this section shall be considered
satisfactory and final in meeting any official request to the city for financial data, except for statutory
or judicial requirements, or requirements of the Legislative Research Commission necessary to carry
out the purposes of KRS 6.955 to 6.975.
2019 S-18
Finance and Revenue 25
(D) Within 30 days after the presentation of an audit to the City Council, the city shall publish an
advertisement, in accordance with KRS Chapter 424, containing:
(1) The auditor’s opinion letter;
(2) The “Budgetary Comparison Schedules - Major Funds,” which shall include the general
fund and all major funds;
(3) A statement that a copy of the complete audit report, including financial statements and
supplemental information, is on file at city hall and is available for public inspection during normal
business hours.
(4) A statement that any citizen may obtain from city hall a copy of the complete audit
report including financial statements and supplemental information, for his personal use;
(5) A statement which notifies citizens requesting a personal copy of the city audit report that
they will be charged for duplication costs at a rate that shall not exceed $.25 per page; and
(6) A statement that copies of the financial statement prepared in accordance with KRS
424.220, when a financial statement is required by KRS 424.220, are available to the public at no cost
at the business address of the officer responsible for preparation of the statement.
(E) Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be fined not less than $50 nor
more than $500. In addition, any officer who fails to comply with any of the provisions of this section
shall, for each failure, be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $50 nor more than $500, in the
discretion of the court, which may be recovered only once, in a civil action brought by any resident of
the city. The costs of all proceedings, including a reasonable fee for the attorney of the resident
bringing the action, shall be assessed against the unsuccessful party.
(F) Within a reasonable time after the completion of a special audit or examination conducted
pursuant to KRS 43.050, the Auditor shall bill the city for the actual expense of the audit or
examination conducted. The actual expense shall include the hours of work performed on the audit or
examination as well as reasonable associated costs, including but not limited to travel costs. The bill
submitted to the city shall include a statement of the hourly rate, total hours, and total costs for the
entire audit or examination.
(KRS 91A.040)
Statutory reference:
Governor’s Office for Local Development to provide assistance, see KRS 91A.050.
§ 33.05 OFFICIAL DEPOSITORIES; DISBURSEMENT OF CITY FUNDS.
(A) The Mayor shall designate as the city's official depositories one or more banks, federally
insured savings and loan companies, or trust companies within the Commonwealth. The amount of
funds
2019 S-18
26 Lebanon - Administration
on deposit in an official depository shall be fully insured by deposit insurance or collateralized in
accordance with 12 USC 1823, to the extent uninsured, by any obligations, including surety bonds
permitted by KRS 41.240(4).
(B) All receipts from any source of city money or money for which the city is responsible, which
has not been otherwise invested or deposited in a manner authorized by law, shall be deposited in
official depositories. All city funds shall be disbursed by written authorization approved by the Mayor
which states the name of the person to whom funds are payable, the purpose of the payment, and the
fund out of which the funds are payable. Each authorization shall be numbered and recorded.
(KRS 91A.060)
§ 33.06 COLLECTION OF DELINQUENT CITY TAXES, LICENSES, FEES AND OTHER
CHARGES.
(A) The City Council may, by resolution, from time to time direct the collection of existing
delinquent city taxes, licenses, fees and other charges, through any legal means, including suit. Any
such suits may be brought in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction, provided,
however, that any suit seeking to foreclose a lien upon property shall be brought in Circuit Court. In all
such legal actions the city may obtain personal judgment for the amount of the delinquent taxes, fees,
licenses or other amounts owing, together with all penalties, interest, publication fees and costs of the
suit.
(B) The City Council may direct the City Clerk to publish a list of all delinquent taxpayers and the
face amounts of all their present delinquent tax bills. Such publication shall be accomplished as
provided for in KRS Chapter 424.
(Ord. 83-6, passed 6-29-83)
IMPROVEMENTS
§ 33.10 DEFINITIONS.
As used in this subchapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall
apply:
ASSESSED VALUE BASIS. The apportionment of cost of an improvement according to the ratio
the assessed value of individual parcels of property bears to the total assessed value of all such
properties.
BENEFITS RECEIVED BASIS. The apportionment of cost of an improvement according to
equitable determination by Council of the special benefit received by property from the improvement,
including assessed value basis, front foot basis, and square foot basis, or any combination thereof, and
2002 S-4
Finance and Revenue 27
may include consideration of assessed value of land only, graduation for different classes of property
based on nature and extent of special benefits received, and other factors affecting benefits received.
COST. All costs related to an improvement, including planning, design, property or easement
acquisition and construction costs, fiscal and legal fees, financing costs, and publication expenses.
FAIR BASIS. Assessed value basis, front foot basis, square foot basis, or benefits received basis.
FRONT FOOT BASIS. The apportionment of cost of an improvement according to the ratio the
front footage on the improvement of individual parcels of property bears to such front footage of all
such properties.
IMPROVEMENT. Construction of any facility for public use or services or any addition thereto,
which is of special benefit to specific properties in the area served by such facility.
PROPERTY. Any real property benefited by an improvement.
SPECIAL ASSESSMENT or ASSESSMENT. A special charge fixed on property to finance an
improvement in whole or in part.
SQUARE FOOT BASIS. The apportionment of cost of an improvement according to the ratio the
square footage of individual parcels of property bears to the square footage of all such property.
(KRS 91A.210)
§ 33.11 FINANCING OF IMPROVEMENTS.
(A) The city may not finance any improvement in whole or in part through special assessments
except as provided in this subchapter and in any applicable statutes. (KRS 91A.200)
(B) Cost of an improvement shall be apportioned equitably on a fair basis.
(C) The city may provide for lump sum or installment payment of assessments or for bond or
other long-term financing, and for any improvement may afford property owners the option as to
method of payment or financing.
(KRS 91A.220)
Statutory reference:
Improvements; alternate methods, see KRS Ch. 107
§ 33.12 APPORTIONMENT OF COST.
The cost of any improvement shall be apportioned on a benefits received basis with respect to any
property owned by the state, a local unit of government, or any educational, religious, or charitable
2002 S-4
28 Lebanon - Administration
organization. Council may assess such property in the same manner as for privately owned property or
it may pay the costs so apportioned out of general revenues.
(KRS 91A.230)
§ 33.13 COMPREHENSIVE REPORT REQUIRED.
Before undertaking any improvements pursuant to this subchapter, the city shall prepare a
comprehensive report setting out:
(A) The nature of the improvement;
(B) The scope and the extent of the improvement, including the boundaries or other description of
the area to be assessed;
(C) The preliminary estimated cost of the improvement;
(D) The fair basis of assessment proposed;
(E) If financing of assessments is provided, the proposed method, including the proposed years to
maturity of any bonds to be issued in connection with the improvement; and
(F) Such other information as may further explain material aspects of the improvement,
assessments, or financing.
(KRS 91A.240)
§ 33.14 PUBLIC HEARING REQUIRED.
After preparation of the report required by § 33.13, the city shall hold at least one public hearing
on the proposed improvement at which all interested persons shall be heard. Notice of the hearing shall
be published pursuant to KRS Chapter 424, and mailed to each affected property owner by certified
mail, return receipt requested, and shall include:
(A) The nature of the improvement;
(B) Description of area of the improvement;
(C) Statement that the city proposes to finance the improvement in whole or in part by special
assessment of property and the method to be used;
(D) Time and place the report may be examined; and
(E) Time and place of the hearing.
(KRS 91A.250)
2002 S-4
Finance and Revenue 29
§ 33.15 ADOPTION OF ORDINANCE; NOTICE TO AFFECTED OWNERS.
Within 90 days of conclusion of the hearing, the city shall determine whether to proceed with the
improvement by special assessments, and if it determines to proceed shall adopt an ordinance so stating
and containing all necessary terms, including the items referred to in § 33.13 and a description of all
properties. Promptly upon passage the city shall publish such ordinance pursuant to KRS Chapter 424
and shall mail by certified mail to each affected property owner a notice of determination to proceed
with the project, the fair basis of assessment to be utilized, the estimated cost to the property owner,
and the ratio the cost to each property owner bears to the total cost of the entire project.
(KRS 91A.260)
§ 33.16 AFFECTED OWNER MAY CONTEST.
(A) Within 30 days of the mailing of the notice provided for in § 33.15, any affected property
owner may file an action in the circuit court of the county, contesting the undertaking of the project by
special assessment, the inclusion of his property in the improvement, or the amount of his assessment.
If the action contests the undertaking of the improvement by the special assessment method of the
inclusion of the property of that property owner, no further action on the improvement insofar as it
relates to any property owner who is a plaintiff shall be taken until the final judgment has been entered.
(B) The city may proceed with the improvement with respect to any properties whose owners
have not filed or joined in an action as provided in this section or who have contested only the amounts
of their assessments, and the provisions of the resolution are final and binding with respect to such
property owners except as to contested amounts of assessments. After the lapse of time as herein
provided, all actions by owners of properties are forever barred.
(KRS 91A.270)
§ 33.17 WHEN CITY MAY PROCEED; ASSESSMENT CONSTITUTES LIEN.
(A) After the passage of time for the action provided for in § 33.16, or after favorable final
judgment in any such action, whichever comes later, the city may proceed with the improvement or
part thereof stayed by the action, including notice requiring payment of special assessment or
installment thereon and bonds or other method proposed to finance the improvement. The first
installment may be apportioned so that other payments will coincide with payment of ad valorem taxes.
(B) The amount of any outstanding assessment or installments thereof on any property, and
accrued interest and other charges, constitutes a lien on the property to secure payment to the
bondholders or any other source of financing of the improvement. The lien takes precedence over all
other liens, whether created prior to or subsequent to the publication of the ordinance, except a lien for
state and county taxes, general municipal taxes, and prior improvement taxes, and is not defeated
30 Lebanon - Administration
or postponed by any private or judicial sale, by any mortgage, or by any error or mistake in the
description of the property or in the names of the owners. No error in the proceedings of the Council
shall exempt any benefited property from the lien for the improvement assessment, or from payment
thereof, or from the penalties or interest thereon, as herein provided.
(KRS 91A.280)
§ 33.18 EFFECT OF ADDITIONAL PROPERTY OR CHANGE IN FINANCING.
The city may undertake any further proceedings to carry out the improvement or any extension or
refinancing thereof, except that §§ 33.13 through 33.17 applies if additional property is included in the
improvement or if change is made in the method or period of financing; but additional property may be
included in the improvement with the consent of the owner thereof without compliance with other
sections if it does not increase the cost apportioned to any other property, or any other change may be
made without such compliance if all property owners of the improvement consent.
(KRS 91A.290)
CHAPTER 34: PUBLIC RECORDS
Section
General Provisions
34.01 Definitions
Procedures for Requesting Public Records
34.05 Initial request with immediate inspection
34.06 Referral to proper custodian
34.07 Public records not immediately available
34.08 Refusal of unreasonable requests
34.09 Time limitation; denial of inspection
34.10 Concealing or destroying records prohibited
34.11 Access to records relating to particular individual
34.12 Format of copies
34.13 Fees for copies
34.14 Misstatement of purpose prohibited
34.15 Online access to public records in electronic form
34.16 Public records protected from disclosure
34.17 Notification of the Attorney General
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 34.01 DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings
ascribed to them respectively.
CITY. The city government of this city.
COMMERCIAL PURPOSE. The direct or indirect use of any part of a public record or records,
in any form, for sale, resale, solicitation, rent, or lease of a service, or any use by which the user
expects a profit either through commission, salary, or fee. COMMERCIAL PURPOSE shall not
include:
31
32 Lebanon - Administration
(1) Publication or related use of a public record by a newspaper or periodical;
(2) Use of a public record by a radio or television station in its news or other informational
programs; or
(3) Use of a public record in the preparation for prosecution or defense of litigation, or claims
settlement by the parties to such action, or the attorneys representing the parties.
CUSTODIAN. The official custodian or any authorized person having personal custody and
control of public records. The CUSTODIAN having personal custody of most of the public records of
this city is the City Clerk.
MECHANICAL PROCESSING. Any operation or other procedure which is transacted on a
machine, and which may include, but is not limited to a copier, computer, recorder or tape processor, or
other automated device.
MEDIA. The physical material in or on which records may be stored or represented, and which
may include, but is not limited to paper, microform, disks, diskettes, optical disks, magnetic tapes, and
cards.
OFFICIAL CUSTODIAN. The chief administrative officer or any other officer or employee of a
public agency who is responsible for the maintenance, care, and keeping of public records, regardless
of whether such records are in his actual personal custody and control. The OFFICIAL CUSTODIAN
of this city shall be the Mayor.
PERSON. A human being who makes a request for inspection of public records.
PRESCRIBED FEE or FEE. The fair payment required by the city for making copies of public
records and for mailing public records, which shall not exceed the actual cost thereof and shall not
include the cost of required staff time.
PUBLIC AGENCY. The city, including its legislative body and every officer, department and
division of the city; every entity created by authority of the city; any board, commission, committee,
subcommittee, ad hoc committee, advisory committee, council or agency created and controlled by the
city; and any interagency body in which the city participates.
PUBLIC RECORDS. All books, papers, maps, photographs, cards, tapes, discs, diskettes,
recordings, software, or other documentation regardless of physical form or characteristics, which are
prepared, owned, used, in the possession of or retained by the public agency. PUBLIC RECORDS
shall not include any records owned or maintained by or for the public agency that are not related to
functions, activities, programs, or operations funded by the public agency nor any records that may be
excluded by § 34.16.
REQUEST. An oral or written application by any person to inspect public records of the agency.
Public Records 33
SOFTWARE. The program code which makes a computer system function, but does not include
that portion of the program code which contains public records exempted from inspection as provided
by KRS 61.878 or specific addresses of files, passwords, access codes, user identifications, or any other
mechanism for controlling the security or restricting access to public records in the public agency's
computer system. SOFTWARE consists of the operating system, application programs, procedures,
routines, and subroutines such as translators and utility programs, but does not include that material
which is prohibited from disclosure or copying by a license agreement between a public agency and an
outside entity which supplied the material to the agency.
(KRS 61.870)
PROCEDURES FOR REQUESTING PUBLIC RECORDS
§ 34.05 INITIAL REQUEST WITH IMMEDIATE INSPECTION.
(A) Any person desiring to inspect or copy the public records of this city shall make a request for
inspection at the office of the City Clerk during regular office hours, except during legal holidays. The
official custodian, or the custodian acting under the authority of the official custodian, may require a
request to inspect public records to be in writing, signed by the applicant and with the applicant's name
printed legibly on the application. A written request to inspect public records may be presented by
hand delivery, mail or via facsimile, if one is available.
(B) If the custodian determines that a person's request is in compliance with this chapter and the
open records law, and the requested public records are immediately available, the custodian shall
deliver the records for inspection. A person may inspect public records at the designated office of the
city during the regular office hours, or in appropriate cases, by receiving copies of the records through
the mail.
(C) If the public records are to be inspected at the offices of the city, suitable facilities shall be
made available in the office of the City Clerk or in another office of the city as determined by the
official custodian or custodian for the inspection. No person shall remove original copies of public
records from the offices of the city without the written permission of the official custodian of the
record. When public records are inspected at the city offices, the person inspecting the records shall
have the right to make abstracts and memoranda of the public records and to obtain copies of all
written public records. When copies are requested, the custodian may require advance payment of the
prescribed fee.
(D) Upon proper request, the city shall mail copies of the public records to a person whose
residence or principal place of business is located outside of the county after the person precisely
describes the public records which are readily available and after the person pays in advance the
prescribed fee.
34 Lebanon - Administration
§ 34.06 REFERRAL TO PROPER CUSTODIAN.
If the City Clerk does not have custody or control of the public record or records requested, the
City Clerk shall notify the applicant and shall furnish the name and location of the official custodian of
the agency's public records.
(KRS 61.872(4))
§ 34.07 PUBLIC RECORDS NOT IMMEDIATELY AVAILABLE.
If the public record is in active use, in storage, or not otherwise available, the official custodian
shall immediately notify the applicant and shall designate a place, time, and date for inspection or
mailing of the public records, not to exceed three days (excepting Saturdays, Sundays, and legal
holidays) from receipt of the application, unless a detailed explanation of the cause is given for further
delay and the place, time, and earliest date on which the public record will be available for inspection
or duplication.
(KRS 61.872(5))
§ 34.08 REFUSAL OF UNREASONABLE REQUESTS.
If the application places an unreasonable burden in producing public records, or if the custodian
has reason to believe that repeated requests are intended to disrupt other essential functions of the
public agency, the official custodian may refuse to permit inspection of the public records or mail
copies thereof. However, refusal under this section must be sustained by clear and convincing
evidence.
(KRS 61.872(6))
§ 34.09 TIME LIMITATION; DENIAL OF INSPECTION.
The official custodian, upon any request for records made under this chapter, shall determine
within three days (excepting Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays) after the receipt of any request
whether to comply with the request and shall notify in writing the person making the request within the
three-day period of its decision. Any agency response denying, in whole or in part, inspection of any
record shall include a statement of the specific exception authorizing the withholding of the record and
a brief explanation of how the exception applies to the record withheld. The response shall be issued
by the official custodian or under his authority and shall constitute final agency action.
(KRS 61.880)
§ 34.10 CONCEALING OR DESTROYING RECORDS PROHIBITED.
No official of the city shall willfully conceal or destroy any record with the intent to violate the
provisions of this chapter or these rules and regulations.
Public Records 35
§ 34.11 ACCESS TO RECORDS RELATING TO PARTICULAR INDIVIDUAL.
Any person shall have access to any public record relating to him or in which he is mentioned by
name, upon presentation of appropriate identification, subject to the provisions of § 34.16 of these rules
and regulations.
(KRS 61.884)
§ 34.12 FORMAT OF COPIES.
(A) Upon inspection, the applicant shall have the right to make abstracts of the public records and
memoranda thereof, and to obtain copies of all public records not exempted by the terms of § 34.16.
When copies are requested, the custodian may require a written request and advance payment of the
prescribed fee, including postage where appropriate. If the applicant desires copies of public records
other than written records, the custodian of the records shall duplicate the records or permit the
applicant to duplicate the records; however, the custodian shall ensure that such duplication will not
damage or alter the original records.
(B) (1) Nonexempt public records used for noncommercial purposes shall be available for
copying in either standard electronic or standard hard copy format, as designated by the party
requesting the records, where the agency currently maintains the records in electronic format.
Nonexempt public records used for noncommercial purposes shall be copied in standard hard copy
format where agencies currently maintain records in hard copy format. Agencies are not required to
convert hard copy format records to electronic formats.
(2) The minimum standard format in paper form shall be defined as not less than 8½ inches x
11 inches in at least one color on white paper, or for electronic format, in a flat file electronic American
Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII) format. If the public agency maintains electronic
public records in a format other than ASCII, and the format conforms to the requestor's requirements,
the public record may be provided in this alternate electronic format for standard fees as specified by
the public agency. Any request for a public record in a form other than the forms described in this
section shall be considered a nonstandardized request.
(KRS 61.874(1) - (3))
§ 34.13 FEES FOR COPIES.
(A) The public agency may prescribe a reasonable fee for making copies of nonexempt public
records requested for use for noncommercial purposes which shall not exceed the actual cost of
reproduction, including the costs of the media and any mechanical processing cost incurred by the
public agency, but not including the cost of staff required. If a public agency is asked to produce a
record in a nonstandardized format, or to tailor the format to meet the request of an individual or a
group, the public agency may at its discretion provide the requested format and recover staff costs as
well as any actual costs incurred.
36 Lebanon - Administration
(B) (1) Unless an enactment of the General Assembly prohibits the disclosure of public records
to persons who intend to use them for commercial purposes, if copies of nonexempt public records are
requested for commercial purposes, the public agency may establish a reasonable fee.
(2) The public agency from which copies of nonexempt public records are requested for a
commercial purpose may require a certified statement from the requestor stating the commercial
purpose for which they shall be used, and may require the requestor to enter into a contract with the
agency. The contract shall permit use of the public records for the stated commercial purpose for a
specified fee.
(3) The fee provided for in division (B)(1) of this section may be based on one or both of the
following:
(a) Cost to the public agency of media, mechanical processing, and staff required to
produce a copy of the public record or records;
(b) Cost to the public agency of the creation, purchase, or other acquisition of the public
records.
(KRS 61.874(3),(4))
Cross-reference:
Fees for online access to public records, see § 34.15
§ 34.14 MISSTATEMENT OF PURPOSE PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for a person to obtain a copy of any part of a public record for a:
(A) Commercial purpose, without stating the commercial purpose, if a certified statement from the
requestor was required by the public agency pursuant to § 34.13;
(B) Commercial purpose, if the person uses or knowingly allows the use of the public record for a
different commercial purpose; or
(C) Noncommercial purpose, if the person uses or knowingly allows the use of the public record
for a commercial purpose. A newspaper, periodical, radio or television station shall not be held to have
used or knowingly allowed the use of the public record for a commercial purpose merely because of its
publication or broadcast, unless it has also given its express permission for that commercial use.
(KRS 61.874(5)) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 34.15 ONLINE ACCESS TO PUBLIC RECORDS IN ELECTRONIC FORM.
(A) Online access to public records in electronic form may be provided and made available at the
discretion of the public agency. If a party wishes to access public records by electronic means and the
public agency agrees to provide online access, a public agency may require that the party enter into a
contract, license, or other agreement with the agency, and may charge fees for these agreements.
Public Records 37
(B) Fees shall not exceed:
(1) The cost of physical connection to the system and reasonable cost of computer time
access charges; and
(2) If the records are requested for a commercial purpose, a reasonable fee based on the
factors set forth in § 34.13.
(KRS 61.874(6))
§ 34.16 PUBLIC RECORDS PROTECTED FROM DISCLOSURE.
(A) The following public records are excluded from the application of this chapter and these rules
and regulations and shall be subject to inspection only upon order of a court of competent jurisdiction,
except as provided in KRS 61.878(1) that no court shall authorize the inspection by any party of any
materials pertaining to civil litigation beyond that which is provided by the Rules of Civil Procedure
governing pretrial discovery:
(1) Public records containing information of a personal nature where the public disclosure
thereof would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy.
(2) Records confidentially disclosed to an agency and compiled and maintained for scientific
research. This exemption shall not, however, apply to records the disclosure or publication of which is
directed by other statute.
(3) (a) Records confidentially disclosed to the agency, or required by an agency to be
disclosed to it, generally recognized as confidential or proprietary, which if openly disclosed would
permit an unfair commercial advantage to competitors of the entity that disclosed the records.
(b) Records confidentially disclosed to an agency or required by an agency to be
disclosed to it, generally recognized as confidential or proprietary, which are compiled and maintained:
1. In conjunction with an application for or the administration of a loan or a grant;
2. In conjunction with an application for or the administration of assessments,
incentives, inducements, and tax credits as described in KRS Ch. 154;
3. In conjunction with the regulation of commercial enterprise, including mineral
exploration records, unpatented, secret commercially valuable plans, appliances, formulae, or
processes, which are used for the making, preparing, compounding, treating, or processing of articles or
materials which are trade commodities obtained from a person; or
4. For the grant or review of a license to do business.
(c) The exemptions provided for in divisions (A)(3)(a) and (b) above, shall not apply to
records the disclosure or publication of which is directed by statute.
38 Lebanon - Administration
(4) Public records pertaining to a prospective location of a business or industry where no
previous public disclosure has been made of the business' or industry's interest in locating in, relocating
within, or expanding within the Commonwealth. This exemption shall not include those records
pertaining to applications to agencies for permits or licenses necessary to do business or to expand
business operations within the state, except as provided in division (A)(2) above.
(5) Public records which are developed by an agency in conjunction with the regulation or
supervision of financial institutions, including but not limited to, banks, savings and loan associations,
and credit unions, which disclose the agency's internal examining or audit criteria and related analytical
methods.
(6) The contents of real estate appraisals or engineering or feasibility estimates and
evaluations made by or for a public agency relative to the acquisition of property, until such time as all
of the property has been acquired. The law of eminent domain shall not be affected by this provision.
(7) Test questions, scoring keys, and other examination data used to administer a licensing
examination, examination for employment, or academic examination before the exam is given or if it is
to be given again.
(8) Records of law enforcement agencies or agencies involved in administrative adjudication
that were compiled in the process of detecting and investigating statutory or regulatory violations, if the
disclosure of the information would harm the agency by revealing the identity of informants not
otherwise known or by premature release of information to be used in a prospective law enforcement
action or administrative adjudication. Unless exempted by other provisions of this chapter, public
records exempted under this provision shall be open after enforcement action is completed or a
decision is made to take no action. The exemptions provided by this subdivision shall not be used by
the custodian of the records to delay or impede the exercise of rights granted by this chapter.
(9) (a) Public records the disclosure of which would have a reasonable likelihood of
threatening the public safety by exposing a vulnerability in preventing, protecting against, mitigating,
or responding to a terrorist act and limited to:
1. Criticality lists resulting from consequence assessments;
2. Vulnerability assessments;
3. Antiterrorism protective measures and plans;
4. Counterterrorism measures and plans;
5. Security and response needs assessments;
6. Infrastructure records that expose a vulnerability referred to in this division
through the disclosure of the location, configuration, or security of critical systems, including public
utility critical systems. These critical systems shall include but not be limited to information
technology, communication, electrical, fire suppression, ventilation, water, wastewater, sewage, and
gas systems;
2005 S-6
Public Records 39
7. The following records when their disclosure will expose a vulnerability referred
to in this division: detailed drawings, schematics, maps, or specifications of structural elements, floor
plans, and operating, utility, or security systems of any building or facility owned, occupied, leased, or
maintained by a public agency; and
8. Records when their disclosure will expose a vulnerability referred to in this
division and that describe the exact physical location of hazardous chemical, radiological, or biological
materials.
(b) As used in this section, “terrorist act” means a criminal act intended to:
1. Intimidate or coerce a public agency or all or part of the civilian population;
2. Disrupt a system identified in division (9)(a)6.; or
3. Cause massive destruction to a building or facility owned, occupied, leased, or
maintained by a public agency.
(c) On the same day that a public agency denies a request to inspect a public record for a
reason identified with this division, that public agency shall forward a copy of the written denial of the
request, referred to in KRS 61.880(1), to the executive director of the Office for Security Coordination
and the Attorney General.
(d) Nothing in this division shall affect the obligations of a public agency with respect to
disclosure and availability of public records under state environmental, health, and safety programs;
(e) The exemption established in this division shall not apply when a member of the
Kentucky General Assembly seeks to inspect a public record identified in this section under the Open
Records Law.
(10) Preliminary drafts, notes, or correspondence with private individuals, other than
correspondence which is intended to give notice of final action of a public agency.
(11) Preliminary recommendations and preliminary memoranda in which opinions are
expressed or policies formulated or recommended.
(12) All public records or information the disclosure of which is prohibited by federal law or
regulation.
(13) Public records or information the disclosure of which is prohibited or restricted or
otherwise made confidential by enactment of the General Assembly.
(14) Records of a procurement process under KRS Chapter 45A or 56. This exemption shall
not apply after:
2019 S-18
40 Lebanon - Administration
(a) A contract is awarded; or
(b) The procurement process is canceled without award of a contract and there is a
determination that the contract will not be resolicited; and
(15) Communications of a purely personal nature unrelated to any governmental function.
(B) No exemption under this section shall be construed to prohibit disclosure of statistical
information not descriptive of any readily identifiable person. In addition, if any public record contains
material which is not excepted under this section, the city shall separate the excepted and make the
non-excepted material available for examination, subject to the possible applicability of § 34.08.
(C) The provisions of this section shall in no way prohibit or limit the exchange of public records
or the sharing of information between public agencies when the exchange is serving a legitimate
governmental need or is necessary in the performance of a legitimate government function.
(D) No exemption under this section shall be construed to deny, abridge, or impede the right of a
municipal employee, an applicant for employment, or an eligible on a register to inspect and copy any
record, including preliminary and other supporting documentation, that relates to him. Such records
shall include, but not be limited to work plans, job performance, demotions, evaluations, promotions,
compensation, classification, reallocation, transfers, layoffs, disciplinary actions, examination scores,
and preliminary and other supporting documentation. A city employee, applicant, or eligible shall not
have the right to inspect or copy any examination or any documents relating to ongoing criminal or
administrative investigations by any agency.
(KRS 61.878)
§ 34.17 NOTIFICATION OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL.
The official custodian shall notify the Attorney General of any actions filed against the city in
circuit court regarding the enforcement of the open records law, KRS 61.870 to 61.884.
2019 S-18
CHAPTER 35: TAXATION
Section
General Provisions
35.01 Assessment; mailing of tax bills
35.02 Levy; establishment of tax rate
35.03 Due date; payment and delinquency
35.04 Publication of names of delinquent taxpayers
35.05 Recording of delinquent tax bills
35.06 City to have lien for taxes
35.07 Actions to enforce tax liens
35.08 Ad valorem taxes on motor vehicles
35.09 Disposition of funds
Bank Franchise and Local Deposit Tax
35.20 Imposition of tax
35.21 Issuance of tax bills
35.22 City to have lien for taxes
35.23 Delinquent payment
35.24 Disposition of funds
Transient Room and Restaurant Tax
35.30 Imposition of transient room tax
35.31 Payment, due date of transient room tax
35.32 Imposition of restaurant tax
35.33 Exemptions
35.34 Payment, due date of restaurant tax
35.35 Taxpayer recordkeeping
35.36 Delinquent payment
35.37 Audit of funds
35.99 Penalty
Cross-reference:
Occupational License Tax, see Chapter 110
41
2008 S-9
42 Lebanon - Administration
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 35.01 ASSESSMENT; MAILING OF TAX BILLS.
(A) City ad valorem taxes on real and personal property shall be assessed as of January 1 of each
year. The city may use the assessment of the Marion County Property Valuation Administrator or may
conduct its own assessment. Such ad valorem taxes shall be collected by the City Clerk, who shall not
be required to post any additional bond as a result of the duties imposed under this chapter, and such
taxes shall be payable at the City Clerk's office. No demand shall be necessary for the collection of ad
valorem taxes due the city.
(B) Tax bills shall be mailed annually to the taxpayer's last known address. Failure on the part of
the city to send a tax bill or failure of the taxpayer to receive a tax bill shall not absolve the taxpayer
from liability for payment of such taxes and any penalties, interest and publication charges applicable
thereto and failure or informality in the publication, notification or recording as required herein shall
not affect the validity of such taxes or the collection thereof.
(Ord. 83-5, passed 6-29-83)
§ 35.02 LEVY; ESTABLISHMENT OF TAX RATE.
City ad valorem taxes shall be levied at the regular meeting of the City Council held in July of
each year, or as soon thereafter as may be practicable. Such levy and the applicable tax rate shall be
established annually by ordinance.
(Ord. 83-5, passed 6-29-83)
§ 35.03 DUE DATE; PAYMENT AND DELINQUENCY.
(A) All city ad valorem taxes shall be due and payable on November 1 of each year. Any such
taxes which are not paid prior to December 1 of the year in which they become due shall be delinquent.
A penalty of 5% of the face amount of the tax bill shall be imposed on all delinquent tax bills which are
delinquent after December 1 and through December 31. A penalty of 10% of the face amount of the tax
bill shall be imposed on all delinquent tax bills after January 1. In addition to the penalty, each
delinquent tax bill shall accumulate interest at the rate of 1% per month of the face amount of the tax
bill for each month or part thereof that the tax bill remains delinquent.
(B) Any taxpayer may pay the whole tax bill any time after the tax bill has been made out and/or
delivered to the taxpayer. Upon payment, the City Clerk shall note on the stub of the bill the amount
paid and the date thereof, and shall deliver the receipted bill to the taxpayer. When any person desires
to pay taxes on any one item of property in a tax bill, he shall be allowed to do so if the city's interest
will not be prejudiced thereby, and the taxpayer shall be given a receipt showing the date and the
amount of the payment, the number of the tax bill, the name of the person against whom the tax bill
was made out and
2004 S-5
Taxation 43
a sufficient description to identify the property on which the taxes are paid. A corresponding notation
shall be made on the tax bill and the stub, and the city's lien shall thereupon stand released as to that
property, but the tax bill shall not be surrendered until paid in full.
(Ord. 83-5, passed 6-29-83)
§ 35.04 PUBLICATION OF NAMES OF DELINQUENT TAXPAYERS.
On or before March 1 of each year, or as soon thereafter as may be practicable, the City Clerk shall
cause to be published at least once as provided in KRS Chapter 424 a list of all delinquent taxpayers
and the face amounts of their delinquent tax bills for the preceding year. The Council may, by
resolution, direct the City Clerk to include in such list for publication the names of delinquent
taxpayers from prior years and the amount of their delinquencies or to publish the list more than one
time. In order to cover publication costs, an additional $5 shall be added to each delinquent tax bill
each year the delinquent taxpayer's name is published.
(Ord. 83-5, passed 6-29-83)
§ 35.05 RECORDING OF DELINQUENT TAX BILLS.
Following publication of the list of delinquencies, the City Clerk shall cause to be recorded in the
County Clerk's office all delinquent tax bills, or a reasonable facsimile thereof, showing thereon the
name of the delinquent taxpayer and the face amount of the delinquent tax bill. Such recordings may be
released of record by the City Clerk upon payment of the delinquent tax bill and all applicable
penalties, interest and publication costs, and upon payment by the taxpayer of any recording and
release fees charged by the County Clerk.
(Ord. 83-5, passed 6-29-83)
§ 35.06 CITY TO HAVE LIEN FOR TAXES.
(A) The city shall have a lien for the taxes provided for herein upon all property subject to taxation
from January 1 of each year until paid, which lien shall be superior to all other liens and encumbrances,
except liens for state taxes, whether such liens and/or encumbrances were acquired before or after the
maturity of the taxes referred to in this chapter. The tax lien in favor of the city shall secure payment of
the taxes, penalties, interest and publication costs provided for herein. Such lien shall extend for five
years from the date such taxes become delinquent and shall be imposed upon all real and personal
property assessed and on all other property of the taxpayer, whether owned at the time of assessment or
acquired thereafter. The lien shall not be defeated by gift, devise, sale, alienation or any other means.
(B) The City Clerk may distrain sufficient personal property owned by or in the rightful
possession of a delinquent taxpayer, if it is found in the city, to satisfy all taxes, penalties, interest and
publication charges due, notwithstanding the existence of any other lien upon such property.
(Ord. 83-5, passed 6-29-83)
2004 S-5
44 Lebanon - Administration
§ 35.07 ACTIONS TO ENFORCE TAX LIENS.
Following the publication of the list of delinquencies, the City Council may, at its discretion,
proceed to collect by any legal means the remaining delinquent taxes, interest, penalties and
publication fees. The city may bring suit in its own name against the delinquent taxpayer in any court
of competent jurisdiction. If the city chooses to enforce its lien against the real and/or personal property
of a taxpayer, any action brought thereon shall be commenced in Circuit Court. In either instance, the
city may also obtain a personal judgement against the delinquent taxpayer for the amount of the tax,
together with all penalties, interest, publication fees and cost of the suit. Actions to enforce the city's
tax liens shall be conducted and enforced as all other actions to enforce liens are conducted. In all
actions, the production of the tax bill shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness therefor.
(Ord. 83-5, passed 6-29-83)
§ 35.08 AD VALOREM TAXES ON MOTOR VEHICLES.
(A) All ad valorem taxes on motor vehicles shall be collected by the Marion County Clerk in
accordance with KRS 134.800.
(B) Ad valorem taxes on motor vehicles shall become due and delinquent as set forth in KRS
134.810 and any such taxes not paid by the date when they become delinquent shall be subject to the
penalty and interest specified in KRS 134.810.
§ 35.09 DISPOSITION OF FUNDS.
All monies collected from the taxes levied in this chapter shall be paid into the General Fund of the
city to be used for the payment of proper expenditures as determined by the City Council.
BANK FRANCHISE AND LOCAL DEPOSIT TAX
§ 35.20 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
There is hereby imposed on all “financial institutions,” as defined in KRS Chapter 136, located
within the city, for the 1996 tax year and all subsequent tax years, a franchise tax known as the Bank
Franchise and Local Deposit Tax, at the rate of 0.025% on all deposits, as defined in KRS Chapter 136,
maintained by such financial institutions.
(Ord. 96-11, passed 8-12-96)
2004 S-5
Taxation 45
§ 35.21 ISSUANCE OF TAX BILLS.
(A) 1996 tax year. For transition purposes, the 1996 tax year will be treated differently in terms of
collection of taxes than for all subsequent years. For the 1996 tax year, the following timetable is
hereby established: The city will issue tax bills to financial institutions no later than May 1, 1997.
Payment of the tax shall be due with a 2% discount by May 31, 1997, or without the discount by June
30, 1997.
(B) Subsequent years. For all tax years subsequent to the 1996 tax year, the following timetable is
hereby established: The city will issue tax bills to financial institutions no later than December 1 of
each year. Payment of the tax shall be due with a 2% discount by December 31 of each year, or without
the discount by January 31 of each year.
(Ord. 96-11, passed 8-12-96)
§ 35.22 CITY TO HAVE LIEN FOR TAXES.
The city shall have a lien for taxes on the property assessed for taxes to the extent allowed under
KRS 134.420.
(Ord. 96-11, passed 8-12-96)
§ 35.23 DELINQUENT PAYMENT.
All taxes due in accordance with these sections which are not paid before June 30, 1997, for tax
year 1996, or which are not paid before January 31 for all subsequent years tax years shall be deemed
delinquent and shall be subject to a penalty of 10% and shall bear interest at the rate of 12% per annum.
(Ord. 96-11, passed 8-12-96)
§ 35.24 DISPOSITION OF FUNDS.
All moneys collected pursuant to these sections shall be paid into the General Fund of the city to
be used for the payment of proper expenditures as determined by the City Council.
(Ord. 96-11, passed 8-12-96)
2004 S-5
46 Lebanon - Administration
TRANSIENT ROOM AND RESTAURANT TAX
§ 35.30 IMPOSITION OF TRANSIENT ROOM TAX.
In order to provide a source of funds for the operation of the Commission and to finance the costs
of acquisition, construction, operation and maintenance of facilities useful in the attraction and
promotion of tourist and convention business, there is hereby imposed and levied a Transient Room
Tax of 3% of the rent for every occupancy of a suite, room or rooms within the city charged by all
persons, companies, corporations or other like or similar persons, groups or organizations doing
business as motor courts, motels, hotels, inns or like or similar accommodations businesses. The
Transient Room Tax shall not apply to the renting or leasing of an apartment or any other facility
where rental periods are usually and customarily for a period of 30 days or more. The Transient Room
Tax shall be in addition to other taxes imposed by the city.
(Ord. 03-03, passed 3-10-03)
§ 35.31 PAYMENT, DUE DATE OF TRANSIENT ROOM TAX.
The Transient Room Tax shall be collected and paid by the person, company, corporation or other
like or similar person, group or organization doing business as a motor court, motel, hotel, inn or like
or similar accommodations business. The Transient Room Tax shall be paid to the City Clerk no later
than the twentieth day of the calendar month following the calendar month in which the tax was
imposed, and shall be submitted with a return on a form provided by the City Clerk setting forth the
aggregate amount of gross rentals charged and collected during the preceding month for every
occupancy to which the tax applies, together with such other pertinent information as the City Clerk
may require.
(Ord. 03-03, passed 3-10-03; Am. Ord. 03-05, passed 5-12-03)
§ 35.32 IMPOSITION OF RESTAURANT TAX.
In order to provide a source of funds for the operation of the Commission and to finance the costs
of acquisition, construction, operation and maintenance of facilities useful in the attraction and
promotion of tourist and convention business, there is hereby imposed and levied a Restaurant Tax of
2% of the retail sales by all restaurants doing business within the city. For purposes of this subchapter,
“restaurants” shall include any fixed or mobile commercial establishment that engages in the
preparation and serving of ready-to-eat foods in portions to the consumer, including, but not limited to,
restaurants, coffee shops, cafeterias, short order cafes, luncheonettes, grilles, tea rooms, sandwich
shops, soda fountains, roadside stands, street vendors, catering kitchens, delicatessens or similar places
or facilities in which food is prepared for sale for consumption on the premises or elsewhere. The
Restaurant Tax shall be in addition to other taxes imposed by the city.
(Ord. 03-03, passed 3-10-03; Am. Ord. 03-05, passed 5-12-03)
2004 S-5
Taxation 47
§ 35.33 EXEMPTIONS.
Exempt from the Restaurant Tax are bona fide governmental, religious and charitable non-profit
organizations. The term “restaurants” shall not include schools, food vending machines and
establishments serving only beverages in single service or original containers. Temporary food stands,
booths, street concessions and similar type operations that prepare and sell food for immediate
consumption, whether or not operated by nonprofit entities, are not exempt from the Restaurant Tax.
(Ord. 03-05, passed 5-12-03)
§ 35.34 PAYMENT, DUE DATE OF RESTAURANT TAX.
The Restaurant Tax shall be collected and paid by the person, company, corporation or other like
or similar person, group or organization doing business as a restaurant. The Restaurant Tax shall be
paid to the City Clerk no later than the twentieth day of the calendar month following the calendar
month in which the tax was imposed, and shall be submitted with a return on a form provided by the
City Clerk setting forth the aggregate amount of retail sales during the preceding month for every
restaurant to which the tax applies, together with such other pertinent information as the City Clerk
may require.
(Ord. 03-03, passed 3-10-03; Am. Ord. 03-05, passed 5-12-03)
§ 35.35 TAXPAYER RECORDKEEPING.
It is the responsibility of the taxpayer to maintain books and records in support of all amounts
reported on any return required by this subchapter. The city may examine the books and records of the
taxpayer upon prior written notification to the taxpayer.
(Ord. 03-03, passed 3-10-03)
§ 35.36 DELINQUENT PAYMENT.
Any Transient Room Tax or Restaurant Tax that shall remain unpaid after it becomes due, as set
forth herein, shall carry interest at the rate of 12% per annum.
(Ord. 03-03, passed 3-10-03)
§ 35.37 AUDIT OF FUNDS.
All funds collected pursuant to this subchapter shall be maintained in an account separate and
unique from all other funds and revenues collected by the city. Said account and the books of the
Commission shall be audited annually by an independent auditor in accordance with KRS 91A.360(5).
(Ord. 03-03, passed 3-10-03)
2004 S-5
48 Lebanon - Administration
§ 35.99 PENALTY.
Any person who shall purposely refuse to file a return required herein or pay the Transient Room
Tax or Restaurant Tax due, knowingly file a false or fraudulent return, or otherwise violate any
provision of §§ 35.30 through 35.35 shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $100 per violation for each month during which such violation shall
have occurred or continues to occur, or imprisonment for not more than 30 days for each violation, or
both.
(Ord. 03-03, passed 3-10-03)
2004 S-5
CHAPTER 36: COMMISSIONS
Section
Commission on Human Rights
36.01 Policy
36.02 Definitions
36.03 Creation; members
36.04 Functions
36.05 Powers and duties
36.06 Cooperation of city departments
36.07 Election of officers
36.08 Expenditures
36.09 Office space
36.10 Relationship with Kentucky Commission on Human Rights
Tourist and Convention Commission
36.25 Creation
36.26 Members; appointment; terms
36.27 Officers; duties
36.28 Budget; report
Statutory reference:
State Equal Opportunities Act, see KRS 207.130 through 207.260
State Civil Rights statutes, see KRS 344.010 through 344.990
COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS
§ 36.01 POLICY.
It is the public policy of the city to promote fair treatment and equal opportunity for all persons
regardless of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age (40 and above), disability or familial status
(in housing).
(Ord. 150.1, passed 11-10-69; Am. Ord. 04-01, passed 2-9-04)
49
2004 S-5
50 Lebanon - Administration
§ 36.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
COMMISSION. The Lebanon Commission on Human Rights or a member of the Commission.
DISCRIMINATION. Any direct or indirect act or practice of exclusion, distinction, restriction,
segregation, limitation, refusal, denial or an other act or practice of differentiation or preference in the
treatment of a person or persons because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age (40 and
above), disability and familial status (in housing), or the aiding, abetting, inciting, coercing or
compelling thereof.
(Ord. 150.1, passed 11-10-69; Am. Ord. 04-01, passed 2-9-04)
§ 36.03 CREATION; MEMBERS.
There is hereby created a Lebanon Commission on Human Rights. It shall consist of 11 members
who shall be appointed on a nonpartisan basis and shall be broadly representative of employers,
proprietors, religious groups, human rights groups, general public and the geography of Lebanon. The
Mayor shall appoint the members. Of the first members appointed, three shall be appointed for one
year, four shall be appointed for two years, and four shall be appointed for three years; after the first
appointments, all appointments shall be for a term of three years. A member chosen to fill a vacancy
other than by expiration of a term shall be appointed for the unexpired term of the member whom
he/she is to succeed. A member of the Commission is eligible for reappointment. No elected or
appointed city official shall be a member of the Commission. The members shall serve without
compensation.
(Ord. 150.1, passed 11-10-69; Am. Ord. 04-01, passed 2-9-04)
§ 36.04 FUNCTIONS.
The Commission shall encourage fair treatment and equal opportunity for all persons regardless of
race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age (40 and above) or disability and shall promote mutual
understanding and respect among all economic, social, racial, sex, age, religious, disability and ethnic
groups; and shall endeavor to eliminate discrimination against, and antagonism between groups and
their members because of their race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, religion or disability. The
Commission shall administer such enforceable ordinances forbidding discrimination as the City
Council may enact.
(Ord. 150.1, passed 11-10-69; Am. Ord. 04-01, passed 2-9-04)
2004 S-5
Commissions 50A
§ 36.05 POWERS AND DUTIES.
In performing its functions, the Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
(A) To employ an executive director and other necessary personnel within the limits of funds
made available;
(B) To conduct or arrange for research projects and studies into, and publish reports on
discrimination and progress in equal opportunity in the community;
(C) To accept gifts or bequests, grants, or other payments, public or private, to help finance its
activities;
(D) To receive, initiate, investigate, seek to conciliate, and hold hearings on complaints alleging
discrimination;
(E) To recommend methods for elimination of discrimination and intergroup tensions, and to use
its best efforts to secure compliance with its recommendations;
(F) To cooperate with other intergroup relations agencies, both public and private, on the local,
state and national level in performing its functions under this subchapter;
(G) To cooperate with the various departments, agencies and boards of the city and of the
Commonwealth in effectuating the purposes of this subchapter;
(H) To enlist the support of civic, labor, religious, professional, educational organizations and
institutions in community activities and programs that will further the goals of this subchapter;
(I) To organize community committees and councils that will work toward the goals of this
subchapter;
(J) To recommend legislation to the City Council and modes of executive action to the Mayor
that will effectuate the purposes of this subchapter;
(K) To submit an annual report of its activities and of the progress and problems in intergroup
relations in the community to the Mayor and the City Council; and
(L) To adopt, promulgate, amend and rescind rules and regulations to effectuate the policies and
provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 150.1, passed 11-10-69; Am. Ord. 04-01, passed 2-9-04)
2004 S-5
50B Lebanon - Administration
§ 36.06 COOPERATION OF CITY DEPARTMENTS.
The services of all other city departments, agencies and boards shall be made available to the
Commission upon its request. Information in the possession of any city department, agency or board
shall be furnished to the Commission upon its request, and to the extent permitted by law.
(Ord. 150.1, passed 11-10-69; Am. Ord. 04-01, passed 2-9-04)
§ 36.07 ELECTION OF OFFICERS.
The Commission shall elect a chairperson, vice-chairperson, secretary, treasurer and such other
officers as it shall deem necessary in order to carry out its functions.
(Ord. 150.1, passed 11-10-69; Am. Ord. 04-01, passed 2-9-04)
§ 36.08 EXPENDITURES.
The Commission shall adopt a budget for expenditures within the limits of the funds made
available by the city. The Treasurer shall make a semi-annual financial report to the City Council and
other city officials.
(Ord. 150.1, passed 11-10-69; Am. Ord. 04-01, passed 2-9-04)
§ 36.09 OFFICE SPACE.
The Mayor may provide suitable office space and facilities for the Commission if such is available.
(Ord. 150.1, passed 11-10-69; Am. Ord. 04-01, passed 2-9-04)
§ 36.10 RELATIONSHIP WITH KENTUCKY COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS.
The Commission shall, when requested, act in an advisory capacity to and otherwise cooperate
with the Kentucky Commission on Human Rights wherever possible to effectuate compliance with
state laws. The Commission is authorized to enter into cooperative working agreements with the
Kentucky Commission on Human Rights whenever enforceable ordinances forbidding discrimination
are enacted which are in conformity with state law.
(Ord. 150.1, passed 11-10-69; Am. Ord. 04-01, passed 2-9-04)
2004 S-5
Commissions 50C
TOURIST AND CONVENTION COMMISSION
§ 36.25 CREATION.
That pursuant to KRS 91A.350(2), there is hereby created a commission to be known as the
Lebanon Tourist and Convention Commission.
(Ord. 03-03, passed 3-10-03)
§ 36.26 MEMBERS; APPOINTMENT; TERMS.
That the Lebanon Tourist and Convention Commission shall be composed of seven members
appointed by the Mayor in accordance with KRS 91A.360. Vacancies on the Commission shall be
filled in the same manner that original appointments are made. The commissioners shall be appointed
for terms of three years; provided, that in making the initial appointments, the Mayor shall appoint two
commissioners for a term of three years, two commissioners for a term of two years, and three
commissioners for a term of one year. Subsequent appointments shall be for three year terms. There
shall be no limitation on the number of terms to which a commissioner is re-appointed. A
commissioner may be removed by the Mayor, as provided in KRS 65.007.
(Ord. 03-03, passed 3-10-03)
§ 36.27 OFFICERS; DUTIES.
That the Commission shall elect from its membership a chairperson and a treasurer, and may
employ such personnel and make such contracts as are necessary to effectively carry out the purposes
of KRS 91A.350 through 91A.390. Such contracts may include, but shall not be limited to, the
procurement of promotional services, advertising services and other services and materials relating to
the promotion of tourist and convention business; provided, contracts of the type enumerated shall be
made only with persons, organizations and firms with experience and qualifications for providing
promotional services and materials such as advertising firms, chambers of commerce, publishers and
printers.
(Ord. 03-03, passed 3-10-03)
§ 36.28 BUDGET; REPORT.
That the Commission shall annually submit to the City Council a request for funds for the
operation of the Commission for the ensuing year, and a report of the operation of the Commission
during the preceding year.
(Ord. 03-03, passed 3-10-03)
2004 S-5
50D Lebanon - Administration
CHAPTER 37: POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS
Section
Police Department
37.01 Creation
37.02 Duties
37.03 Probationary period for appointees
37.04 Longevity, shift differential and educational incentive pay
37.05 Arrest fee
37.06 City impoundment facility
Volunteer Fire Department
37.20 Establishment
37.21 Fire Chief
37.22 Members
37.23 Rules and regulations
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 37.01 CREATION.
There is hereby created a Police Department for the city, which shall consist of the Chief of Police,
who shall be director of the Department, and such other members and officers as may be provided for
from time to time by the City Council.
(Ord. 320.1, passed 6-12-78)
§ 37.02 DUTIES.
It shall be the duty of the members of the Police Department to see to the enforcement of all
ordinances of the city and all statutes effective in the city, and to preserve order and prevent infractions
of the law and to arrest violators thereof.
(Ord. 320.1, passed 6-12-78)
51
52 Lebanon - Administration
§ 37.03 PROBATIONARY PERIOD FOR APPOINTEES.
(A) Each sworn full- or part-time officer of the Police Department hired after the effective date of
this section shall be hired and classified as an appointee. No appointee shall be deemed to be a member
of the Police Department until such time as the appointee has satisfactorily completed a probationary
period of 12 consecutive months, beginning with the date of the appointee's appointment. During such
12-month probationary period, an appointee shall not be a member of the Police Department as that
term is used in KRS 95.700 or a “police officer” as that term is used in KRS 15.520. During that
probationary period, the appointment shall be conditional and at the discretion of the Chief of Police,
who shall have the power of summary removal. During the 12-month probationary period, an appointee
shall not be subject to the provisions of KRS 15.520, to the two-year term of office provided for in
KRS 95.700, or to any other provision which would frustrate the probationary plan herein provided for.
(B) Upon successful completion of the 12-month probationary period, an appointee shall
automatically become a “member” of the Police Department and a “police officer” as that term is used
in the Kentucky Revised Statutes.
(C) The 12-month probationary period herein provided shall consist of 12 consecutive months of
service with the Police Department. If either an appointee's or a member's service with the city is
interrupted or terminated for any reason or for any length of time, other than for military service
required by the United States or for other reasons for which the city shall grant the appointee or
member a leave of absence, the appointee or member shall again successfully complete the 12-month
probationary period from the date of his re-employment before becoming a member of the Police
Department.
(D) An appointee shall have the powers, duties, rights and responsibilities, except as set forth
herein, of a member of the Police Department, and shall be required to post such bonds and to take
such oaths as may be required by statute before assuming the status of appointee.
(E) The provisions hereof shall apply to all sworn full- and part-time officers of the Police
Department and shall include, but not be limited to, all sworn officers of every classification other than
Chief. Nothing herein shall be construed so as to prevent an appointee from being hired, promoted or
demoted during such 12-month probationary period to any rank, classification or pay grade which the
Police Department now has or may then have, provided such appointee retains his probationary status.
(Ord. 80-16, passed 1-12-81; Am. Ord. 81-1, passed 2-9-81)
§ 37.04 LONGEVITY, SHIFT DIFFERENTIAL AND EDUCATIONAL INCENTIVE PAY.
(A) Any sworn law enforcement officer who has completed his probationary status with the city
and who has completed five or more years as a sworn law enforcement officer in any jurisdiction or
combination of jurisdictions shall be entitled to longevity pay of $45 per month. At the completion of
ten years of service with the Police Department, longevity pay shall be increased by an additional $5
per month. At the completion of each additional five-year period of service with the Police
Police and Fire Departments 53
Department, beginning with the completion of the 15th year of service, the longevity incentive shall be
increased by an additional $5 per month for each additional five-year period of service completed,
provided, however, that no sworn law enforcement officer of any rank shall receive more than $75 per
month in longevity pay incentives.
(B) Each sergeant assigned to the 11:00 p.m. through 7:00 a.m. duty shift shall receive an
additional $.11 per hour for each hour worked during such shift. Each patrolman assigned to that shift
shall receive an additional $.10 per hour for each hour worked during such shift.
(C) (1) Any sworn law enforcement officer who has completed the basic training for police
officers provided by the Kentucky Law Enforcement College shall be entitled to receive the following
educational incentive pay:
Classification Educational Incentive Pay
Officers having completed
60 college semester hours
$29 per month
Officers having attained a Bachelor's Degree $42 per month
(2) In order to receive educational incentive pay, officers must provide certified transcripts
from the registrar of the institutions attended.
(D) Longevity pay, shift differential pay and educational incentive pay provided for herein shall
be in addition to the base salary as provided for in the current classification and compensation
ordinance, as same may from time to time be amended, and all other incentive programs, including the
Kentucky Law Enforcement Foundation Program Fund, which officers may be entitled to receive.
(Ord. 88-9, passed 8-8-88)
§ 37.05 ARREST FEE.
The statutory arrest fee payable to members of the Police Department under the provisions of KRS
64.060 shall be paid to the city treasury. (Ord. 79-11, passed 9-18-79)
§ 37.06 CITY IMPOUNDMENT FACILITY.
(A) There is hereby established a city impoundment facility, located at the city barn on Woodlawn
Avenue in the city.
(B) All vehicles impounded, stored or otherwise held by the city or by the Police Department and
all vehicles held, stored or kept by the city and/or by the Police Department at the request and/or
direction of any court, any other law enforcement agency and/or any individual, corporation or firm,
shall be stored, kept and held at said city impoundment facility.
54 Lebanon - Administration
(C) The Chief of Police shall establish written procedures for the acceptance, keeping and release
of all vehicles at the city impoundment facility and shall further establish a schedule of charges
therefor, which written procedures and schedule of charges and any subsequent additions thereto or
modifications thereof shall require the prior approval of the City Council.
(D) The Police Department shall use only such towing services as shall agree in writing to the
written procedures and schedule of charges prepared by the Chief of Police and approved by the City
Council.
(Ord. 82-18, passed 1-10-83)
VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 37.20 ESTABLISHMENT.
A Volunteer Fire Department for the city is hereby established.
(Ord. 310.1, passed 6-12-78)
§ 37.21 FIRE CHIEF.
The Volunteer Fire Department shall be headed and controlled by the Fire Chief, who shall have
the control, subject to the order and direction of the City Council, of all personnel and all fire apparatus
belonging to the city.
(Ord. 310.1, passed 6-12-78)
§ 37.22 MEMBERS.
The Fire Department shall consist of so many members as the City Council may determine and all
members thereof shall be appointed to the Fire Department and to their rank by the City Council.
(Ord. 310.1, passed 6-12-78)
§ 37.23 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
The City Council shall establish written rules and regulations for the Fire Department.
(Ord. 310.1, passed 6-12-78)
CHAPTER 38: CODE OF ETHICS
Section
38.01 Title
38.02 Definitions
38.03 Standards of conduct
38.04 Nepotism
38.05 Financial disclosure
38.06 Ethics Commission
§ 38.01 TITLE.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Code of Ethics.”
(Ord. 94-16, passed 12-19-94)
§ 38.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
BUSINESS ASSOCIATE.
(1) A private employer;
(2) A general or limited partnership, or a general or limited partner within the partnership;
(3) A corporation that is family-owned or in which all shares of stock are closely held, and its
shareholders, owners and officers; or
(4) A corporation, business association, or other business entity in which the city officer or
employee in question serves as a compensated agent or representative.
BUSINESS ORGANIZATION. Any corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, firm,
enterprise, franchise, association, organization, self-employed individual, holding company, joint stock
company, receivership, trust, professional service corporation, or any legal entity through which
business is conducted for profit;
55
56 Lebanon - Administration
CANDIDATE. An individual who seeks nomination or election to an elected city government
office. An individual is a candidate when the individual:
(1) Files a notification and declaration for nomination for office with the County Clerk or the
Secretary of State; or
(2) Is nominated for office by a political party under KRS 118.105, 118.115, 118.325, or
118.760.
CITY. The City of Lebanon, Kentucky.
CITY GOVERNMENT AGENCY. Any board, commission, authority, non-stock corporation, or
other entity formed by the city government or a combination of cities and/or county governments.
CITY GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEE, CITY EMPLOYEE, and EMPLOYEE. Any person,
whether compensated or not, whether full-time or part-time, employed by or serving the city
government, or a city government agency who is not a city government officer, but shall not mean any
employee of a school district or a school board.
CITY GOVERNMENT OFFICER, CITY OFFICER, or OFFICER. Any person, whether
compensated or not, whether full-time or part-time, who is elected to any city government office or any
person who serves as a member of the governing body of any city government agency, but shall not
mean persons serving on or employed by any or special taxing or non-taxing district.
ETHICS COMMISSION. The Lebanon Ethics Commission created under this chapter.
FAMILY MEMBER. A spouse, parent, child, brother, sister, mother-in-law, father-in-law, sonin-
law, daughter-in-law, grandparent or grandchild.
(Ord. 94-16, passed 12-19-94)
§ 38.03 STANDARDS OF CONDUCT.
The following standards of conduct are applicable to, and shall be followed by, all appointed
officers and employees of the city, including the Mayor, members of the Council, the City
Administrator, and anyone who holds a nonelected office created under KRS 83A.080.
(A) No city government officer or employee or member of his family shall have an interest in a
business organization or engage in any business transaction or professional activity, which is in
substantial conflict with the proper discharge of his duties in the public interest;
(B) No city government officer or employee shall use or attempt to use his official position to
secure unwarranted privileges or advantages for himself;
Code of Ethics 57
(C) No city government officer of employee shall act in his official capacity in any matter where
he, a family member, or a business organization in which he has an interest, has a direct or indirect
financial or personal involvement that might reasonably be expected to impair his objectivity or
independence of judgment;
(D) No city government officer or employee shall undertake any employment or service,
compensated or not, which might reasonably be expected to prejudice his independence of judgment in
the exercise of his official duties;
(E) No city government officer or employee, or family member thereof, or business organization
in which he has an interest, shall solicit or accept any gift, favor, loan, political contribution, service,
promise of future employment, or other thing of value based upon an understanding that the gift, favor,
loan, contribution, service, promise, or other thing of value was given, or offered for the purpose of
influencing him, directly or indirectly, in the discharge of his official duties. This provision shall not
apply to the solicitation or acceptance of contributions to the campaign of an announced candidate for
elective public office as governed by the Kentucky Revised Statutes.
(F) No city government officer or employee shall be prohibited from giving or receiving an award
publicly presented in recognition of public service, commercially reasonable loans made in the
ordinary course of the lender's business, or reasonable hosting, including travel and expenses,
entertainment, meals or refreshments furnished in connection with public events, appearance,
ceremonies or fact-finding trips, provided that such expenses are related to official city government
business.
(G) No city government officer or employee shall use, or allow to be used, his public office or
employment, or any information, not generally available to the members of the public, which he
receives or acquires in the course of and by reason of his office or employment, for the purpose of
securing financial gain for himself, any family member, or any business organization with which he is
associated;
(H) No city government officer or employee or business organization in which he has an interest
shall represent any person or party other than the city in connection with any cause, proceeding,
application, or other matter pending before any city government agency.
(I) No city government officer shall be deemed in conflict with these provisions if, by reason of
his participation in the enactment of any ordinance, resolution, or other matter required to be voted
upon or which is subject to executive approval or veto, no material or monetary gain accrues to him as
a member of any business, profession, occupation or group, to any greater extent than any gain could
reasonably be expected to accrue to any other member of such business, profession, occupation or
group.
(J) No elected city government officer shall be prohibited from making an inquiry for information
or providing assistance on behalf of a constituent, if no fee, reward or other thing or value is promised
to, given to or accepted by the officer or a member of his family, whether directly or indirectly, in
return therefor.
58 Lebanon - Administration
(K) Nothing shall prohibit any city government officer or employee, or family members, from
representing himself, or themselves, in negotiations or proceedings concerning his, or their, own
interests; and
(L) No city government officer or employee, or family member thereof, shall use or permit the use
of any city labor, funds, equipment or other personal or real property for his private use.
(Ord. 94-16, passed 12-19-94)
§ 38.04 NEPOTISM.
(A) After the effective date of this chapter, a family member of the Mayor or a family member of
a member of the City Council shall not be employed by the city or appointed to a position in a city
government agency. In the case of other city officers, a family member shall not be employed in or
appointed to a position which is supervised by such officer. This provision shall not apply to a family
member of a city officer, who, on the date of the officer's election or appointment, has been employed
by the city for at least six months or has held a position in a city government agency for at least six
months.
(B) No family member of a city government officer shall be compensated more than others in like
job positions, other than for reasons permitted by statute or ordinance, such as education, training and
longevity.
(Ord. 94-16, passed 12-19-94)
§ 38.05 FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE.
(A) The following individuals shall be required to file a financial disclosure statement:
(1) Elected city officers;
(2) Candidates for elected city office;
(3) City Treasurer and any other city government officers or employees with procurement
authority to sign checks for the city for amounts in excess of $500 per purchase;
(4) Members of the Ethics Commission;
(B) The financial disclosure statement filed each year shall cover the preceding calendar year.
(C) The financial disclosure statement shall include the following information:
(1) Name of the filer;
(2) Current business address, business telephone number and home address of the filer;
Code of Ethics 59
(3) Title of the filer's public office or office sought;
(4) Occupations of the filer and the filer's spouse;
(5) Positions held by the filer, the filer's spouse, or the filer's unemancipated children in any
business organization or nonprofit entity from which the filer or the filer's spouse and unemancipated
children received compensation in excess of $5,000 during the preceding calendar year, and the name,
address, and telephone number of the business organization or nonprofit entity;
(6) Name, address, and telephone number of each source of income of both the filer, the
filer's spouse, or the filer's unemancipated children which exceeded $5,000 during the preceding
calendar year, provided that nothing herein shall require disclosure of income received for services
provided to individual clients if such income is aggregately reported under the immediately preceding
paragraph hereof;
(7) Name, address, and telephone number of each business organization in which the filer or
the filer's spouse or unemancipated children had an interest of $5,000 or more at fair market value or
5% ownership interest or more during the preceding calendar year; and
(8) The location and type (commercial, residential, agricultural) of all real property within the
city, other than the filer's primary residence, in which the filer or the filer's spouse, or unemancipated
children had an interest of $5,000 or more during the preceding calendar year.
(D) The financial disclosure statement shall be on a form provided by the Ethics Commission. The
financial disclosure statement shall be filed annually by officers and employees no later than February
1. Candidates for elected city office shall be required to file the financial disclosure statement no later
than 21 days after the filing date or the date of nomination. Newly-appointed officers and employees
should be required to file their initial financial disclosure statement no later than 21 days after their date
of appointment.
(E) Each financial disclosure statement shall be signed and dated by the filer. Signing a fraudulent
financial disclosure statement shall be a Class A misdemeanor.
(F) Financial disclosure statements shall be filed with the City Clerk and, as public documents,
may be reviewed by the public consistent with the Kentucky Open Records Law.
(Ord. 94-16, passed 12-19-94)
§ 38.06 ETHICS COMMISSION.
(A) The Ethics Commission shall consist of five members. The members shall be appointed by the
Mayor with approval by the City Council. Members shall receive no compensation but may be
reimbursed for all necessary expenses. The terms of the members shall be staggered and shall serve
four-year terms. Two of the initial terms shall be for four years, one for three years, one for two years
and one for one year.
60 Lebanon - Administration
(B) A member of the Ethics Commission may be removed by the Mayor, subject to approval by
the City Council, for misconduct, inability, or wilful neglect of duties. Before any member is removed,
the member shall be afforded the opportunity for a hearing before the Mayor and City Council.
(C) Vacancies on the Ethics Commission shall be filled within 60 days by the Mayor, subject to
the approval of the City Council. Any vacancy not so filled within 60 days may be filled by the
remaining members of the Ethics Commission. All vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the
unexpired term.
(D) The Ethics Commission shall have the following powers:
(1) To initiate on its own motion, receive, hear, and review complaints and hold hearings
regarding possible violations of the Code of Ethics:
(2) To issue orders in connection with its investigations and hearings requiring persons to
submit in writing and under oath reports and answers to questions that are relevant to the proceedings
and to order testimony to be taken by deposition before any individual designated by the Ethics
Commission who has the power to administer oaths.
(3) To refer any information concerning violations of this Code of Ethics to the Mayor, the
City Council, the governing body of any city government agency, the City Attorney, or other
appropriate person or body, as necessary.
(4) To render advisory opinions to city officers and employees regarding whether a given set
of facts and circumstances constitutes a violation of any provisions of this Code of Ethics;
(5) To enforce the provisions of the this Code of Ethics and to impose penalties for violations
as authorized; and
(6) To adopt rules and regulations necessary to implement this Code of Ethics.
(E) The Ethics Commission may seek the advice of the City Attorney, but may retain private
counsel at the expense of the city should the Ethics Commission or the City Attorney determine that an
actual or perceived conflict of interest may arise.
(F) The Ethics Commission may impose an administrative fine of not to exceed $1,000 for noncompliance
with the provisions hereof. Any person who intentionally violates the provisions hereof
shall be subject to the criminal prosecution, said offense to be classified as a “Class A” misdemeanor.
(G) Decisions of the Ethics Commission regarding violations shall be appealable to the County
Circuit Court.
(Ord. 94-16, passed 12-19-94)
CHAPTER 39: PERSONNEL
Section
39.01 [Reserved]
39.02 Controlled substances and alcohol use testing program
§ 39.01 [RESERVED.]
§ 39.02 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES AND ALCOHOL USE TESTING PROGRAM.
(A) The city hereby adopts in its entirety the Controlled Substances and Alcohol Use Testing
Program attached to Ord. 96-04, passed 4-8-96.
(1) The Controlled Substances and Alcohol Use Testing Program hereby adopted may only
be waived, altered or suspended by ordinance.
(2) The city's Controlled Substances and Alcohol Use Testing Program hereby adopted shall
be applicable only to those city employees who fall within the regulations mandated by the United
States Department of Transportation, Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations.
(3) All ordinances or parts of ordinances that are in conflict with Ord. 96-04, including
certain portions of the city's Personnel Policies and Procedures (Ordinance No. 91-3), are repealed, but
only to the extent of such conflict and only insofar as the employees subject to the regulations
promulgated by the United States Department of Transportation in Title 49 of the Code of Federal
Regulations are concerned.
(Ord. 96-04, passed 4-8-96)
(B) The city hereby adopts in its entirety the Controlled Substances and Alcohol Use Testing
Program attached to Ord. 96-05, which program shall be applicable to all full-time city employees not
covered by Ordinance No. 96-04.
(1) The Controlled Substances and Alcohol Use Testing Program hereby adopted may only
be waived, altered or suspended by ordinance.
61
2015 S-15
62 Lebanon - Administration
(2) All ordinances or parts of ordinances that are in conflict with Ord. 96-5, including certain
portions of the city's Personnel Policies and Procedures (Ordinance No. 91-3), are repealed, but only to
the extent of such conflict.
(Ord. 96-5, passed 5-13-96)
2015 S-15
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
Chapter
50. SEWERS
51. WATER
1
2 Lebanon - Public Works
CHAPTER 50: SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
50.001 Purpose and policy
50.002 Definitions and abbreviations
Use of Public Sewers
50.010 Mandatory sewer connections
50.011 Unlawful discharge to storm sewers or natural outlets
50.012 Compliance with local, state, and federal laws
50.013 Discharge of unpolluted waters into sewer
50.014 Prohibited discharges
50.015 Sewer maintenance
Sanitary Sewer Extensions
50.020 Responsibility
50.021 Conditions for approval
50.022 Application for extension
50.023 Exemptions
Private Wastewater Disposal
50.030 Public sewer not available
50.031 Requirements for installation
Building Sewers and Connections
50.040 Permits
50.041 Prohibited connections
50.042 Design and installations
50.043 Inspection
50.044 Grease traps
50.045 Liability of city for damages
3
2018 S-17
4 Lebanon - Public Works
Pollutant Discharge Limits
50.050 General conditions
50.051 Restricted discharges
50.052 Dilution of wastewater discharge
50.053 Grease, oil, and sand interceptors
50.054 Special industrial pretreatment requirements
50.055 Protection from accidental and slug discharges
50.056 State requirements
50.057 City=s right of revision
50.058 Federal categorical pretreatment standards
Pretreatment Program Administration
50.065 Wastewater discharges
50.066 Industrial wastewater discharge permits
50.067 Permit modifications
50.068 Permit conditions
50.069 Alternative discharge limits
50.070 Permit duration
50.071 Permit transfer
50.072 Compliance data reporting
50.073 Periodic compliance reports
50.074 Permit violations
50.075 Monitoring
50.076 Inspection and sampling
50.077 Pretreatment
50.078 Annual publication
50.079 Significant non-compliance
50.080 Confidential information
50.081 Signatory requirements
Fees
50.090 Purpose
50.091 Charges and fees
Powers and Authority of Inspectors
50.100 Right to enter premises
50.101 Right to obtain information regarding discharge
50.102 Access to easements
50.103 Safety
Sewers 5
Enforcement
50.110 General
50.111 Notice of violation
50.112 Administrative orders
50.113 Show cause hearing
50.114 Additional enforcement remedies
50.115 Remedies not exclusive
50.999 Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
' 50.001 PURPOSE AND POLICY.
(A) This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect contributors into the
wastewater collection and treatment system for the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable
state and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act of 1977 and the general pretreatment regulations (40
CFR Part 403).
(B) The objectives of this chapter are:
(1) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal wastewater system which will
interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge;
(2) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal wastewater system which will
pass through the system inadequately treated into receiving waters so as to cause violations of the city's
KPDES permit or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system;
(3) To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and sludges from the system;
(4) To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the municipal wastewater system;
(5) To provide for the safety of the treatment plant employees; and
(6) To provide for the orderly growth of the municipal wastewater system.
(C) This chapter provides for the regulation of connection to and of direct and indirect contribution to
the municipal wastewater system through the issuance of permits to certain non-domestic users and through
enforcement of general requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement
2012 S-12
6 Lebanon - Public Works
activities, requires user reporting and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs
resulting from the program established herein.
(D) This chapter shall apply to the city and to persons outside the city who are, by contract or
agreement with the city, users of the city publicly owned treatment works (POTW). Except as otherwise
provided herein, the City Administrator and/or his designated representative shall administer, implement,
and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96)
' 50.002 DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS.
(A) Definitions. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases,
as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated:
ACT or THE ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as
amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The Secretary of the Kentucky Natural Resources and Environmental
Protection Cabinet or an authorized representative thereof.
AGENCY. Any governmental or quasi governmental entity.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE. An authorized representative of a user may be: (1) A principal
executive officer of at least the level of vice president, if the industrial user is a corporation; (2) a general
partner or proprietor if the user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively; (3) a duly authorized
representative of the individual designated above if such representative is responsible for the overall
operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge originates. An authorized representative of the
city may be any person designated by the city to act on its behalf.
BASELINE MONITORING REPORT (BMR). A report submitted by categorical industrial users
within 180 days after the effective date of a categorical standard which indicates the compliance status of
the user with the applicable categorical standard (40 CFR 403.12(b)).
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices,
maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in 40 CFR
403.5. BMPs include, but are not limited to, treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices or
control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical
oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five days at 20? Celsius expressed in
terms of weight and concentration in milligrams per liter (mg/l).
2012 S-12
Sewers 6A
BUILDING DRAIN. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives
the discharge from soil, water, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to
the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of
disposal, also called HOUSE CONNECTION.
BUILDING SEWER PERMIT. As set forth in '' 50.040 through 50.044.
CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER (CIU). An industrial user subject to categorical, pretreatment
standards which, have been promulgated by EPA.
2012 S-12
6B Lebanon - Public Works
Sewers 7
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. National Categorical Pretreatment Standard.
Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section
307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1347) which applied to a specific category of industrial users.
CITY. The city of Lebanon, Kentucky; its City Council; the City Administrator; the Public Works
Director or their designee.
CITY ENGINEER. The agent or representative or other such person qualified by training or formal
education which has been empowered by the city to deal with matters relating to this chapter.
CLEAN WATER ACT (CWA). (Also known as the Federal Water Pollution Control Act) enacted by
Public Law 92-500. October 18, 1972. 33 USC 1251 et seq: as amended by PL 95-217. December 28, 1977;
PL 97-117 December 29, 1981; PL 97-440, January 8, 1983, and PL 100-04, February 4, 1987.
COMBINED SEWER. Any conduit designed to carry both sanitary sewage and storm water or
surface water.
COMBINED WASTESTREAM FORMULA (CWF). Procedure for calculating alternative discharge
limits at industrial facilities where a regulated wastestream is combined with other non-regulated
wastestreams prior to treatment (40 CFR 403.7).
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids and fecal coliform
bacteria; plus any additional pollutants identified in the POTW's NPDES/KPDES permit, where the POTW
is designed to treat such pollutants and, in fact, does treat such pollutants so as to ensure compliance with
the POTW's NPDES/KPDES permit.
CONCENTRATION-BASED LIMIT. A limit based on the relative strength of a pollutant in a
wastestream, usually compressed in mg/l.
CONTROL AUTHORITY. The term shall refer to the city when there exists an approved pretreatment
program under the provisions of 40 CFR 403.11.
COOLING WATER. The water discharge from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or
refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat.
DAILY MAXIMUM. The maximum allowable value for any single observation in a given day.
DEVELOPER. Any owner/contractor/builder of a property or properties being improved and for
which sanitary service will be required.
DILUTE WASTESTREAM. Boiler blowdown, sanitary wastewater, non-contact cooling water and
certain process wastestreams that have been excluded from regulation in categorical pretreatment standards
because they contain none or only trace amounts of the regulated pollutant.
8 Lebanon - Public Works
DIRECT DISCHARGE. The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the
Commonwealth of Kentucky.
DISCHARGER. Any person that discharges or causes a discharge to a public sewer.
DOMESTIC WASTEWATER. The water-carried wastes produced from non-commercial or nonindustrial
activities and which result from normal human living processes.
EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
EFFLUENT. The liquid overflow of any facility designed to treat, convey or retain wastewater.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, or where appropriate the term may also be used as a designation for the Administrator or other
duly authorized official of said agency.
EQUIPMENT. All movable, non-fixed items necessary to the wastewater treatment processes.
FLOW PROPORTIONAL COMPOSITE SAMPLE. Combination of individual samples proportional
to the flow of the wastestream at the time of sampling.
FLOW WEIGHTED AVERAGING FORMULA (FWA). A procedure used to calculate alternative
limits for a categorical pretreatment standard where regulated and non-regulated wastestreams combine
after treatment, but prior to the monitoring point as defined in 40 CFR 403.
GARBAGE. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and
serving of foods.
GRAB SAMPLE. A sample which is taken from a wastestream on a one-time basis with no regard to
the flow of the wastestream and without consideration of time.
HOLDING TANK WASTE. Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers,
trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks.
INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. All pollutants other than compatible pollutants as defined in this
section.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE. The discharge or the introduction of non-domestic pollutants from any
source regulated under Section 307 (b) or (c) of the Act, (33 USC 1317), into the POTW (including holding
tank waste discharged into the system).
INDUSTRIAL USER (IU). A source of indirect discharge which does not constitute a Adischarge of
pollutants@ under regulations issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Clean Water Act.
INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT. A permit issued to industrial users which
authorizes discharges to the public sewer as set forth in the '' 50.065 through 50.081.
Sewers 9
INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The wastewater from industrial or commercial processes as distinct from
domestic or sanitary wastes.
INTERCEPTOR. A device designed and installed so as to separate and retain deleterious, hazardous
or undesirable matter from normal wastes which permits normal sewage or liquid wastes to discharge into
the sewer or drainage system by gravity. INTERCEPTOR as defined herein is commonly referred to as a
grease, oil, or sand trap.
INTERFERENCE. A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from
other sources, both:
(1) Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes,
use or disposal; and
(2) Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES/KPDES permit
(including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge
use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued
thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations); Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid
Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including Title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act (RCRA), and including state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan
prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, and
the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act (40 CFR 403.3).
MAY. This is permissive (see SHALL).
MONTHLY AVERAGE. The maximum allowable value for the average of all observations obtained
during one month.
MULTI-UNIT SEWER CUSTOMER. A location served where there are two or more residential
units or apartments, two or more businesses in the same building or complex or where there is any
combination of business and residence in the same building or complex.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or PRETREATMENT
STANDARD. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance
with Section 307 (b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act which applies to a specific category of industrial users.
This term includes prohibitive discharge limits established pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5.
NATIONAL (OR KENTUCKY) POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM or
NDPES/KPDES PERMIT. A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 USC 1332), or a
permit issued by the Commonwealth of Kentucky under this authority and referred to as KPDES.
NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet, including storm sewers, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or
other body of surface or groundwater.
10 Lebanon - Public Works
NEW SOURCE. Any source, the construction of which is commenced after the publication of
proposed regulations prescribing a Section 307(c) (33 USC 1317) categorical pretreatment standard which
will be applicable to such source, if such standard is thereafter promulgated within 120 days of proposal in
the Federal Register. Where the standard is promulgated later than 120 days after proposal, a new source
means any source, the construction of which is commenced after the date of promulgations of the standard.
NINETY (90) DAY COMPLIANCE REPORT. A report submitted by a categorical industrial user,
within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical standards that documents
and certifies the compliance status of the user (40 CFR 403.12(d)).
OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS. Improvements made to the existing sanitary sewer system or the
construction of all new sewer lines, pump stations, manholes and other appurtenant structures necessary to
accommodate the expansion of the sanitary sewer system which are not located on a developer's parcel(s).
ON-SITE IMPROVEMENTS. Improvements made to the existing sanitary sewer system or the
construction of all appurtenant structures necessary to accommodate the expansion of the sanitary sewer
system which are located on a developer's parcel(s).
PASS THROUGH. A discharge of pollutant which cannot be treated adequately by the POTW, and
therefore exits into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in
conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement
of the POTW's NPDES/KPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation)
(40 CFR 403.3).
PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORT. A report on compliance status submitted by significant
industrial users to the Control Authority at least semiannually (40 CFR 403.12(e)).
PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint
stock company, trust, estates, governmental entity, or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives,
agent or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall include the plural
where indicated by the context.
pH. The logarithm or the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration. The concentration is the weight
of hydrogen ions, in grams, per liter of solution.
POLLUTION. The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, and
radiological integrity of water.
POLLUTANT. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge,
munitions, chemical, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal,
and agricultural waste discharged into water.
POTW TREATMENT PLANT. That portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to
wastewater.
Sewers 11
PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of
pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to
or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration
can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes, or process changes by other means, except
as prohibited by 40 CFR Section 403.6(d).
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedure requirement related to
pretreatment, other than a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard imposed on a significant user.
PROCESS WASTEWATER. Any water which, during manufacturing or processing, comes into direct
contact with or results from the production of or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished
product, by-product, or waste product.
PRODUCTION-BASED STANDARD. A discharge limitation expressed in terms of allowable
pollutant mass discharge rate per unit of production and is applied directly to an industrial user's
manufacturing process.
PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD. Any regulation developed under the authority of 307(b)
of the Act and 40 CFR Section 403.5.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of
food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 2 inch in any directions.
PUBLIC SEWER. A common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public utility. In general,
the public sewer shall include the main sewer in the street and the service branch to the curb or property
line, or a main sewer on private property and the service branch to the extent of ownership by public
authority.
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR. The authorized representative of the city responsible for operating
and maintaining the municipal sewerage structures and facilities.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW). A treatment works as defined by Section
212 of the Act, (33 USC 1292) which is owned in this instance by the city. This definition includes any
sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers, or other
conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purpose of this chapter, POTW shall
also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the city who are, by
contract or agreement with the city, users of the city's POTW.
REGULATED WASTESTREAM. An industrial process wastestream regulated by a National
Categorical Pretreatment Standard.
SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions.
12 Lebanon - Public Works
SEWAGE. The spent water of a community. Domestic or sanitary waste shall mean the liquid or
water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings and institutions as distinct from industrial
sewage. The terms SEWAGE and WASTEWATER are used interchangeably.
SEWERAGE. Any and all facilities used for collecting, conveying, pumping, treating and disposing of
wastewater.
SEWER USER CHARGES. A system of charges levied on users of a POTW for the cost of operation
and maintenance, including replacement, of such works.
SEWER SYSTEM or WORKS. All facilities for collecting, transporting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage and sludge, namely the sewerage system and POTW.
SEWER. A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
SHALL. Is mandatory (see MAY).
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (SIU). Defined by EPA regulations as:
(a) All industrial users subject to Categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40
CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N; and
(b) Any non-categorical industrial user that:
1. Discharges 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater (Aprocess wastewater@
excludes sanitary non-contact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewaters) or
2. Contributes a process wastestream which makes up 5% or more of the average dry
weather hydraulic or organic (BOD, TSS, etc.) capacity of the treatment plant or
3. Has a reasonable potential, in the opinion of the Control or Approval Authority, to
adversely affect the POTW treatment plant (inhibition, pass through of pollutants, sludge contamination or
endangerment of POTW workers) or violate any requirements of this chapter. The city may determine that
an industrial user subject to Categorical Pretreatment Standards is a NON-SIGNIFICANT
CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER rather than a SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER on a finding
that the industrial user never discharges more than 100 gallons per day (gpd) or total categorical wastewater
(excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater, unless specifically included in
the pretreatment standard and the following conditions are met:
A. The industrial user, prior to the city=s finding, has consistently complied with all
applicable Categorical Pretreatment Standards and requirements;
B. The industrial user annually submits the certification statement required in 40 CFR
403.12(q) together with any additional information necessary to support the certification statement; and
2012 S-12
Sewers 12A
C. The industrial user never discharges any untreated concentrated process wastewater.
(c) Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in this definition has no reasonable potential
for adversely affecting the POTW=s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement,
the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from an industrial user,
and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.9(f)(6), determine that such user should not be
considered a SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.
SLUG DISCHARGE. Any discharge of a non-routine episodic nature including, but not limited to, an
accidental spill or non-customary batch discharge or any discharge of water or wastewater in which the
concentration of any given constituent or quantity of flow exceeds, for any period of duration longer than
15 minutes, more than five times the average 24 hour concentration or flow rate during normal operation
which adversely affects the POTW.
SLUG LOAD. Any pollutant (including Biochemical Oxygen Demand) released in a discharge at a
flow rate or concentration which will cause interference with the operation of the treatment works or which
exceeds limits set forth in an Industry's Discharge Permit and which include accidental spills.
SPILL PREVENTION AND CONTROL PLAN. A plan prepared by an industrial user to minimize
the likelihood of a spill and to expediate control and cleanup activities should a spill occur.
SPLIT SAMPLE. Portion of a collected sample given to the industry or to another agency to verify or
compare laboratory results.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC). An EPA classification scheme based on the
type of industry or process at a facility.
STANDARD METHODS. The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the recent editions
of AStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater,@ published jointly by the American
Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control
Federation and as set forth in the Congressional Record 40 CFR 136.
2012 S-12
12B Lebanon - Public Works
Sewers 13
STATE. Commonwealth of Kentucky.
STORM DRAIN or STORM SEWER. A drain or sewer for conveying water, groundwater, surface
water, or unpolluted water from any source.
STORM WATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and
resulting therefrom.
SURCHARGE. A charge for services in addition to the basic sewer user and debt service charges, for
those users whose contributions contain Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD5), Chemical Oxygen Demand
(COD), Total Suspended Solids (TSS), Oil and Grease or Ammonia nitrogen (NH3-N) in concentrations
which exceed limits specified herein for such pollutants. Where authorized by the control authority,
payment of a surcharge will authorize the discharge of the referenced pollutants so long as the discharge
does not cause pass through or interference.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS). Total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in
suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed
in AStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater.@
TIME PROPORTIONAL COMPOSITE SAMPLE. Combination of individual samples with fixed
volumes taken at specific time intervals.
TOXIC ORGANIC MANAGEMENT PLAN. Written plan submitted by industrial users as an
alternative to Total Toxic Organics (TTO) monitoring, which specifies the toxic organic compounds used,
the method of disposal used and procedures for assuring that toxic organics do not routinely spill or leak
into wastewater discharged to the POTW.
TOXIC POLLUTANT. Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations
promulgated by the Administrator or EPA under the provisions of the Clean Water Act 307(a) or any
amendments thereto.
UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the treatment works effluent criteria
in effect, or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be
benefitted by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities.
UNREGULATED WASTESTREAM. A wastestream that is not regulated by National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards.
USER. Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the POTW.
WASTEWATER. The spent water of a community. Sanitary or domestic wastes shall mean the liquid
and water carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings and institutions as distinct from industrial
waste.
2012 S-12
14 Lebanon - Public Works
WASTEWATER FACILITIES. The structures, equipment, and processes required to collect, carry
away, treat domestic and industrial wastes, and dispose of the effluent.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS. An arrangement of devices and
structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous with
Awaste treatment plant@ or Awastewater treatment plant@ or Awater pollution control plant@ or Asewage
treatment plant.@
WATERCOURSE. A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either continuously or
intermittently.
WATERS OF THE STATE. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells,
springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of
water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow
through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof.
(B) Abbreviations. The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
ADMI - American Dye Manufacturers Institute
ASTM - American Society for Testing and Materials
BMP - Best Management Practices
BMR - Baseline Monitoring Report
BOD - Biochemical Oxygen Demand
BPJ - Best Professional Judgment
?C - degrees Celsius
CFR - Code of Federal Regulations
CIU - Categorical Industrial User
CWA - Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.)
CWF - Combined Wastestream Formula
DOW - Division of Water
EPA - Environmental Protection Agency
?F - degrees Fahrenheit
FWA - Flow Weighted Average
FR - Federal Register
GC - Gas Chromatography
GC/MS - Gas Chromatography/Mass Spectroscopy
gpd - gallons per day
IU - Industrial User
l - Liter
mg - Milligrams
mg/l - Milligrams per liter
NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
KAR - Kentucky Administrative Regulation
KPDES - Kentucky Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
2012 S-12
Sewers 15
POTW - Publicly Owned Treatment Works
QA - Quality Assurance
QC - Quality Control
RCRA - Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
SIC - Standard Industrial Classification
SIU - Significant Industrial User
SWDA - Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 USC 6901 et seq.
TSS - Total Suspended Solids
TTO - Total Toxic Organics
USC - United States Code
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96; Am. Ord. 2012-01, passed 3-12-12)
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
' 50.010 MANDATORY SEWER CONNECTIONS.
(A) The owner(s) of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment,
recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in
which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the city, is hereby
required at the owner's expense to install suitable plumbing facilities therein, and to connect such facilities
directly with the proper sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 60 days after date of
official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within 200 feet (61 meters) of the property line.
(B) Sanitary sewer service will be available to any parcel within the city limits so long as the city
deems that such service will not hydraulically overload the collection system or POTW or adversely affect
the treatment operation.
(C) For residential and commercial sewer connections less than six inches in diameter which are not
significant users, sanitary sewer service can be approved by the City Administrator based on the
recommendation of the Public Works Director.
(D) For sanitary sewer connections of six inches in diameter or larger, any significant user or for any
connection which requires pumping to the existing facilities, sanitary sewer service can only be approved
by the Mayor.
(E) Where there exists parcels within the city limits that are not within a reasonable distance or do not
have reasonable access to the sanitary sewer system, the city will allow extension of the system if the
extension is in compliance with this chapter and is paid for by those who benefit from such extension. See
'' 50.020 through 50.023 for requirements of sanitary sewer extensions.
2012 S-12
16 Lebanon - Public Works
(F) It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other
facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater where public sanitary sewer service is available, as
defined in division (A), except as provided for in APrivate Wastewater Disposal.@
(G) At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater
disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public system within 60 days in compliance with
this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be
cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable material or salvaged and removed.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96) Penalty, see ' 50.999
' 50.011 UNLAWFUL DISCHARGE TO STORM SEWERS OR NATURAL OUTLETS.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited any pollutant in any
unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the
city except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(B) It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the city, any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment or
management has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter. No provision of
this chapter shall be construed to relieve the owner of a discharge to any natural outlet of the responsibility
for complying with applicable state and federal regulations governing such discharge.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96) Penalty, see ' 50.999
' 50.012 COMPLIANCE WITH LOCAL, STATE, AND FEDERAL LAWS.
The discharge of any wastewater into the public sewer system by any person is unlawful except in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and any more stringent state or federal standards
promulgated pursuant to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, the Clean Water
Act of 1977, and subsequent amendments, and 40 CFR 403.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96) Penalty, see ' 50.999
' 50.013 DISCHARGE OF UNPOLLUTED WATERS INTO SEWER.
(A) No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged, through any leak, defect, or connection any
unpolluted waters such as storm water, groundwater, roof runoff or subsurface drainage to any sanitary
sewer, building sewer, building drain or building plumbing. The Public Works Director or his
representative shall have the right, at any time, to inspect the inside or outside of buildings or smoke test for
connections, leaks, or defects to building sewers and require disconnection or repair of any such pipes
carrying such water to the building sewer. No sanitary drain sump or sump pump discharge by manual
switch-over of discharge connection shall have a dual use for removal of such water.
Sewers 17
(B) The owners of any building sewers having such connections, leaks, or defects shall bear all costs
incidental to removal of such sources. The owner shall remove any illicit connections and make all
necessary repairs no later than sixty days after being notified of such illicit connections. The city may
suspend water service to any building where an illicit connection has not been removed within the specified
time.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96; Am. Ord. 2017-09, passed 10-9-17) Penalty, see ' 50.999
' 50.014 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
(A) No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or
wastewater which will interfere with performance of the POTW or cause pass-through of a pollutant(s) to
the receiving stream. These general prohibitions apply to all such users of a POTW whether or not the user
is subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment
standards or requirements.
(B) A user shall not contribute the following substances to the POTW:
(1) Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be,
sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in
any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. At no time shall the wastewater exhibit a
closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degrees Centigrade using the test methods
specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
(2) Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 10.0 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the
POTW.
(3) Any slug load of pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released at a
flow rate and/or concentration that will cause interference with the normal operation of the POTW.
(4) Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the
flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not
limited to, wood, glass, ashes, sand, cinders, unshredded garbage, paper products such as cups, dishes,
napkins and milk containers, flushable wipes, etc. A user discharging any such items shall be notified by
the city of the prohibited discharge and shall be assessed all costs incurred by the city for repairs,
maintenance and/or replacement of the sanitary sewer. The city may take such enforcement action,
including fines, fees and/or penalties as provided in ' 50.110 et seq. to protect the city's sanitary sewer
system.
(5) Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW
treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction
into the POTW that will result in a treatment plant influent temperature which exceeds 40?C (104?F).
2018 S-17
18 Lebanon - Public Works
(6) Any pollutant(s) which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the
POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems.
(7) Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW such
as residues, sludges, or scum, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation
process where the POTW is pursuing a reuse and reclamation program. In no case shall a substance
discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria,
guidelines or regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act; any criteria, guidelines, or regulations
affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the
Toxic Substances Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used.
(8) Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES/KPDES permit and/or
sludge disposal system permit.
(9) Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that
will cause interference or pass through at the POTW.
(10) Any trucked or hauled pollutants except at discharge points designated by the POTW.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96; Am. Ord. 2012-01, passed 3-12-12; Am. Ord. 2017-09, passed 10-9-17)
Penalty, see ' 50.999
' 50.015 SEWER MAINTENANCE.
(A) The city shall maintain all sanitary sewers, manholes, pump stations and related appurtenances.
(B) Installation and maintenance of the building sewers and connections shall be the responsibility of
the property owners.
(C) When the city constructs replacement sewers, service laterals will be constructed to the property
line. It is the responsibility of the property owner to connect his/her sanitary sewer service lateral to the new
service. Property owners served by a replacement sewer shall be notified in writing by the city to the date
that connection to the replacement sewer must be complete.
(D) All connections to the sanitary sewer system shall be inspected by the city prior to those
connections being covered or backfilled.
(E) The cost of replacing a sanitary sewer service lateral is the responsibility of the property owner.
This cost includes the cost of sidewalk and street cuts and replacements. A tap fee will be assessed only if a
new lateral location is chosen.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96) Penalty, see ' 50.999
2018 S-17
Sewers 18A
SANITARY SEWER EXTENSIONS
' 50.020 RESPONSIBILITY.
Where there exists parcels within the city limits that are not within reasonable distance or do not have
reasonable access to the sanitary sewer system, the city will permit extension of the sanitary sewer system
to serve such parcels so long as the extension of the system is paid for by those who benefit from such
extension.
2018 S-17
18B Lebanon - Public Works
Sewers 19
(A) If a sanitary sewer extension crosses only a benefitted party's property and is not expected to serve
any other parties, then the total cost of the extension shall be borne by the benefitted party.
(B) If a sanitary sewer extension crosses more than one parcel or provides service to more than one
party, all benefitted parties shall share in the cost of the extension.
(C) If a sanitary sewer is constructed by the city or a developer across presently undeveloped land
within or without the city limits, then the city can, through a benefitted property owners agreement, grant
access to the sanitary sewer system for such undeveloped properties with payment of a proportionate share
of the cost of the extension and payment of appropriate tap fees. The proportionate share shall be
determined by the Mayor. Owners of undeveloped land who decline the benefitted property owners
agreement shall be denied access to the system for a period of five years. If the owner of undeveloped land
requests access to the system following the five year period, the Mayor may approve it with payment of the
appropriate tap fees.
(D) The cost of all system extensions shall include design and inspection services by the city or their
designee and shall be the responsibility of the developer. The cost shall also include all on and off-site
improvements to the sewer lines, pump stations, manholes or other appurtenant structures as may be
required by the city.
(E) The city reserves the right, at its own expense, to increase the size of any sewer line, pump station
or appurtenant structure beyond that required by a proposed development. The cost of the upgrades can, in
the future, be passed to those who will benefit from the upgrade.
(F) In cases where grant money is available to the city for urban redevelopment, industrial
development or other reasons, such grant money can be used to reduce or replace the cost of sanitary sewer
extensions by respective property owners. Special financing arrangements by the city may be implemented
through a Special Assessments Project or Special Assessments District as set forth in the Kentucky Revised
Statutes to assist property owners in the funding of sewer extensions or replacements.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96)
' 50.021 CONDITIONS FOR APPROVAL.
(A) Where an extension is necessary to serve a residential or commercial development within the
planning area boundary, both of the following criteria shall be met.
(1) There have been or are proposed major changes of an economic, physical or social nature
within the sanitary sewer service area, which were not planned or constructed when the existing sanitary
sewer system was constructed.
(2) The proposed extension will not adversely affect the performance capabilities of the existing
sanitary sewer system.
20 Lebanon - Public Works
(B) If the city finds the criteria in division (B) to be satisfied and it is so reflected in the minutes of a
City Council meeting, the extension shall be approved. If the city does not find the criteria in division (B) to
be satisfied, the Mayor shall notify the developer in writing and state the reasons for denying the request for
extension of sanitary sewer service.
(C) Where an extension is necessary to serve a residential or commercial development outside the
planning area boundary, the three following criteria shall be met:
(1) There have been or are proposed major changes of an economic, physical or social nature
within the sanitary sewer service area which were not planned or constructed when the existing sanitary
sewer system was constructed.
(2) The proposed extension will not adversely affect the performance capabilities of the existing
sanitary sewer system.
(3) The parcel(s) is not contiguous to the planning area boundary and therefore not available for
inclusion in the planning area.
(D) If the city finds the criteria in division (C) to be satisfied and it is so reflected in the minutes of a
City Council meeting, the extension shall be approved. If the city does not find the criteria in division (C) to
be satisfied, the Mayor shall notify the developer in writing and state the reasons for denying the request for
extension of sanitary sewer service.
(E) All extensions of or connections to the sanitary sewer system shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the city's specifications and all applicable state regulations.
(F) Plans and specifications for the proposed extension shall be reviewed and approved by the city and
the Kentucky Division of Water (DOW). It is the developer's responsibility to obtain a construction permit
from the DOW.
(G) The developer shall submit the record drawings of the extension to the city prior to acceptance by
and dedication to the city. The record drawings shall contain final construction documentation of all
sanitary sewer improvements.
(H) The city reserves the right to require a 100% cash bond or letter of irrevocable credit from the
developer for construction of any approved sanitary sewer extension. Such bond or letter of irrevocable
credit shall be released upon the city's acceptance of the extension and its dedication to the city.
(I) A one-year warranty on all labor and materials shall be included in the extension project and shall
be assigned to the city upon acceptance by and dedication to the city.
(J) All sanitary sewer line easements or rights-of-way shall be in favor of the city and be in a form
acceptable by the city prior to acceptance by and dedication to the city.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96) Penalty, see ' 50.999
Sewers 21
' 50.022 APPLICATION FOR EXTENSION.
The developer shall file an application (available from the city) with the city that contains the
following information:
(A) Name and address of potential customer(s)/owner;
(B) Name and address of contact person;
(C) Legal description of the property;
(D) Identification of the type (residential, commercial, institutional or industrial) and size of the
proposed development. State the number of proposed housing units or number of employees and the
projected amount of wastewater flow;
(E) Drawings that contains the tract boundary, amount of acreage, proposed street and lot locations,
expected land uses, zoning designations, location of requested sanitary sewer service, existing adjacent
roads, north arrow and a set of the construction drawings and specifications for proposed sewer extensions.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96)
' 50.023 EXEMPTIONS.
The city may permit deviations from the extension requirements in special instances and under special
circumstances. Such action shall be noted in the minutes of the City Council meeting.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96)
PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL
' 50.030 PUBLIC SEWER NOT AVAILABLE.
(A) Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of '' 50.010 through 50.015,
the building sewer shall be connected, until the public sewer is available, to a private wastewater disposal
system complying with the provisions of the Marion County Health Department and all applicable local and
state regulations.
(B) The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at
all times, at no expense to the city.
(C) No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed to interfere with any additional
requirements that may be imposed by applicable local or state regulations.
22 Lebanon - Public Works
(D) Holders of NPDES/KPDES permits excepted. Industries with current NPDES/KPDES permits
may discharge at permitted discharge points provided they are in compliance of the issuing authority.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96)
' 50.031 REQUIREMENTS FOR INSTALLATION.
(A) The type, capacity, location and layout of a private sewage disposal systems shall comply with all
local or state regulations.
(B) A permit for private sewage disposal systems shall not become effective until the installation is
completed to the satisfaction of the local and state authorities.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96)
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
' 50.040 PERMITS.
(A) There shall be two classes of building sewer permits required: (a) for residential and (b) for service
to commercial and industrial establishments. In either case, the owner(s) or his agent shall make
application on a special form furnished by the city. Applicants for service to commercial and industrial
establishments shall be required to furnish information about all waste producing activities, wastewater
characteristics and constituents. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications,
or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the city. Details regarding commercial and
industrial permits include, but are not limited to those required by this chapter. Permit and inspection fees
shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed.
(B) Installation of the building sewer shall include the cost of replacing sidewalks, curbs, gutters and
streets to city specifications when necessary.
(C) All connections to the sanitary sewer system shall be inspected by the Public Works Director prior
to backfilling the trench and final installation.
(D) The city shall notify the owner in writing of the date that connection to the sanitary sewer system
is available for use.
(E) Users shall promptly notify in writing the city at least 30 days in advance of any introduction of
wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents
being introduced into the POTW. The city may deny or condition the new introduction or change in
discharge based on the information submitted in the notification or additional information as may be
requested.
2012 S-12
Sewers 23
(F No person(s) shall uncover, plug or make any connection with or opening into, use, alter, or
disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining permission from the city.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96; Am. Ord. 2012-01, passed 3-12-12) Penalty, see ' 50.999
' 50.041 PROHIBITED CONNECTIONS.
(A) No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, basement wall seepage or floor seepage,
exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or
building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. Any such
connections which already exist on the effective date of this chapter shall be completely and permanently
disconnected within 60 days of the effective date of this chapter. The owner(s) of any building sewers
having such connections, leaks or defects shall bear all costs incidental to removal of such sources. Pipes,
sumps, and pumps for such sources of ground and surface water shall be separate from wastewater
facilities. Removal of such sources of water without presence of separate facilities shall be evidence of
drainage to public sanitary sewer.
(B) Floor, basement, or crawl space drains which are lower than ground surfaces surrounding the
building shall not be connected to the building sanitary sewer. No sanitary inlet which is lower than six
inches above the top of the lowest of the two adjacent public sanitary sewer manholes shall be connected by
direct drainage to the building sewer or service line.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96) Penalty, see ' 50.999
' 50.042 DESIGN AND INSTALLATIONS
(A) A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one
building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be
constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard, or driveway. The sewer from the
front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, but the
city does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from
any such single connection aforementioned.
(B) Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on
examination and test by the Public Works Director to meet all requirements of this chapter. Permit and
inspection fees for new buildings using existing building sewers shall be the same as for new building
sewers. If additional sewer customers are added to the old building sewers, additional sewer tap fees shall
be charged accordingly even though no new sewer tap is actually made into the city system.
(C) Extension of a building sewer for delivery of waste from any location other than that of the
customer in whose name the tap is registered shall not be permitted.
(D) The building sewer shall meet requirements of state plumbing code, latest revisions.
2012 S-12
24 Lebanon - Public Works
(E) The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be
used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the
requirements of the local and state building and plumbing codes and other applicable rules and regulations
of the city.
(F) All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be
borne by the owner(s). The owner(s) shall indemnify the city for any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. Fees for connection shall be established
by the city.
(G) The owner shall ensure that all excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways,
and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to
the city.
(H) In all buildings in which any sanitary facility drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public
sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the
same building sewer.
(I) The building sewer shall be connected into the public sewer at the right-of-way or property line
and the owner must install at a point prior to the tap an approved back water valve in order to prevent a
sewer backup into the private owner's dwelling. Where no connection exists at the right-of-way or property
line, the Public Works Director shall designate a point at which a connection can be made to the city sewer.
The property owner or property owner's representative must secure all permits necessary to block the street,
remove the pavement and make the necessary excavation to permit connection to the city sewer. If the
roadway is state maintained, the property owner must secure the necessary encroachment permit for the
Kentucky Department of Transportation. Street replacement is the responsibility of the property owner and
shall be according to the respective state or local specifications.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96; Am. Ord. 96-07, passed 6-10-96) Penalty, see ' 50.999
' 50.043 INSPECTION.
(A) The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Public Works Director when the
building sewer is ready for connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the
supervision of the Public Works Director or his representative. The connections shall be made airtight and
watertight and verified by proper testing.
(B) All building sewers shall be inspected and approved by the local Health Department.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96) Penalty, see ' 50.999
Sewers 25
' 50.044 GREASE TRAPS.
(A) All new or extensively remodeled public facilities engaged in the manufacture, processing,
preparation, or service of food and food products shall install a grease trap approved by the Public Works
Director.
(B) All wastewater drain piping from food processing equipment, sinks, dishwashers, and floor drains
located in food preparation and processing areas shall be separated from other wastewater piping and shall
discharge to the grease trap prior to entering the sanitary sewer system.
(C) (1) The minimum liquid capacity of the grease trap shall be based on the total design daily waste
flow for the facility served. The minimum capacity shall be as follows:
Grease Trap Capacity
Design Daily Waste Flow
150 gallons
1 to 4,000 GPD
300 gallons
4,001 - 8,000 GPD
500 gallons
> 8,000 GPD
(2) The design daily waste flow shall be determined based on the guidelines provided in the state
regulations for On-Site Disposal Systems (902 KAR 10:081 and 10:085)
(D) Grease traps shall be installed as close as practicable to the source of the wastewater and located
outside of the facility unless approval is granted by the Public Works Director.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96) Penalty, see ' 50.999
' 50.045 LIABILITY OF CITY FOR DAMAGES.
The city shall not be liable for any damage to any customer of the sewer utility service furnished by the
city due to backflow of the sewerage system, failure of supply, interruption of service or any other cause
outside the direct control of the city. It is the customer's responsibility to clear any blockage, maintain,
repair and/or replace the lateral section of the sewer line extending from the building to the city sanitary
sewer. The city shall not be liable for any damage to any sewer customer due to sewage backflow resulting
from blockage or damage to the lateral sewer line connecting the building to the main sewer line. The City
Administrator may require, at his/her discretion, that the building owner install a check valve to prevent
backflow and/or backup of wastewater. All costs and expenses associated with installation of a check valve
shall be borne by the owner(s).
(Ord. 2017-09, passed 10-9-17)
2018 S-17
26 Lebanon - Public Works
POLLUTANT DISCHARGE LIMITS
' 50.050 GENERAL CONDITIONS.
The following described substances, materials, waters or wastes shall be limited in discharges to
municipal systems to concentration or quantities which: will not harm either the sewers, wastewater
treatment process or equipment, will maintain and protect water quality in the receiving stream and will not
otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. The city may set additional
limitations or limitations more stringent than those established in the provisions below if in his opinion
more severe limitations are necessary to meet the above objectives. In forming this opinion as to the
acceptability of a discharge, the city shall give consideration to such factors as the quantity of subject waste
in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, the wastewater
treatment process employed, capacity of the wastewater treatment plant, and other pertinent factors.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96)
' 50.051 RESTRICTED DISCHARGES.
(A) The following described substances, materials, waters or wastes shall be limited in discharges to
municipal systems to concentrations which meet the conditions in ' 50.050:
(1) Wastewater containing more than 25 milligrams per liter of petroleum oil, non-biodegradable
cutting oils, or products of mineral oil origin;
(2) Wastewater containing floatable oils, fat, or grease, whether emulsified or not, in excess of
100 milligrams per liter (100 mg/l) or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures 32-150?F (0-65?C);
(3) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders may be connected to
sanitary sewers from homes, motels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, or similar
places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on
the premises or when served by caterers;
(4) Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other pollutants which: injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute
a hazard to humans or animals, causes the city to violate the terms of its KPDES permit, prevents the use of
acceptable sludge disposal methods, or exceed a limitation set forth in a Categorical Pretreatment Standard;
(5) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits
established by the city in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;
2018 S-17
Sewers 26A
(6) Any water or wastes which by interaction with other water or wastes in the public sewer
system, release obnoxious gasses, form suspended solids which interfere with the collection system, or
create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes;
(7) Any wastewater with objectionable color which cannot be removed to an acceptable level
within the operation of the wastewater treatment process unless otherwise specifically noted in the
industrial user permit;
(8) Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by
the wastewater treatment processes employed to the extent required by the city's NPDES/KPDES permit;
(9) Any waste(s) or wastewater(s) classified as a hazardous waste by the Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act (RCRA) without a 60 day prior notification of such discharge to the city. This
notification must include the name of the hazardous waste, the EPA hazardous waste number, type of
discharge, volume/mass of discharge and time of occurrence(s). The city may prohibit or condition the
discharge(s) at any time; and
2018 S-17
26B Lebanon - Public Works
Sewers 27
(10) Any water or wastes which have characteristics based on a 24-hour composite sample, grab or
a shorter period composite sample, if more representative, that exceed the following normal maximum
domestic wastewater parameter concentrations:
Parameter
Maximum Allowable
Concentration Without Surcharges
BOD
250 mg/l
COD
350 mg/l
TSS
250 mg/l
Phosphorus, Total as P
14 mg/l
NH3-N
25 mg/l
Oil and grease
100 mg/l
(B) Any person discharging wastewater exceeding the maximum allowable concentration as noted
above, will be subject to a surcharge fee for each pound loading over and above the set limit, provided such
fee is in excess of $10. Surcharge fees that are calculated to be less than this amount will be issued at the
city=s discretion. Any other amenable constituents requiring the addition of specific chemicals for proper
treatment will also be subject to surcharge as noted on the Wastewater Discharge Permit. Exceedance of the
effluent limits specified above shall not be deemed to constitute a violation of a permit condition of this
chapter if the appropriate surcharge fee is paid and the discharge does not cause interference or pass
through of the POTW.
(C) All surcharge fees will be set by the city and will be clearly defined in the industrial user permit.
(D) The City Administrator is authorized to establish local limits pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5(c). The
following limitations are established for characteristics of any wastewaters to be discharged into the
municipal sewer system subject to any compliance schedule as established in the industrial user permit. All
significant industrial users must comply with these limitations where they are more stringent than
applicable state and/or federal regulations. Based upon the sampling program at the Lebanon Wastewater
Treatment Plant, the limitations may be adjusted to reflect the POTW=s needs. These local limits are
established to protect against pass through and interference. Additional and/or more stringent limits may be
necessary if any pass through and/or interference are detected.
2017 S-16
28 Lebanon - Public Works
Parameter
Maximum Daily Concentration
Arsenic
0.34 mg/l
Cadmium
0.07 mg/l
Chromium (Total)
1.71 mg/l
Chromium (Hexavalent)
0.38 mgl
Copper
0.71 mg/l
Cyanide (Amenable)
0.21 mg/l
Lead
0.35 mg/l
Mercury
0.0092 mg/l
Molybdenum
1.38 mg/l
Nickel
0.89 mg/l
Selenium
0.14 mg/l
Silver
0.37 mg/l
Zinc
1.48 mg/l
(E) The city has received authority through the U.S. EPA and state statutes to enforce the requirements
of 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 and 40 CFR Part 403. All users shall comply with the
requirements of those regulations. The Superintendent and/or his or her designee may require the
development of best management practices (BMPs), by ordinance or in individual wastewater discharge
permits to implement local limits and the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96; Am. Ord. 96-07, passed 6-10-96; Am. Ord. 01-03, passed 7-9-01; Am. Ord.
2012-01, passed 3-12-12; Am. Ord. 2015-11, passed 1-11-16) Penalty, see ' 50.999
' 50.052 DILUTION OF WASTEWATER DISCHARGE.
No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a
partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained
in the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards, or in any pollutant specific limitation developed by the
city or state.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96) Penalty, see ' 50.999
2017 S-16
Sewers 28A
' 50.053 GREASE, OIL, AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.
Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city, they are necessary
for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable
wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptor shall not be required for private
living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of type and capacity approved by the City
Administrator or Public Works Director and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection. In the maintenance of these interceptors the owner(s) shall be responsible for the
proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain records of
the dates and means of disposal. The city may require reporting of such information for their review. Any
removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by owner(s) personnel must be performed by
currently licensed waste disposal firms. Interceptors shall also comply with applicable regulations of the
county Health Department.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96) Penalty, see ' 50.999
' 50.054 SPECIAL INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Pursuant to the requirements imposed on publicly owned wastewater treatment works by the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972 and later amendments, all Pretreatment
Standards promulgated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency for new and existing industrial
discharges to public sewer systems are hereby made a part of this chapter. Any industrial waste discharge
which violates these EPA Pretreatment Standards shall be in violation of this chapter.
2017 S-16
28B Lebanon - Public Works
Sewers 29
(B) Where pretreatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided or required for any waters or wastes,
the industry shall be solely responsible for the continued maintenance in satisfactory and effective operation
of such facilities and at their expense. The city may agree to assume these responsibilities if proper and
appropriate arrangements for reimbursement of costs are made.
(C) (1) Any person who transports septic tank, seepage pit or cesspool contents, liquid industrial
waste or other batch liquid waste and wishes to discharge such waste to the public sewer system shall first
have a valid trucker's discharge permit. All applicants for a trucker's discharge permit shall complete the
application form, pay the appropriate fee, and receive a copy of the city's regulations governing discharge to
sewers of liquid wastes from trucks. All persons receiving such permits shall agree, in writing, to abide by
all applicable provisions of this chapter, and any other special provisions that may be established by the city
as necessary for the proper operation and maintenance of the sewerage system.
(2) In addition any person holding a valid permit and wishing to discharge to the wastewater
treatment plant must submit to the Chief Operator a sample of each load prior to discharge. A fee and
payment schedule shall be established in the permit to cover cost of the required analysis.
(3) It shall be illegal to discharge any batch liquid waste into any manhole or other part of the
public sewer system, or any building sewer or other facility that discharges to the public sewer system,
except at designated points of discharge specified by the city for such purpose.
(4) Any liquid waste hauler illegally discharging to the public sewer system or discharging
wastewater not authorized in the permit shall be subject to immediate revocation of discharge privileges
and further subject to the penalties and enforcement actions prescribed in ' 50.999 including fines and
imprisonment.
(5) Waste haulers who have been granted permission to discharge to the public sewer system
shall pay fees for such discharge in accordance with a fee schedule established by the city.
(6) Nothing in this chapter shall relieve waste haulers of the responsibility for compliance with
county Health Department, state, or federal regulations.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96) Penalty, see ' 50.999
' 50.055 PROTECTION FROM ACCIDENTAL AND SLUG DISCHARGES.
(A) Required.
(1) Each significant user shall provide protection from accidental and/or slug discharges of
prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this chapter which adversely affect the POTW.
Facilities to prevent accidental and/or slug discharges of prohibited materials shall be provided and
maintained at the owner or user's own cost and expense. Once every two years, the city will determine
whether each industrial user needs to develop or update a plan to control slug discharges. If the city
determines that a slug control plan or revision is necessary, the plan shall contain the following:
30 Lebanon - Public Works
(a) Description of discharge practices;
(b) Description of stored chemicals;
(c) Procedures for notifying POTW; and
(d) Prevention procedures for spills.
(2) In the case of all possible or actual accidental and/or slug discharges, it is the responsibility of
the user to immediately telephone and notify the POTW of the incident. The notification shall include
location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions.
(B) Written notice. Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the
city a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user
to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss,
damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other
damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or
other liability which may be imposed by this article, the enforcement response plan or other applicable law.
(C) Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other
prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall
insure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the
emergency notification procedures.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96) Penalty, see ' 50.999
' 50.056 STATE REQUIREMENTS.
State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent
than federal requirements and limitations or those in this chapter.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96) Penalty, see ' 50.999
' 50.057 CITY'S RIGHT OF REVISION.
The city reserves the right at the recommendation of the City Administrator, or his designee to
establish more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the POTW, if deemed necessary, to
comply with the objectives presented in this chapter.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96)
Sewers 31
' 50.058 FEDERAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
Upon promulgation of the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards for a particular industrial
subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this chapter for sources
in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this chapter.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96)
PRETREATMENT PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION
' 50.065 WASTEWATER DISCHARGES.
(A) It shall be unlawful to discharge to the POTW any wastewater except as authorized by the city in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(B) Any agency, non-domestic user, and/or industry outside the jurisdiction of the city that desires to
contribute wastewater to the POTW must execute (through an authorized representative) an
interjurisdictional agreement, whereby the agency and/or industry agrees to be regulated by all provisions of
this chapter and state and federal regulations. An industrial user permit may then be issued by the city in
accordance with ' 50.066.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96) Penalty, see ' 50.999
' 50.066 INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS.
(A) General. All significant industrial users proposing to connect to or contribute to the POTW shall
obtain an industrial wastewater discharge permit before connecting to or contributing to the POTW.
(B) Permit and application. Users required to obtain an industrial wastewater discharge permit shall
complete and file with the city an application in the form prescribed by the city, and accompanied by a
permit fee. New users shall apply at least 90 days prior to connecting to or contributing to the POTW.
Existing permit holder shall apply no later than 60 days prior to expiration of permit. In support of the
application, the user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information:
(1) Name, address, and location if different from the address;
(2) SIC number(s) according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, United States
Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended;
(3) Wastewater constituents and characteristics as determined by an analytical laboratory
acceptable the city; sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by
the EPA pursuant to Section 307(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136, as amended;
32 Lebanon - Public Works
(4) Time and duration of contribution;
(5) Average daily and 30 minute peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and
seasonal variation, if any;
(6) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewers
connections, and appurtenances by the size, location and elevation;
(7) Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises including all materials
which are or could be discharged;
(8) Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are
limited by the city, state or federal pretreatment standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and if not, whether additional pretreatment is
required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards;
(9) (a) If additional pretreatment will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest
schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule
shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard;
(b) The following conditions shall apply to this schedule:
1. The schedule must be acceptable to the city;
2. The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the
commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional
pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards;
3. Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for
compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the city including, as a minimum, whether or not it
complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to
comply with this increment of progress and the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to
return the construction to the schedule established.
(10) Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and the rate of production;
(11) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day);
(12) Number of employees, and hours of operation of plant and proposed or actual hours of
operation of pretreatment system;
(13) Any other information as may be deemed by the city to be necessary to evaluate the permit
application; and
Sewers 33
(14) A copy of the industry's written environmental control program, comparable document, or
policy.
(C) Issuance.
(1) The city shall evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information.
After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the City Administrator or his or her designee may
issue an industrial wastewater discharge permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein. The
industrial wastewater discharge permit must be issued prior to commencement of discharge. The
Superintendent may withhold or discontinue sewer service until the discharge permit is issued. All new
source categorical industries shall be capable of achieving compliance with this chapter upon
commencement of discharge.
(2) The City Administrator shall provide notice to each significant industrial user of the issuance
of the user=s industrial wastewater discharge permit. Any person, including the user, may petition the City
Administrator to reconsider the terms of a permit within 15 days of notice of its issuance.
(a) Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the
administrative appeal.
(b) In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the permit provisions objected to, the
reasons for this objection and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the permit.
(c) The effectiveness of the permit shall not be stayed during the appeal.
(d) If the City Administrator fails to act within 30 days of receipt of the appeal, a request for
reconsideration shall not be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a permit, not issue a permit,
or not to modify a permit shall be considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review.
(e) Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative action and/or the
permit must do so by filing a complaint with the Marion County Circuit Court in accordance with the
appropriate procedures to that court and any statute of limitations.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96; Am. Ord. 2012-01, passed 3-12-12) Penalty, see ' 50.999
' 50.067 PERMIT MODIFICATIONS.
The City Administrator may modify an industrial wastewater discharge permit for good cause,
including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
(A) To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local Pretreatment Standards or Requirements;
2012 S-12
34 Lebanon - Public Works
(B) To address significant alterations or additions to the user=s operation, processes or wastewater
volume or character since the time of the individual wastewater discharge permit issuance;
(C) A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of
the authorized discharge;
(D) Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the Lebanon POTW,
personnel, biosolids disposal and/or the receiving stream;
(E) Violation of any terms or conditions of the industrial wastewater discharge permit;
(F) Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit
application or in any required reporting;
(G) Revision of or a grant of variance from Categorical Pretreatment Standards pursuant to 40 CFR
403.13; or
(H) To correct typographical or other errors in the discharge permit.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96; Am. Ord. 2012-01, passed 3-12-12) Penalty, see ' 50.999
' 50.068 PERMIT CONDITIONS.
(A) Industrial wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this chapter
and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the city.
(B) Permits may contain the following:
(1) The unit surcharges or schedule of other charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged
to a community sewer;
(2) Effluent limits, including best management practices (BMPs), on the average and/or
maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics;
(3) Limits on average and/or maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow
regulations and equalization;
(4) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities;
(5) Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling location; frequency of
sampling, number, type and standards for tests; and reporting schedule;
(6) Compliance schedules;
(7) Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports;
2012 S-12
Sewers 35
(8) Requirements for maintaining and retaining, for a minimum of three years, all plant records
relating to pretreatment and/or wastewater discharge as specified by the city, and affording the city access
thereto as required by 40 CFR 403: 12(o)(2);
(9) Requirements for notification of the city or any new introduction of wastewater constituents
or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into
the wastewater treatment system;
(10) Requirements for notification of slug discharges;
(11) The permit may require the user to reimburse the city for all expenses related to monitoring,
sampling and testing performed at the direction of the city and deemed necessary by the city to verify that
the user is in compliance with said permit;
(12) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure compliance with this chapter;
(13) A statement that indicates the industrial user permit issuance date, expiration date and
effective date;
(14) A statement that the industrial user permit is nontransferable;
(15) Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the Superintendent, to be necessary;
and
(16) A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of Pretreatment Standards
and Requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for
compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state or local law.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96; Am. Ord. 2012-01, passed 3-12-12) Penalty, see ' 50.999
' 50.069 ALTERNATIVE DISCHARGE LIMITS.
(A) Where an effluent from a categorical industrial process(es) is mixed prior to treatment with
wastewater other than that generated by the regulated process, fixed alternative discharge limits may be
derived for the discharge permit by the city. These alternative limits shall be applied to the mixed effluent
and shall be calculated using the combined wastestream formula and/or flow-weighted average formula as
defined in ' 50.002.
(B) Where the effluent limits in a Categorical Pretreatment Standard are expressed only in terms of
mass of pollutants per unit of production (production-based standard), the city may convert the limits to
equivalent limitations expressed either as mass of pollutant discharged per day or of effluent concentration
for purposes of calculating effluent permit limitations applicable to the permittee. The permittee shall be
subject to all permit limits calculated in this matter under 40 CFR 403.6(c) and must fully comply with
these alternative limits.
2012 S-12
36 Lebanon - Public Works
(C) All categorical users subject to production-based standards must report production rates annually
so that alternative permit limits can be calculated if necessary. The categorical user must notify the city 30
days in advance of any major change in production levels that will affect the limits for the discharge permit.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96) Penalty, see ' 50.999
' 50.070 PERMIT DURATION.
Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for
a period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply for permit
reissuance a minimum of 60 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. The terms and
conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the city during the term of the permit as
limitations or requirements as identified in '' 50.050 through 50.088 are modified or other just cause
exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in their permit at least 30 days prior to the
effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time
schedule for compliance.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96) Penalty, see ' 50.999
' 50.071 PERMIT TRANSFER.
Industrial wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. An
industrial wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new
user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without a 30 day prior notification to the city and
provision of a copy of the existing permit to the new owner. The city may deny the transfer of the permit if
it is deemed necessary.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96) Penalty, see ' 50.999
' 50.072 COMPLIANCE DATA REPORTING.
(A) Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable Categorical Pretreatment
Standards or, in the case of a new user, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the
POTW, any user subject to Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards and Requirements shall submit, to
the City Administrator, a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge
from regulated process which are limited by Categorical Pretreatment Standards and Requirements and the
average and maximum daily flow for these process units in the user=s facility which are limited by such
Categorical Pretreatment Standards or Requirements. The report shall state whether the applicable
Categorical Pretreatment Standards or Requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what
additional pretreatment and time schedule is necessary to bring the user into compliance with applicable
Categorical Pretreatment Standards or Requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized
representative of the user.
2012 S-12
Sewers 36A
(B) Where compliance schedules are required, the following conditions shall apply:
(1) The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement
and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment
required for the user to meet the applicable Pretreatment Standards (such events include, but are not limited
to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components,
commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation);
(2) No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months;
(3) The user shall submit a progress report to the City Administrator no later than 14 days
following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, at a minimum, whether or
not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being
taken by the user to return to the established schedule.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96; Am. Ord. 2012-01, passed 3-12-12) Penalty, see ' 50.999
' 50.073 PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS.
(A) All significant industrial users shall submit, to the city, every six months (on dates specified in the
industrial wastewater discharge permit) unless required more frequently by the permit, a report indicating,
at a minimum, the nature and concentration, of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such
Pretreatment Standards or the discharge permit. The report shall also include the chain-of-custody (COC)
forms, field data and any other information required by the City Administrator. In addition, this report shall
include, a record of all daily flows or the average daily flow. At the discretion of the City Administrator and
in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow periods, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the City
Administrator may agree to alter the months during which the above reports are to be submitted. All
periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12 and ' 50.081.
(B) All wastewater samples must be representative of the user=s discharge. Wastewater monitoring
and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean and maintained in good working
order at all times. The failure of the user to keep its monitoring facility and equipment in good working
order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. All
analyses shall be performed by a laboratory acceptable to the city. Analytical procedures shall be in
accordance with procedures established by the U.S. EPA Administrator pursuant to Section 304(g) of the
Act and contained in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto and 40 CFR 261 or with any other test
procedures approved by the U.S. EPA Administrator. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the
techniques approved by the U.S. EPA Administrator. Except as indicated in division (B)(1) and (2) below,
the user must collect wastewater samples using 24-hour flow-proportional composite sampling techniques,
unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the City Administrator.
When time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the City Administrator, the
samples must be representative of the discharge. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation)
specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab
2012 S-12
36B Lebanon - Public Works
samples collected during a 24-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for cyanide,
total phenols and sulfides, the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile
organics and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other
parameters unaffected by the composting procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may
be authorized by the City Administrator, as appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be required to show
compliance with instantaneous limits.
(1) Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total phenols, sulfides and volatile
organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques.
(2) For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and 90-day compliance reports
required in 40 CFR 403.12(b) and (d), a minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total
phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do
not exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the City Administrator may
authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by 40 CFR 403.12(e) and (h), the industrial user is
required to collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance with applicable
Pretreatment Standards and Requirements.
(C) Where 40 CFR Part 136 does not include a sampling or analytical technique for the pollutant(s) in
question, sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the procedures set forth in the EPA
publication, ASampling and Analysis Procedures for Screening of Industrial Effluents for Priority
Pollutants,@ April 1977, and amendments thereto, or with any other sampling and analytical procedures
approved by the U.S. EPA Administrator.
(D) A Baseline Monitoring Report (BMR) must be submitted to the city by all categorical industrial
users at least 90 days prior to initiation of discharge to the sanitary sewer. The BMR must contain, at a
minimum, the following:
(1) Production data. A process description, SIC code number, raw materials used, chemicals
used, final product, pretreatment industrial category (if applicable), and a schematic which indicates points
of discharge to the sewer system.
(2) Identifying information. Information shall include name, address of facility, owner(s), contact
person and any other permits held by the facility.
(3) Wastewater characteristics. Total plant flow, types of discharges, average and maximum
flows from each process.
(4) Nature/concentration of pollutants. Analytical results for all pollutants regulated by this
chapter and/or any applicable federal pretreatment standard and sample type and location. All analyses must
conform with 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto.
(5) Equipment. Information concerning any pretreatment equipment used to treat the facility's
discharge.
2012 S-12
Sewers 36C
(6) Compliance certification. A statement, reviewed by the user=s authorized representative as
defined in ' 50.002 and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether Pretreatment Standards are
being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or
additional pretreatment is required to meet the Pretreatment Standards and Requirements.
(7) Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the
Pretreatment Standards, the shortest schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the
applicable Pretreatment Standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the
requirements set out in division (F) below.
(E) New sources shall give estimates of the information requested in division (D)(1) and (3) above,
but at no time shall a new source commence discharge(s) to the public sewer of substances that do not meet
provisions of this chapter. All new sources must be in compliance with all provisions of this chapter, state
and federal pretreatment regulations prior to commencement of discharge to the public sewer.
(F) Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions shall apply to all compliance
schedules required by this chapter:
(1) The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement
and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment
required for the user to meet the applicable Pretreatment Standards.
(2) No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months.
(3) The user shall submit a progress report to the City Administrator no later than 14 days
following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or
not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being
taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and in no event shall more than nine months elapse
between such progress reports to the City Administrator.
(G) Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall retain, and make available for
inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required
by this chapter, any additional records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities
required by this chapter, any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities
undertaken by the user independent of such requirements and documentation associated with best
management practices as may be required. Records shall include the date, exact place, method and time of
sampling and the name of the person(s) taking the sample; the dates analyses were performed; who
performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used and the results of such analyses. These
records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall automatically be
extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the city or where the user has been
specifically notified of a longer retention by the City Administrator.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96; Am. Ord. 2012-01, passed 3-12-12) Penalty, see ' 50.999
2012 S-12
36D Lebanon - Public Works
Sewers 37
' 50.074 PERMIT VIOLATIONS.
(A) All significant industrial users must notify the city within 24 hours of first becoming aware of a
permit violation. This notification shall include the date of violation, the parameter violated and the
amount in exceedance.
(B) The user shall immediately repeat the sampling and analysis of the parameter(s) in question and
submit the results to the city within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. Exception to this
regulation is only if the city performs the sampling within the same time period for the same parameter(s) in
question.
(C) Compliance with the terms of an industrial wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed in
compliance with the terms of this chapter.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96) Penalty, see ' 50.999
' 50.075 MONITORING.
(A) (1) The city shall require significant users to provide and operate, at the user's own expense,
monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or
internal drainage system. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user's premises, but
the city may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the
facility to be constructed in a public right-of-way. The city shall review and approve the location, plans, and
specifications for such monitoring facilities and may require them to be constructed to provide for the
separate monitoring and sampling of industrial waste and sanitary sewage flows.
(2) There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate
sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility shall be designed and maintained in a manner
such that the safety of city and industrial personnel shall be foremost. The facility, sampling, and
measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a proper operating condition at the expense of the
owner.
(3) Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities
shall be provided in accordance with the city's requirements and all applicable local construction standards
and specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following approval of the location,
plans and specifications.
(B) All monitoring results collected by the city shall be summarized and forwarded to the industrial
user for their review and signature. Self-monitoring results required by the permit and obtained by the
industry are due the 20th of the month following the month during which the analyses are required. Each
report is to be accompanied by a copy of the laboratory analysis sheets and a copy of the chain of custody.
(C) All sampling analyses collected from an approved monitoring point and in accordance with EPA
procedures for the purposes of demonstrating compliance with the wastewater contribution permit shall be
submitted to the city with the required monitoring report.
38 Lebanon - Public Works
(D) Where only one sample per month or less is required then that sample becomes the monthly
average and must meet the monthly average limit noted in the permit.
(E) To obtain a more accurate result for monthly averaging the permittee has the option to monitor the
discharge at a greater frequency than required in the permit. However, all analysis obtained by such
monitoring shall be included in the monthly average calculation and the results submitted to the city.
(F) All sampling analyses done in accordance with approved federal EPA procedures by the industrial
user during a reporting period shall be submitted to the city regardless of whether or not that analysis was
required by the industrial user's discharge permit.
(G) The industrial user must receive the approval of the city before changing the sampling point and/or
monitoring facilities to be used in all required sampling.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96) Penalty, see ' 50.999
' 50.076 INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.
(A) The city shall inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this chapter is
being met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where
wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the city or their representative ready access at all reasonable
times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, copying records, records
examination or in the performance of any of their duties.
(B) The city, state, and EPA shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are
necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a
user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry
into their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards so that upon
presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city, state, and EPA will be permitted to enter,
without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96) Penalty, see ' 50.999
' 50.077 PRETREATMENT.
All significant industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with
this chapter and achieve compliance with any applicable Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards within
the time limitations as specified by the Federal Pretreatment Regulations. The city may require the
development of a compliance schedule for installation of pretreatment technology and/or equipment by any
industrial user that cannot meet discharge limits required by this chapter. Any facilities required to pretreat
wastewater to a level required by this chapter shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's
expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to
the city for review, and shall be acceptable to the city before construction of the facility. The review of such
plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve
Sewers 39
the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent that complies
with the provisions of this chapter. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of
operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the city prior to the user's initiation of the changes.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96) Penalty, see ' 50.999
' 50.078 ANNUAL PUBLICATION.
(A) The city shall annually publish in a newspaper of general circulation that provides meaningful
public notice within the jurisdictions served by the POTW, a list of significant users which were in
significant noncompliance with any pretreatment requirements or standards. The notification shall also
summarize any enforcement actions taken against the user(s) during the same 12 months.
(B) All records relating to the city's pretreatment program shall be made available to officials of the
EPA or Approval Authority upon request. All records shall be maintained for a minimum of three years in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(O)(2).
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96; Am. Ord. 2012-01, passed 3-12-12) Penalty, see ' 50.999
' 50.079 SIGNIFICANT NON-COMPLIANCE.
A user is defined as being in significant non-compliance when it commits one or more of the following
conditions:
(A) Causes imminent endangerment to human health or environment or results in the exercise of
emergency authority under 40 CFR 403 to halt or prevent such a discharge;
(B) Involves failure to report noncompliance accurately;
(C) Results in a chronic violation defined here as 66% or
more of all measurements taken during a six month period that exceed (by any magnitude) the daily
maximum limit or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter;
(D) Results in a Technical Review Criteria (TRC) Violation defined here as 33% or more of all
measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six month period that equal or exceed the
product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for
BOD, TSS, fats, and O&G and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
(E) Any violation of a pretreatment effluent limit that the city determines has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference or pass through or has endangered the health of the POTW
personnel or the public;
(F) Any discharge causing imminent endangerment to human health/welfare or to the environment or
resulting in the POTW's use of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
2012 S-12
40 Lebanon - Public Works
(G) Violations of compliance schedule milestones, failure to comply with schedule milestones for
starting or completing construction or attaining final compliance by 90 days or more after the schedule date;
(H) Failure to provide required reports within 30 days of the due date; and
(I) Any violation or group of violations which may include a violation of best management practice,
which the City Administrator determines will adversely affect the operation of implementation of the local
pretreatment program.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96; Am. Ord. 2012-01, passed 3-12-12) Penalty, see ' 50.999
' 50.080 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
(A) Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits
and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental
agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests in writing and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the city that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or
methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user.
(B) When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose
trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made
available upon request to all governmental agencies for uses related to this chapter, the NPDES/KPDES
permit, sludge disposal system permit and/or the pretreatment programs. Such portions of a report shall be
available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving
the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics shall not be recognized as
confidential information and shall be available to the public without restriction.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96) Penalty, see ' 50.999
' 50.081 SIGNATORY REQUIREMENTS.
All applications, reports or information submitted to the city shall be signed and certified in accordance
with the following requirements. Written designation of the signatory official must be received by the city
prior to acceptance of any application or other required document.
(A) All permit applications shall be signed:
(1) For a corporation. By a principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-president.
(2) For a partnership or sole proprietorship. By a general partner or the proprietor, respectively.
2012 S-12
Sewers 41
(B) All other correspondence, reports and self-monitoring reports shall be signed by a person
described above or by a duly authorized representative of that person. A person is a duly authorized
representative only if:
(1) The authorization is made in writing by a person described above;
(2) The authorization specifies either an individual or a position having facility or activity, such
as the position of plant manager, superintendent or position of equivalent responsibility.
(C) Certification.
(1) Any person signing a document under this section shall made the following written
certification:
AI certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the
information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person(s) who manage the
system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the
information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate
and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting
false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for
knowing violations.@
(2) A facility determined to be a Non-Significant Categorical Industrial User by the City
Administrator pursuant to '' 50.001 and 50.002 must annually submit the following certification statement
signed in accordance with the signatory requirements in this section. This certification must accompany
any alternative report required by the City Administrator:
ABased on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for
managing compliance with the Categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40
CFR [Part], I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief that during the
period from [month/day], [year] to [month/day], [year]:
(a) The facility described as [facility name] met the definition of a Non-
Significant Categorical Industrial User as described in ' 50.002 of this
chapter.
(b) The facility complied with all applicable Pretreatment Standards and
Requirements during this reporting period; and
(c) The facility never discharged more than 100 gallons of total categorical
wastewater on any given day during this reporting period.@
2012 S-12
42 Lebanon - Public Works
(3) Users that have an approved monitoring waiver based on ' 50.068 must certify each report
with the following statement that there has been no increase in the pollutant in its wastestream due to
activities of the user:
ABased on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for
managing compliance with the Pretreatment Standard for 40 CFR [Part], I
certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief, there has been no increase
in the level of [list pollutant] in the wastewaters due to the activities at the
facility since filing of the last periodic report as required by ' 50.068.@
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96; Am. Ord. 2012-01, passed 3-12-12) Penalty, see ' 50.999
FEES
' 50.090 PURPOSE.
This subchapter provides for the recovery of costs from users of the POTW for the implementation of
the program established herein; The applicable charges or fees shall be set forth in the city's schedule of
charges and fees.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96)
' 50.091 CHARGES AND FEES.
(A) The city may adopt charges and fees which may include:
(1) Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's pretreatment program;
(2) Fees for monitoring, inspections, and surveillance procedures;
(3) Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction;
(4) Fees for permit applications;
(5) Fees for filing appeals;
(6) Fees for consistent removal by the POTW of excessive strength conventional pollutants;
(7) Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein.
2012 S-12
Sewers 42A
(B) These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this chapter and are separate from all other fees
chargeable by the city.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96)
POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS
' 50.100 RIGHT TO ENTER PREMISES.
The Public Works Director and other duly authorized employees and representatives of the city and
authorized representatives of applicable federal and state regulatory agencies bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, and testing pertinent to discharges to the public sewer system in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96) Penalty, see ' 50.999
' 50.101 RIGHT TO OBTAIN INFORMATION REGARDING DISCHARGE.
The Public Works Director and other duly authorized employees and representatives of the city and
authorized representatives of applicable federal and state regulatory agencies bearing proper credentials and
identification are authorized to obtain information including but not limited to copying of records
concerning character, strength and quantity of industrial wastes which have a direct bearing on the kind and
source of discharge to the wastewater collection system.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96) Penalty, see ' 50.999
' 50.102 ACCESS TO EASEMENTS.
Duly authorized employees and representatives of the city bearing proper credentials and identification
shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for
the purpose of, but not limited to, construction, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and
maintenance of any portions of the wastewater facilities lying within said easement. All entry and
subsequent work, if any on said easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly
negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96) Penalty, see ' 50.999
' 50.103 SAFETY.
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in ' 50.102, all duly authorized
employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by
2012 S-12
42B Lebanon - Public Works
the company. The company shall be held blameless for injury or death to city employees. The city shall
secure the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and
demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the
gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to
maintain safe conditions as required by this chapter.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96)
2012 S-12
Sewers 43
ENFORCEMENT
' 50.110 ENFORCEMENT.
(A) The city, or its designee, to insure compliance with this chapter, and as permitted through 40 CFR
Subchapter N, and 401 KAR 5:055, may take the following enforcement steps against users in noncompliance
with the chapter. The remedies available to the POTW include injunctive relief, civil and
criminal penalties, immediate discontinuance of discharges and/or water service and the publishing of the
list of significant violators annually. The enforcement authority shall be vested in the City Administrator or
their designee.
(B) The city may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or an industrial wastewater discharge
permit when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the city, in order to stop an actual or threatened
discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare
of persons, to the environment, causes interference to the POTW or causes the city to violate any condition
of its NPDES/KPDES permit.
(C) Any user notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or the industrial
wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure
of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city shall take such steps as deemed
necessary including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the
POTW system or endangerment to any individuals. The city shall reinstate the industrial wastewater
discharge permit and/or the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the
noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the
harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the city
within 15 days of the date of occurrence.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96) Penalty, see ' 50.999
' 50.111 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
(A) Any user found to be violating any provisions of this chapter, wastewater permit, or any order
issued hereunder, shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation(s).
Within 10 days of the receipt date of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the
satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted to the
city. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of potential liability for any violation occurring
before or after receipt of the notice of violation.
(B) If the violations persist or the explanation and/or plan are not adequate, the city's response shall be
more formal and commitments (or schedules as appropriate) for compliance will be established in an
enforceable document. The enforcement response selected will be related to the seriousness of the
violation. Enforcement responses will be escalated if compliance is not achieved expeditiously after the
initial action. A significant noncompliance as defined in ' 50.079, will require a formal enforcement
action.
44 Lebanon - Public Works
(C) The full scale of enforcement actions will be as detailed in the Enforcement Response Plan.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96)
' 50.112 ADMINISTRATIVE ORDERS.
(A) Any user who, after receiving a notice of violation, shall continue to discharge in violation of this
chapter or other pretreatment standards or requirements or is determined to be a chronic or persistent
violator or who is determined to be a significant violator, shall be ordered to appear before the city. At said
appearance, a compliance schedule will be given to the non-conforming user and an administrative fine
assessed. The fine shall be determined on a case-by-case basis which shall consider the type and severity of
violations, duration of violation, number of violations, severity of impact on the POTW, impact on human
health, users economic benefit from violation, history of violations, good faith of the user, and shall be a
non-arbitrary but appropriate amount.
(B) The administrative order may take any of the following three forms.
(1) Consent orders. The city or its designee is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders,
assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with the
industrial user responsible for the noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by
the industrial user to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order. Consent
orders shall have the same force and effect as orders issued pursuant to division (B)(3) below.
(2) Compliance orders. When the city or its designee finds that an industrial user has violated or
continues to violate the chapter or a permit or order issued thereunder, the city may issue an order to the
industrial user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, sewer service
shall be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances have been
installed and are properly operated. Orders may also contain such other requirements as might be
reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the noncompliance, including the installation of
pretreatment technology, additional self-monitoring, and management practices.
(3) Cease and desist orders. When the city finds that an industrial user has violated or continues
to violate this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, the city may issue an order to cease and
desist all such violations and direct those persons in noncompliance to (a) comply forthwith, or (b) take
such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or
threatened violation, including halting operations and terminating the discharge.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96)
Sewers 45
' 50.113 SHOW CAUSE HEARING.
(A) The city or its designee may issue to any user who causes or contributes to violations of this
chapter, wastewater permit or order issued hereunder, an order to appear and show cause why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place
of a hearing to be held by the city regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken, the
proposed enforcement action, and directing the user to show cause, before the city, why the proposed
enforcement action should hot be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by
registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least 10 days before the hearing. Service may be
made on any agent or officer of the industrial user. Whether or not a duly notified industrial user or its
representative appears, immediate enforcement action may be pursued.
(B) The city may, itself, conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or designate a representative to:
(1) Issue, in the name of the city, notices of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of
witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearing;
(2) Take the evidence;
(3) Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence,
together with recommendations to the city for action thereon.
(C) At any hearing held pursuant to this chapter, testimony taken must be under oath and recorded
stenographically. The transcript, so recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or any
party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof.
(D) After the city has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to the user responsible for the
discharge directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service will be discontinued unless
adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders
and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96)
' 50.114 ADDITIONAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES.
(A) Performance bonds. The city may decline to reissue a permit to any industrial user which has
failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any other order or previous permit issued hereunder
unless such user first files with it a satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in a sum not to exceed a value
determined by the city to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance.
(B) Liability insurance. The city may decline to reissue a permit to any industrial user which has
failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any order or previous permit issued hereunder, unless
the industrial user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair
POTW damage caused by its discharge.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96)
46 Lebanon - Public Works
' 50.115 REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.
The enforcement actions and remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The City
Administrator may take any, all, or combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement
of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city=s Enforcement Response Plan.
However, the City Administrator may take other action(s) against any user when the circumstances warrant.
Further the City Administrator is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any
noncompliant user.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 3-12-12)
' 50.999 PENALTY.
(A) Written notice.
(1) Any user found to be violating any provision of this chapter or a wastewater permit or order
issued hereunder, shall be served by the city or its designee with written notice stating the nature of the
violation. The offender shall permanently remedy all violations upon receipt of this notice.
(2) As contained in '' 50.110 through 50.114, the notice may be of several forms. Also as
contained in '' 50.110 through 50.114, penalties of various forms may be levied against users for
violations of this chapter. The penalties, if levied, shall range from publication of violators in the local
newspaper to administrative fines of up to $1,000 per day per violation.
(B) Revocation of permit.
(1) Any user violating any of the provisions of this chapter or a wastewater permit order issued
hereunder, may be subject to termination of its authority to discharge sewage into the municipal sewer
system. Such termination may be immediate if necessary for the protection of the POTW. Said user may
also have water service terminated.
(2) Any user who violates the following conditions of this chapter, or applicable state and federal
regulations, is subject to having his permit revoked in accordance with the procedures of this chapter:
(a) Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of his
discharge;
(b) Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations, or wastewater constituents
and characteristics;
(c) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection or
monitoring; or,
2012 S-12
Sewers 47
(d) Violation of conditions of the permit.
(C) Destruction of POTW. No person(s) shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the
POTW. Any person(s) violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of
disorderly conduct. It shall be noted that the Clean Water Act does not require proof of specific intent to
obtain conviction.
(D) Legal action. If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the city's
wastewater disposal system contrary to the provisions of this chapter, federal or state pretreatment
requirements or any order of the city, the city may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or
equitable relief in the appropriate court of this jurisdiction.
(E) Injunctive relief. Whenever an industrial user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of
this chapter or permit or order issued hereunder, the city through counsel may petition the court for the
issuance of a preliminary or permanent injunction or both (as may be appropriate) which restrains or
compels the activities on the part of the industrial user.
(F) Civil penalties.
(1) Any industrial user who has significantly violated or continues to violate this chapter or any
order or permit issued hereunder, may be liable to the city for a civil penalty of not more than $5,000 per
day plus actual damages incurred by the POTW per violation per day for as long as the violation continues.
Each day in which such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. In addition to the above
described penalty and damages, the city may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, court reporter's
fees, and other expenses associated with the enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring
expenses.
(2) The city may petition the court to impose, assess and recover such sums. In determining
amount of liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited
to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any economic benefit gained
through the industrial user's violation, corrective actions by the industrial user, the compliance history of
the user, and any other factors as justice requires.
(G) Criminal prosecution.
(1) Any industrial user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this chapter or any
orders or permits issued hereunder shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine
not to exceed $5,000 per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than one year or both.
(2) Any industrial user who knowingly and/or negligently makes any false statements,
representation or certification of any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to
be maintained pursuant to this chapter, or industrial user permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or
2012 S-12
48 Lebanon - Public Works
knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $5,000 or by imprisonment for not more than 12 months,
or by both.
(3) In the event of a second conviction, the user shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed
$10,000 per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than three years or both.
(Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-96)
2012 S-12
CHAPTER 51: WATER
Section
Water Rates
51.01 Rate schedule
Water Shortage Regulations
51.15 Purpose
51.16 Definitions
51.17 Declaration of water shortage advisory
51.18 Declaration of water shortage alert
51.19 Declaration of water shortage emergency
51.20 Regulations of Water Works Company
51.21 Termination for violation; hearing
WATER RATES
' 51.01 RATE SCHEDULE.
(A) All persons who use the waterworks facilities of the city, within the city limits shall be charged
and shall pay the following rates for water:
UNIFORM MINIMUM WATER RATE SCHEDULE
Meter Charge*
$7.35 per month
O&M Charge**
$3.35 per 100 cubic feet
* Minimum bill per water meter regardless of the amount of water used each month.
** Rate for all water used over zero cubic feet each month.
2018 S-17 49
50 Lebanon - Public Works
(B) All users whose service is provided through a meter located outside the municipal limits of the city
shall pay 110% of the applicable charge provided for under the uniform minimum water rate schedule set
out above. Provided, however, this shall not apply to the Marion County Water District, which shall pay
those charges set forth in the uniform minimum water rate schedule.
(Ord. 610.1, passed 4-10-72; Am. Ord. 91-8, passed 8-28-91; Am. Ord. 96-16, passed 1-13-96; Am. Ord.
07-04, passed 2-15-07; Am. Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-17-13; Am. Ord. 2017-06, passed 9-11-17)
WATER SHORTAGE REGULATIONS
' 51.15 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for the declaration of official phases of water supply
shortage situations and the implementation of voluntary and mandatory water conservation measures
throughout the service area of the Lebanon Water Works Company, Inc. in the event a shortage is declared.
Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to interfere with common law riparian or statutory water
rights.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 11-13-87)
' 51.16 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
CUSTOMER. Any person or entity using water for any purpose from the Lebanon Water Works
Company, Inc.'s water distribution system and for which either a regular charge is made or, in the case of
bulk sales, a cash charge is made at the site of delivery. For so long as the Marion County Water District
shall purchase from the Lebanon Water Works Company, Inc. all or any part of the water furnished to its
subscribing consumers, then the term Acustomer@ shall include both the Marion County Water District, and
each person or entity being served by or through said District unless such person or entity is served
exclusively with water procured from a source other than the Lebanon Water Company, Inc.
OTHER SOURCES OF WATER. Water that has not been introduced by the Lebanon Water Works
Company, Inc. into its water distribution system.
RAW WATER SUPPLIES. All water potentially available to persons within the service area of
Lebanon Water Works Company, Inc.
2018 S-17
Water 51
TREATED WATER. Water that has been introduced by the Lebanon Water Works Company, Inc.
into its water distribution system, including water offered for sale. Uses of treated water are classified as
follows:
(1) Essential Water Uses (Class 1). The following uses of water, listed by site or user type, are
essential.
(a) Domestic. Water necessary to sustain human life and the lives of domestic pets, and to
maintain minimum standards of hygiene and sanitation.
(b) Health care facilities. Patient care and rehabilitation.
(c) Public use. Firefighting, health and public protection purposes, if specifically approved
by health officials and the municipal governing body.
(2) Socially or economically important uses of water (Class 2). The following uses of water,
listed by site or user type, are socially economically important.
(a) Domestic. Personal, in-house water use including kitchen, bathroom and laundry.
(b) Water hauling. Sales for domestic use where not reasonably available elsewhere.
(c) Commercial and civic use.
1. Laundromats.
2. Restaurants, clubs and eating places.
3. Schools, churches, motels/hotels and similar commercial establishments.
(d) Outdoor non-commercial watering.
1. Minimal watering of vegetable gardens.
2. Minimal watering of trees where necessary to preserve them.
(e) Outdoor commercial or public watering (using conservation methods and when other
sources of water are not available or feasible to use.
1. Agricultural irrigation for the production of food and fiber or the maintenance of
livestock.
2. Watering by arboretums and public gardens of national, state, regional or community
significance where necessary to preserve specimens.
52 Lebanon - Public Works
3. Watering by commercial nurseries at a minimum level necessary to maintain stock.
4. Watering at a minimum rate necessary to establish or maintain vegetation or
landscape plantings required pursuant to law or regulation.
5. Watering of woody plants where necessary to preserve them.
6. Minimal watering of golf course greens.
(f) Recreational. Operation of municipal or private swimming pools that serve more than 25
dwelling units.
(g) Air conditioning.
1. Refilling for startup at the beginning of the cooling season.
2. Make-up of water during the cooling season.
3. Refilling specifically approved by health officials and the municipal governing body,
where the system has been drained for health protection or repair services.
(3) Non-Essential (Class 3). Any waste of water, as defined herein, is non-essential. The
following uses of water, listed by site or user type, are non-essential.
(a) Public use.
1. Use of fire hydrants (excluding Class I and Class II uses), including use of sprinkler
caps, testing fire apparatus and Fire Department drills.
2. Flushing of sewers and hydrants except as needed to ensure public health and safety
as approved by health officials and the municipal governing body.
(b) Water hauling. Non-domestic, when other sources are not reasonably available
elsewhere.
(c) Commercial and civic use.
1. Commercial car and truck washes.
2. Serving water in restaurants, clubs, or eating places except by customer request.
3. Failure to repair a controllable leak increasing water levels in scenic and recreational
ponds and lakes, except for the minimum amount required to support fish and wildlife.
(d) Ornamental purposes. Fountains, reflecting pools and artificial waterfalls.
Water 53
(e) Outdoor watering.
1. Use of water for dirt control or compaction.
2. Watering of annual or non-woody plants, lawns, parks, golf course fairways, playing
fields and other recreational areas.
3. Washing sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts or other hardsurface
areas.
4. Washing down buildings or structures for purposes other than immediate fire
protection.
5. Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any gutter or street.
(f) Outdoor commercial or public watering:
1. Expanding nursery facilities, placing new irrigated agricultural land in production, or
planting of landscaping except when required by a site design review process.
2. Use of water for dirt control or compaction.
3. Watering of lawns, parks, golf course fairways, playing fields and other recreational
areas.
4. Washing sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts or other hardsurface
areas.
5. Washing down buildings or structures for purposes other than immediate fire
protection.
6. Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any gutter or street.
(g) Recreational uses other than those specified as Class II.
(h) Non-commercial washing of motor and other vehicles.
(i) Air conditioning (see also Class II purposes). Refilling cooling towers after draining.
WASTE OF WATER. Includes, but is not limited to permitting water to escape down a gutter, ditch,
or other surface drain, or failure to repair a controllable leak of water due to defective plumbing.
54 Lebanon - Public Works
WATER SHORTAGE RESPONSE PHASES.
(1) ADVISORY. Conditions exist which indicate the potential for serious water supply shortages.
(2) ALERT. Raw water supplies are consistently below seasonal averages, and if they continue
to decline, may not be adequate to meet normal needs.
(3) EMERGENCY. Water supplies are below the level necessary to meet normal needs and
serious shortages exist in the area.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 11-13-87)
' 51.17 DECLARATION OF WATER SHORTAGE ADVISORY.
Whenever the governing board of the Lebanon Water Works Company, Inc. finds that a potential
shortage of raw water supplies is indicated, it shall be empowered to declare by resolution that a Water
Shortage Advisory exists, and that the Superintendent of the Lebanon Water Works Company, Inc. shall, on
a daily basis, monitor the supply and demands upon that supply. In addition, the Superintendent is
authorized to call upon all water customers to employ voluntary water conservation measures to limit nonessential
(Class 3) water use and eliminate the waste of water. This subchapter shall be published in the
official city newspaper and may be publicized through the general news media or any other appropriate
method for making such resolutions public.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 11-13-87)
' 51.18 DECLARATION OF WATER SHORTAGE ALERT.
Whenever the governing Board of the Lebanon Water Works Company Inc. finds raw water supplies to
be consistently below seasonal averages, and, if they continue to decline, to be inadequate to meet normal
needs, it shall be empowered to declare by resolution that a water shortage alert exists. The Board shall
continue to encourage voluntary water conservation measures defined under the advisory declaration, and
further shall impose a ban on all non-essential (Class 3) water uses for the duration of the shortage until it is
declared to have ended by resolution of the Board. Publication of these resolutions shall follow the
guidelines in ' 51.17.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 11-13-87)
' 51.19 DECLARATION OF WATER SHORTAGE EMERGENCY.
Whenever the governing Board of the Lebanon Water Works Company, Inc. finds that raw water
supplies are below the level necessary to meet normal needs and that serious shortages exist, it shall be
empowered to declare by resolution that a Water Shortage Emergency exists. Essential uses (Class 1) shall
be identified, in specific, as targets for voluntary conservation initiatives. Also, all socially
Water 55
or economically important uses (Class 2) shall be banned in addition to the non-essential uses (Class 3).
These restrictions shall be considered ongoing until the emergency is ended by resolution of the Board.
Publication of these resolutions shall follow the guidelines in ' 51.17.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 11-13-87)
' 51.20 REGULATIONS OF WATER WORKS COMPANY.
During the effective period of any water supply shortage as provided for in '' 51.17 and 51.19, the
Board of the Lebanon Water Works Company, Inc. is empowered to promulgate such regulations as may be
necessary to carry out the provisions of this subchapter, and any water supply shortage resolution. Any such
regulation shall be subject to the approval of the City Council of Lebanon, Kentucky, at its next regular or
emergency meeting.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 11-13-87)
' 51.21 TERMINATION FOR VIOLATION; HEARING.
Any person who violates the provisions of this subchapter, who fails to carry out the duties and
responsibilities imposed by this subchapter, or who impedes or interferes with any action undertaken or
ordered pursuant to this subchapter shall be subject to the following penalties.
(A) If the Lebanon Water Works Company, Inc., its Superintendent, officers, or any other city official
charged with implementation and enforcement of this subchapter or a water supply shortage resolution,
learns of any violation of any water use restriction imposed pursuant to this subchapter, a written notice of
the violation shall be mailed, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the customer of record or to any
other person known or reasonably suspected to be responsible either for the violation or the correction
thereof. The notice shall describe the violation, and the date or dates upon which such violation has
occurred, and shall advise the customer that, by reason of such violation, the water service afforded that
customer will, at a specified date and time, be terminated without the privilege of reconnection for a
designated period not exceeding 48 hours, such termination to be subject to the following hearing
procedure, and the customer shall likewise be advised in the Notice of his entitlement to request a hearing
pursuant to the following:
(1) The customer who is or may be adversely affected by termination of service, or his designated
representative, may, within three days of his receipt of the notice request a hearing before a hearing officer
designated by the Board of the Lebanon Water Works Company, Inc. for the purpose of conducting such
hearings.
(2) If a hearing is requested by such customer, then that hearing shall be scheduled forthwith, and
no later than seven days from the date upon which the customer requests such a hearing, and the customer
will then be given a full opportunity to be heard on the issue of termination.
(3) The hearing officer shall, upon completion of the hearing, make findings of fact and
recommend to the Board of the Lebanon Water Works Company, Inc. whether cause for termination has
been established.
56 Lebanon - Public Works
(B) The Board of the Lebanon Water Works Company, Inc., upon receipt of a recommendation from
its hearing officer that cause for termination has not been established, shall order that no termination of
service shall be carried out with respect to the subject alleged violation. If the Board receives a
recommendation from its hearing officer that just cause for termination has been established, then the
Board may, at its discretion, order termination of service at a specified date and time and shall thereupon
notify the customer in writing of that decision regarding termination of service. That advice of termination
shall likewise advise the customer of the length of termination, which shall not exceed 48 hours, and the
customer's privilege of applying for reinstatement of service upon payment of that reconnection fee
established herein. In any case, the Board shall have the discretion to suspend termination of service upon
the immediate payment of a reconnection fee in accordance with that schedule established hereunder.
(C) In the event of termination consistent with the foregoing, a fee of $50 shall be paid for the
reconnection of water service which has been terminated, and which termination has been made by reason
of a first offense of the affected customer. In the event of additional and subsequent violations upon the part
of that same customer, the reconnection fee to be paid shall be in the sum of $250.
(D) In the event that any person or entity suspected of any violation of this subchapter shall be served
through the facilities of the Marion County Water District, then the District's manager shall be forwarded a
copy of each notice provided for herein, and the District shall be encouraged to participate in those
proceedings affecting its consumer. In the event of an order of termination made with respect to a customer
who is served by the District, then such termination shall be implemented by means of advice to, and in
cooperation with, the officers of the District.
(Ord. 87-11, passed 11-13-87)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
Chapter
70. GENERAL PROVISIONS
71. TRAFFIC RULES
72. PARKING REGULATIONS
73. BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES
74. TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
75. PARKING SCHEDULES
1
2 Lebanon - Traffic Code
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
70.01 Definitions
70.02 Required obedience to traffic directions
70.03 Powers and duties of Police Department
70.04 Authority for enforcement
70.05 Temporary regulations
Traffic-Control Devices
70.15 Signal legends
70.16 Establishment and maintenance of traffic-control devices
70.17 Obedience to signals
70.18 Interference with signals
70.19 Unauthorized signals or markings
70.20 Device to be legible and in proper position
70.21 Temporary disregard of devices by police officers
70.99 General penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this title the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES. Vehicles of the Fire Department or Police
Department, vehicles of the Commonwealth Attorney’s office when on official business, and
ambulances on an authorized emergency run.
BOULEVARD. Any legally designated street at which cross traffic is required to stop before
entering or crossing such boulevard.
3
4 Lebanon - Traffic Code
BUSINESS DISTRICT. Any portion of any street between two consecutive intersections in
which 50% or more of the frontage on either side of the street is used for business purposes.
CROSSWALK. That portion of the roadway included within the extension of the sidewalk
across any intersection, and such other portions of the roadway between two intersections, as may be
legally designated as crossing places and marked by stanchions, paint lines, or otherwise.
CURB. The boundary of that portion of the street used for vehicles whether marked by
curbstones or not.
INTERSECTION. That part of the public way embraced within the extensions of the street lines
of two or more streets which join at an angle whether or not one such street crosses the other.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, signals, warnings, directions,
markings, and devices placed or erected or maintained by authority of the Chief of Police.
ONE-WAY STREET. A street on which vehicles are permitted to move in one direction only.
OPERATOR. Every person who is in actual physical control of the guidance, starting, and
stopping of a vehicle.
PARK. When applied to vehicles, to leave a vehicle standing, whether occupied or not, for a
period of time longer than is necessary to receive or discharge passengers or property.
PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.
PLAY STREET. Any street or portion thereof so designated by the Chief of Police and reserved
as a play area for children, from which all traffic is barred, except vehicles to and from abutting
properties.
POLICE DEPARTMENT. The Police Department or other persons or agency authorized to
perform the duties of § 70.03 or any other acts necessary to implement and enforce this traffic code.
PUBLIC WAY. The entire width between property lines of every way, dedicated passway, or
street set aside for public travel, except bridle paths and foot paths.
REVERSE TURN. To turn a vehicle on any street in such a manner as to proceed in the
opposite direction.
RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate and preferential use of the street.
ROADWAY. That portion of any street, improved, designated, or ordinarily used for vehicular
travel.
SIDEWALK. That portion of the street between the curb and the property line intended for the
use of pedestrians.
General Provisions 5
STOPPING. As applied to vehicles, to stop a vehicle longer than is actually necessary to receive
or discharge passengers.
STREET. Every public way, including alleys.
TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, buses, and other conveyances,
individually or collectively, while using any street for the purpose of travel.
VEHICLE. Every device in, on, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or
drawn on any street except devices moved by human power or used exclusively on stationary rails or
tracks.
§ 70.02 REQUIRED OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC DIRECTIONS.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order, signal,
or direction given by a uniformed police officer, or to fail or refuse to comply with any of the traffic
regulations of this traffic code.
(B) The provisions of this traffic code shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned or used in
the service of the United States government, this state, county, or city, and it shall be unlawful for any
such driver to violate any of the provisions of this traffic code, except as otherwise permitted in this
traffic code or by state statute.
(C) Every person propelling any pushcart or riding a bicycle or an animal on any roadway, and
every person driving any animal on any roadway, and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle
shall be subject to the provisions of this traffic code applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except
those provisions of this traffic code which by their very nature can have no application.
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.03 POWERS AND DUTIES OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.
It shall be the duty of the Police Department to direct all traffic in conformance with this traffic
code and to enforce the traffic regulations as set forth in this traffic code, to make arrest for traffic
violations, to investigate accidents, and to cooperate with other officers of the city in the administration
of the traffic laws, and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions.
§ 70.04 AUTHORITY FOR ENFORCEMENT.
Authority to direct and enforce all traffic regulations of this city in accordance with the
provisions of this traffic code and to make arrests for traffic violations is given to the Police
Department, and, except in case of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any other person to direct or
attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand, whistle, or any other signal.
Penalty, see § 70.99
6 Lebanon - Traffic Code
§ 70.05 TEMPORARY REGULATIONS.
When required for the convenience and safety of the public and to alleviate unusual traffic
problems, the Chief of Police or other authorized city official shall, at his discretion, have authority to
impose such traffic regulations as he may deem necessary for temporary periods not to exceed two
weeks. If these temporary regulations are necessary for a period longer than two weeks, the City Clerk
shall be notified in writing of the extended order.
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
§ 70.15 SIGNAL LEGENDS.
Whenever traffic is regulated or controlled exclusively by a traffic-control sign or signs
exhibiting the words “Go,” “Caution,” or “Stop,” or exhibiting different colored lights for purposes of
traffic control, the following colors only shall be used, and these terms and lights shall indicate and be
obeyed as follows:
(A) Green alone or “Go.” Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or
turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. However, vehicular traffic shall
yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection at the time
such signal is exhibited.
(B) Steady yellow alone or “Caution” when shown following the green or “Go” signal.
Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow signal is thereby warned that the related green movement is
being terminated or that a red indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic
shall not enter the intersection. Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow signal may enter and clear the
intersection.
(C) Red alone or double red or “Stop.” Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before
entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at such other point as may be indicated by a clearly
visible line, and shall remain standing until green or “Go” is shown alone.
(D) Flashing red alone. Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the nearest
crosswalk at an intersection or at such other point as may be indicated by a clearly visible line, and
shall not again proceed until it can do so without danger.
(E) Flashing amber alone. Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall reduce its speed and proceed
cautiously across the intersection controlled by such signal.
General Provisions 7
(F) “Yield Right-of-Way.” Vehicular traffic facing the “Yield Right-of-Way” sign shall bear the
primary responsibility of safely entering the primary intersecting or merging right-of-way. All traffic
facing the sign shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles and pedestrians within such primary
intersecting or merging right-of-way. No vehicle facing a “Yield Right-of-Way” sign shall enter the
merging or intersecting right-of-way at a speed in excess of 15 miles per hour, except that this speed
limit shall not apply to vehicles entering an expressway.
(G) Lane lights. When lane lights are installed over any street for the purpose of controlling the
direction of flow of traffic, vehicular traffic shall move only in traffic lanes over which green arrows
appear. However, when flashing amber lights appear above a lane all left turns shall be made from that
lane. Where red arrows appear above such lanes, vehicles shall not move against them. If flashing
amber lights show above a lane, that lane shall be used only for passing and for left turns unless a sign
at such place prohibits such turn.
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
Traffic-control signals, see KRS 189.338
§ 70.16 ESTABLISHMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
The city shall establish and maintain all official traffic-control devices necessary within the city.
All traffic-control devices, including signs, shall be employed to indicate one particular warning or
regulation, shall be uniform, and as far as possible shall be placed uniformly. All traffic-control
devices and signs shall conform to required state specifications.
§ 70.17 OBEDIENCE TO SIGNALS.
(A) It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to disobey the signal of any official trafficcontrol
device placed in accordance with the provisions of this traffic code or of a traffic barrier or sign
erected by any of the public departments or public utilities of the city, or any electric signal, gate, or
watchman at railroad crossings, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. However, the type and
the right to or necessity for such barrier or sign must be approved by the city.
(B) Such sign, signal, marking, or barrier shall have the same authority as the personal direction
of a police officer.
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.18 INTERFERENCE WITH SIGNALS.
No person shall without authority attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down, or
remove any official control device or any railroad sign or signal, or any inscription, shield, or insignia
thereon, or any part thereof.
Penalty see § 70.99
8 Lebanon - Traffic Code
§ 70.19 UNAUTHORIZED SIGNALS OR MARKINGS.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to place, maintain, or display on or in view of any street
any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or
resembles an official traffic device or railroad sign or signal which attempts or purports to direct the
movement of traffic, or which conceals or hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any
official control device or any railroad sign or signal. No person shall place or maintain, nor shall any
public authority permit on any street, any traffic sign or signal any commercial advertising. Nothing in
this section shall be construed as restricting any public department or public utility of the city in any
emergency or temporarily from marking or erecting any traffic barrier or sign whose placing has been
approved by the city.
(B) Every such prohibited sign, signal, or marking is declared to be a public nuisance and the
city is empowered forthwith to remove it or cause it to be removed.
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.20 DEVICE TO BE LEGIBLE AND IN PROPER POSITION.
No provision of this traffic code for which signs or any other traffic-control device is required
shall be enforceable against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation the
required device was not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant
person.
§ 70.21 TEMPORARY DISREGARD OF DEVICES BY POLICE OFFICERS.
In an emergency any police officer may at his discretion disregard traffic-control lights or signals
or established regulations in order to facilitate the movement of traffic.
§ 70.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
Any person who violates any provision of this traffic code where no other penalty is specifically
provided shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than $20 nor more than $500.
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC RULES
Section
Operation Generally
71.01 Obstructing traffic
71.02 Reverse or U turns
71.03 Backing vehicles
71.04 Vehicles crossing sidewalks
71.05 Speed limits; unsafe speed
Accidents
71.15 Duty of operator
71.16 Accident report
Prohibitions
71.25 Operator of vehicle to drive carefully
71.26 Right-of-way of emergency vehicles; following emergency vehicles; driving over fire
hose
71.27 Smoke emission or other nuisance
Parades
71.40 Definitions
71.41 Permit required
71.42 Application for permit
71.43 Standards for issuance of permit
71.44 Notice of rejection of permit
71.45 Appeal procedure when permit denied
71.46 Alternative permit
71.47 Notice to city and other officials when permit issued
71.48 Contents of permit
71.49 Duties of permittee
71.50 Public conduct during parades
71.51 Revocation of permit
71.99 Penalty
9
10 Lebanon - Traffic Code
OPERATION GENERALLY
§ 71.01 OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC.
(A) It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle or permit it to remain standing in any street in
such manner as to create an obstruction thereof.
(B) It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to enter any intersection or crosswalk
unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the
vehicle without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding the indication
of any traffic-control signal which may be located at the intersection or crosswalk.
(C) Any intersection deemed by the city to be of special or critical importance to the movement
of traffic shall be marked in a distinctive manner in order to indicate its importance. Should the
operator of any vehicle enter any intersection so marked when there is insufficient room on the other
side of the intersection to accommodate the vehicle, the indication of any traffic-control signal
notwithstanding, he shall be deemed to have violated this division rather than division (B) above.
Penalty, see § 71.99
§ 71.02 REVERSE OR U TURNS.
The operator of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction
unless such movement can be made in safety without interfering with other traffic.
(KRS 189.330(8)) Penalty, see § 71.99
§ 71.03 BACKING VEHICLES.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to back the vehicle at any intersection for the
purpose of executing a turning movement. A vehicle from any parking position shall be backed by the
operator in such manner as to proceed on the same side of the roadway in the lawful direction of travel.
Penalty, see § 71.99
§ 71.04 VEHICLES CROSSING SIDEWALKS.
(A) It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive within any sidewalk space except
at a permanent or temporary driveway or by special permit from the Chief of Police or other authorized
city official.
Traffic Rules 11
(B) It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive the vehicle out of any alley,
driveway, building, or lot and across a sidewalk, or its extension across the alley, unless the vehicle has
been brought to a complete stop immediately prior to crossing the sidewalk or its extension. On
entering the roadway from the alley, driveway, or building the operator shall yield the right-of-way to
all vehicles approaching on the roadway. The operator of any vehicle intending to cross a sidewalk and
turn into an alley from the roadway may do so at low speed and with caution.
Penalty, see § 71.99
§ 71.05 SPEED LIMITS; UNSAFE SPEED.
(A) As used in this section the term MOTOR VEHICLE means any vehicle powered in whole or
in part by a motor of any type, and includes all two, three and four wheeled vehicles.
(B) No person shall operate a motor vehicle on any street, highway or public thoroughfare in any
speed zone in excess of the maximum speed established for that zone.
(C) No person shall at any time operate a motor vehicle on any street, highway or public
thoroughfare in the city at any unsafe speed, even though such speed may be less than the maximum
established for that speed zone. As used herein “unsafe speed” means a speed which, due to unusual or
abnormal conditions which are or should be readily apparent to the operator of the motor vehicle, and
which make the operation of a motor vehicle at such speed reasonably likely to cause accident or injury
to the subject motor vehicle or to other persons, vehicles or to other persons, vehicles or property in the
immediate vicinity.
(D) Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the establishment of temporary or emergency
maximum speed limits within any speed zone by the city or any law enforcement agency. During the
time that any such temporary or emergency maximum speed limit shall be in force, such temporary or
emergency speed limits shall be clearly posted and shall take precedence over the maximum speed
limits hereinabove provided for. During the time that any such temporary or emergency maximum
speed limit is in effect, no person shall operate a motor vehicle on any street, highway or public
thoroughfare within the area covered by the temporary or emergency speed limits at speeds in excess of
the temporary or emergency maximum speed limits.
(E) School zones may be established within any other speed zone established by this section or
Chapter 74, Schedule I. Maximum speed limits within school zones shall be clearly posted within such
zones and shall take precedence over the regular maximum speed limit for such zone. Maximum speed
limits within school zones may be temporary and in force only during certain hours and/or certain days.
At any time the school zone speed limit is not in effect, the regular maximum speed limit established
for that zone shall be effective.
(Ord. 82-3, passed 3- -82)
12 Lebanon - Traffic Code
ACCIDENTS
§ 71.15 DUTY OF OPERATOR.
It shall be the duty of the owner of, operator of, or passenger in any motor vehicle which is
involved in an accident in which any person is injured or property damaged to stop immediately and
ascertain the extent of the injury or damage and render such assistance as may be needed.
Penalty, see § 71.99
Statutory reference:
Duty in case of accident, see KRS 189.580
§ 71.16 ACCIDENT REPORT.
The operator, owner, or passenger involved in an accident resulting in the injury or death of any
person, or an accident in which property is damaged, shall immediately report the accident or property
damage to the Police Department.
Penalty, see § 71.99
PROHIBITIONS
§ 71.25 OPERATOR OF VEHICLE TO DRIVE CAREFULLY.
(A) The operator of any vehicle upon a highway shall operate the vehicle in a careful manner,
with regard for the safety and convenience of pedestrians and other vehicles upon the highway.
(B) No person shall willfully operate any vehicle on any highway in such a manner as to injure
the highway.
(KRS 189.290) Penalty, see § 71.99
§ 71.26 RIGHT-OF-WAY OF EMERGENCY VEHICLES; FOLLOWING EMERGENCY
VEHICLES; DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.
(A) Upon the approach of an emergency vehicle equipped with, and operating, one or more
flashing, rotating, or oscillating red or blue lights visible under normal conditions from a distance of
500 feet to the front of such vehicle; or when the driver is giving audible signal by siren, exhaust
whistle, or bell, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, immediately drive to a
position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the edge or curb of the highway clear of any
intersection, and stop and remain in such position until the emergency vehicle has passed, except when
otherwise directed by a police officer or firefighter.
Traffic Rules 13
(B) Upon the approach of any emergency vehicle operated in conformity with the provisions of
division (A) above, the operator of every vehicle shall immediately stop clear of any intersection and
shall keep such position until the emergency vehicle has passed, unless directed otherwise by a police
officer or firefighter.
(C) No operator of any vehicle, unless he is on official business, shall follow any emergency
vehicle being operated in conformity with the provisions of division (A) above closer than 500 feet, nor
shall he drive into, park the vehicle into, or park the vehicle within the block where the vehicle has
stopped in answer to an emergency call or alarm, unless he is directed otherwise by a police officer or
firefighter.
(D) No vehicle, train, or other equipment shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire
department when the hose is laid down on any street, private driveway, or track for use at any fire
alarm unless the fire department official in command consents that the hose be driven over.
(E) Upon approaching a stationary emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when the
emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle is giving a signal by displaying alternately flashing yellow,
red, red and white, red and blue or blue lights, a person who drives an approaching vehicle shall, while
proceeding with due caution:
(1) Yield the right-of-way by moving to a lane not adjacent to that of the authorized
emergency vehicle if:
(a) The person is driving on a highway having at least four lanes with not fewer than
two lanes proceeding in the same direction as the approaching vehicle; and
(b) It is possible to make the lane change with due regard to safety and traffic
conditions; or
(2) Reduce the speed of the vehicle, maintaining a safe speed to road conditions, if
changing lanes would be impossible or unsafe.
(F) This section does not operate to relieve the person who drives an emergency vehicle from
the duty to operate the vehicle with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway.
(KRS 189.930) Penalty, see § 71.99
§ 71.27 SMOKE EMISSION OR OTHER NUISANCE.
Every vehicle when on a highway shall be so equipped as to make a minimum of noise, smoke,
or other nuisance, to protect the rights of other traffic, and to promote the public safety.
(KRS 189.020) Penalty, see § 71.99
2004 S-5
14 Lebanon - Traffic Code
PARADES
§ 71.40 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
PARADE. Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant, or procession of any kind,
or any similar display in or on any street, sidewalk, park, or other public place in the city.
PARADE PERMIT. A permit required by this subchapter.
§ 71.41 PERMIT REQUIRED.
(A) No person or persons shall engage in, participate in, aid, form, or start any parade unless a
parade permit has been obtained from the Chief of Police or other authorized city official.
(B) This subchapter shall not apply to:
(1) Funeral processions; or
(2) A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
Penalty, see § 71.99
§ 71.42 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
(A) Application required. A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application
with the Chief of Police or other authorized city official on forms provided by such officer.
(B) Filing period. The application for a parade permit shall be filed not less than five days or
not more than 60 days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade.
(C) Application contents. The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following
information:
(1) The name, address, and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct the parade;
(2) If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the
name, address, and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and of the authorized and
responsible heads of the organization;
2002 S-4
Traffic Rules 14A
(3) The name, address, and telephone number of the person who will be the parade
chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct;
(4) The date when the parade is to be conducted;
(5) The route to be traveled, the starting point, and the termination point;
(6) The approximate number of persons, animals, and vehicles which will constitute the
parade, the type of animals, if any, and the description of the vehicles;
(7) The hours when the parade will start and terminate;
(8) A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of
the streets, sidewalk, park, or other public place proposed to be traversed;
(9) The location by street of any assembly area for the parade;
(10) The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any such assembly area
or areas;
(11) The interval of space to be maintained between units of the parade;
2002 S-4
14B Lebanon - Traffic Code
Traffic Rules 15
(12) If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for, any person other than
the applicant, the applicant for the permit shall file a communication in writing from the person
authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf;
(13) Any additional information reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a
permit should issue.
(D) There shall be paid at the time of filing an application for a parade permit a fee in an amount
as established by the City Council.
Penalty, see § 71.99
§ 71.43 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
The Chief of Police or other authorized city official shall issue a permit when, from a
consideration of the application and from other information obtained, he finds that:
(A) The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of
other traffic contiguous to its route;
(B) The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police
officers of the city to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to
prevent normal police protection to the city;
(C) The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances
as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the
proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto;
(D) The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not
unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to
the assembly areas;
(E) The conduct of the parade will not interfere with the movement of fire fighting equipment en
route to a fire;
(F) The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination
expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route.
Penalty, see § 71.99
16 Lebanon - Traffic Code
§ 71.44 NOTICE OF REJECTION OF PERMIT.
The Chief of Police or other authorized city official shall act on the application for a parade
permit within three days, Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays excepted, after filing thereof. If he
disapproves the application, he shall mail to the applicant within the three days, Saturdays, Sundays,
and holidays excepted, after the date on which the application was filed, a notice of his action stating
the reasons for his denial of the permit.
§ 71.45 APPEAL PROCEDURE WHEN PERMIT DENIED.
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade permit to the City
Council. The appeal shall be taken within 30 days after notice of denial. The City Council shall act on
the appeal within 30 days after its receipt.
§ 71.46 ALTERNATIVE PERMIT.
The Chief of Police or other authorized city official, in denying an application for a parade
permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time, or over a route
different than that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall file
a written notice of his acceptance. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of,
and shall have the effect of, a parade permit under this subchapter.
§ 71.47 NOTICE TO CITY AND OTHER OFFICIALS WHEN PERMIT ISSUED.
Immediately on the issuance of a parade permit, a copy thereof shall be sent to the following
persons:
(A) The Mayor;
(B) The City Attorney;
(C) The Fire Chief;
(D) The general manager or responsible head of each public utility, the regular routes of whose
vehicles will be affected by the route of the proposed parade.
§ 71.48 CONTENTS OF PERMIT.
Each parade permit shall state the following information:
(A) Starting time;
Traffic Rules 17
(B) Minimum speed;
(C) Maximum speed;
(D) Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade;
(E) The portions of the street, sidewalk, park, or other public place to be traversed that may be
occupied by the parade;
(F) The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof;
(G) Such other information as is reasonably necessary to the enforcement of this subchapter.
Penalty, see § 71.99
§ 71.49 DUTIES OF PERMITTEE.
A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all
applicable laws and ordinances. The parade chairman or other person heading or leading the activity
shall carry the parade permit on his person during the conduct of the parade.
Penalty, see § 71.99
§ 71.50 PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING PARADES.
(A) Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede, or interfere with any
parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle, or animal participating or used in a parade.
(B) Driving through parades. No driver of a vehicle except a police car or other emergency
vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons
are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade.
Cross reference:
Parking on parade routes, see § 72.07
§ 71.51 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
The city shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued hereunder on application of the
standards for issuance as herein set forth.
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
(A) Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no other penalty is specifically
provided shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than $20 nor more than $500.
18 Lebanon - Traffic Code
(B) Any person who violates the provisions of § 71.05 or Chapter 74, Schedule I, shall be guilty
of a violation and shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $50 for each offense. (Ord. 82-3,
passed 3- -82)
(C) Any person who violates § 71.26 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less
than $60 nor more than $500, or be imprisoned in the county jail for not more than 30 days, or both.
(KRS 189.993(8))
CHAPTER 72: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
Parking Generally
72.01 Obstructional parking; double parking
72.02 Manner of parking
72.03 Limitations of stopping and parking
72.04 Restrictions and prohibitions on designated streets
72.05 Parking restricted to allow street cleaning
72.06 Parking in excess of certain number of hours prohibited; towing authorized
72.07 Parking on parade route
72.08 Parking on off-street facility
72.09 Owner responsibility
72.10 Parking in parks
72.11 Display of parked vehicle for sale
72.12 Parking with handicapped permits
72.13 Establishment of parking zones
72.14 Fire lanes
Impounding
72.20 Impoundment of vehicles authorized; redemption
72.21 Required notice to owner
72.22 Sale of vehicle
Snow Emergency
72.35 Announcement of snow emergency
72.36 Termination of emergency
72.37 Snow emergency routes
72.99 Penalty
Statutory reference:
Revenues from fees, fines, and forfeitures related to parking, see KRS 65.120
19
20 Lebanon - Traffic Code
PARKING GENERALLY
§ 72.01 OBSTRUCTIONAL PARKING; DOUBLE PARKING.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any vehicle or any other thing that may be a
nuisance, obstruction, or hindrance in or on any street, alley, or sidewalk within the city either during
the day or night.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to stop or park any vehicle on the roadway side of any
other vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street.
Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.02 MANNER OF PARKING.
(A) It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop or park the vehicle in a manner
other than with its right-hand side toward and parallel with the curb, except that where parking is
permitted on the left side of any one-way street, the left-hand side shall be parked, and except for
commercial loading and unloading on one-way streets. Stopping or parking a vehicle in any other
manner on the city streets shall be subject to penalty, if the officer deems the manner parked a threat to
the safety of the operator of the vehicle or others.
(B) No vehicle shall be parked or left standing on any street unless the side of the vehicle is
parked parallel to the curb with its wheels six inches from the curb.
(C) The city may establish diagonal parking at certain places, requiring the parking of vehicles at
a certain angle to the curb and within a certain portion of the roadway adjacent thereto. However,
diagonal parking shall not be established where the roadway space required therefor would be within
ten feet of the center line of any street. Such diagonal parking places shall be designated by suitable
signs, and shall indicate by markings on the pavement the required angle and the width of the roadway
space within which such vehicle shall park.
(E) It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to so park such vehicle that any part
thereof shall extend beyond the lines marking the side or the rear of the space assigned for one vehicle.
(Am. Ord. 09-03, passed 7-13-09) Penalty, see § 72.99
2010 S-10
Parking Regulations 21
§ 72.03 LIMITATIONS OF STOPPING AND PARKING.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop or park such vehicle except in a case of
real emergency or in compliance with the provisions of this traffic code or when directed by a police
officer or traffic sign or signal at any time in the following places:
(A) On the mainly-traveled portion of any roadway or on any other place in the roadway where
vehicles stand in any manner other than as specified in § 72.02.
(B) On a sidewalk or so that such motor vehicle blocks any sidewalk.
(C) In front of sidewalk ramps provided for persons with disabilities.
(D) In front of a public or private driveway so that such motor vehicle shall block any driveway,
street or alley way.
(E) Within three feet of the entrance to any street, driveway or alley way, or within six feet of
any fire plug;
(F) Within an intersection or crosswalk.
(G) At any place where official signs prohibit stopping or parking. This does not apply to police
officers when operating properly identified vehicles during the performance of their official duties.
(H) Within 30 feet of any flashing beacon, traffic sign, or traffic-control device.
(I) In any designated fire lane.
(J) On any street in such a manner so that either of the right wheels are more than 14 inches
from the right curb of such street.
(K) No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such prohibited area.
(KRS 189.450(5), (6)) (Ord. 91-17, passed 1-13-92) Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.04 RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS ON DESIGNATED STREETS.
(A) The provisions of this section prohibiting the stopping and parking of a vehicle shall apply at
all times or at those times herein specified or as indicated on official signs except when it is necessary
to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police
officer or official traffic-control devices.
(B) The provisions of this section imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve any person
from his duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping or
parking of vehicles in specific places or at specified times.
22 Lebanon - Traffic Code
(C) When signs are erected in compliance with the provisions of division (F) below giving
notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at any time on any street so marked by official signs.
(D) When a curb has been painted in compliance with the provisions of division (F) below, no
person shall park a vehicle at any time at or adjacent to any curb so marked.
(E) When signs are erected in compliance with the provisions of division (F) below, in each
block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified by official signs
on any day except Sundays on any street so marked.
(F) (1) The city shall determine on what streets or portions thereof stopping or parking shall be
restricted or prohibited. Whenever under authority of or by this traffic code or any other ordinance any
parking limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets, or parking areas are restricted to
handicapped parking, appropriate signs shall be erected giving notice thereof. However, in lieu of
erecting such signs or in conjunction therewith, the face and top of a curb or curbs at or adjacent to
which parking is prohibited at all times may be painted a solid yellow color.
(2) No such regulations or restrictions shall be effective unless the signs have been erected
and are in place or the curbs are painted yellow at the time of any alleged offense, except in the case of
those parking restrictions which by their very nature would not require such signs and markings.
(G) When signs are erected in compliance with division (F) above in each block giving notice
thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for a time longer than specified on official signs any day except
Sunday and on any street so marked.
Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.05 PARKING RESTRICTED TO ALLOW STREET CLEANING.
The city is authorized to designate street cleaning areas and shall provide suitable signs and
markings on the street to be cleaned, restricting parking on that particular day. It shall be unlawful for
the operator of any vehicle to stop on any street so designated.
Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.06 PARKING IN EXCESS OF CERTAIN NUMBER OF HOURS PROHIBITED;
TOWING
AUTHORIZED.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to park in any one place any vehicle on any of the public ways or
streets of the city for a period of 24 hours or longer. Any vehicle left parked in any one place on any of
the public ways or streets of the city for a period of 24 hours or longer shall be deemed abandoned, and
shall be subject to all existing regulations of the city pertaining to abandoned motor vehicles.
Penalty, see § 72.99
Cross-reference:
Removal of abandoned vehicles, see § 72.21 et seq.
Parking Regulations 23
§ 72.07 PARKING ON PARADE ROUTE.
(A) The Chief of Police or other authorized city official shall have the authority, whenever in his
judgment it is necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a street or part thereof
constituting a part of the route of a parade or procession, to erect temporary traffic signs to that effect,
and to prohibit and prevent such parking.
(B) It shall be unlawful to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation of such signs or
directions.
Penalty, see § 72.99
Cross-reference:
Parades, see §§ 71.40 through 71.51
§ 72.08 PARKING ON OFF-STREET FACILITY.
(A) It shall be unlawful for the driver of a motor vehicle to park or abandon the vehicle or drive
on or otherwise trespass on another’s property, or on an area developed as an off-street parking facility,
without the consent of the owner, lessee, or person in charge of such property or facility.
(B) If at any time a vehicle is parked, abandoned, or otherwise trespasses in violation of division
(A) of this section, the owner, lessee, or person in charge of the property or facility may have the
unauthorized motor vehicle removed in accordance with the provisions of §§ 72.20 through 72.22.
(C) Every property owner or operator of an off-street parking facility shall post signs stating
thereon that the property or parking lot or facility is privately owned and that unauthorized vehicle will
be removed at the owner’s expense before exercising the authority granted in division (B).
Penalty, see § 72.99
Statutory reference:
Removal of vehicles by owners of private parking lots; signs, see KRS 189.725
§ 72.09 OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.
If any vehicle is found illegally parked in violation of any provisions of this subchapter
regulating stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles, and the identity of the driver cannot be
determined, the owner or person in whose name the vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie
responsible for the violation.
Penalty, see § 72.99
24 Lebanon - Traffic Code
§ 72.10 PARKING IN PARKS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle in or on any section of any public
park, playground, play lot, or tot lot within the city not designed as a parking area or designed and
regularly maintained as a roadway. However, nothing contained in this section shall be construed as
prohibiting the parking of a motor vehicle parallel to a designated and regularly maintained roadway in
any such park or playground where at least two wheels of the motor vehicle are resting on such
roadway.
Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.11 DISPLAY OF PARKED VEHICLE FOR SALE.
It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle displayed for sale or a motor vehicle on which
demonstrations are being made on any street.
Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.12 PARKING WITH HANDICAPPED PERMITS.
(A) Any other provision to the contrary notwithstanding, a motor vehicle bearing a decal in its
front windshield issued by the County Clerk pursuant to appropriate county ordinances for
handicapped persons, when operated by a handicapped person or when transporting a handicapped
person, may be parked in a designated handicapped parking place, or when parked in a metered parking
space may be parked for two hours for no fee, or when parked where any parking limit is imposed may
be parked for two hours in excess of the parking limit. The motor vehicle may be parked in a loading
zone for that period of time necessary to permit entrance or exit of the handicapped person to or from
the parked vehicle, but in no circumstances longer than 30 minutes.
(B) This section shall not permit parking in a “no stopping” or “no parking” zone nor where
parking is prohibited for the purpose of creating a fire lane or to accommodate heavy traffic during
morning, afternoon, or evening hours, nor permit a motor vehicle to be parked in such a manner as to
constitute a traffic hazard.
Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.13 ESTABLISHMENT OF PARKING ZONES.
The City Engineer, or other person designated by the City Council, may, with the consent of the
Council, establish such temporary or permanent no parking zones or limited time parking zones within
the city as may be appropriate. Such zones shall be marked with signs, paint or other appropriate
methods so as to reasonably notify the general public of the establishment of such no parking zones or
limited time parking zones.
(Ord. 91-17, passed 1-13-92)
Parking Regulations 25
§ 72.14 FIRE LANES.
(A) The City Public Works Director, in conjunction with the Fire Chief and/or the Chief of
Police, or such other person or persons as may be designated by the City Council shall from time to
time recommend to the City Council areas within the city which are proposed to be designated as fire
lanes. Such proposed fire lanes shall specify the areas proposed to be made fire lanes and shall state the
approximate size and location. Advance notice of such proposed designation shall be given in writing
to the owner of the property involved and also to any lessee, if known. Such notice shall be given at
least 14 days prior to any action being taken on such recommendation by the City Council.
(B) In no event shall fire lanes in strip malls or shopping centers be less than 30 feet in front of
each tenant space, nor shall fire lanes in front of all main entrances and exits to public or private
schools be less than 30 feet.
(C) The City Council shall consider all proposed fire lanes and any comments with respect
thereto and shall thereafter approve or disapprove such designations.
(D) A similar process shall be followed whenever there is a recommendation to modify or
terminate any existing fire lanes.
(E) Fire lanes approved by the City Council shall be marked with signs, paint or other
appropriate methods so as to reasonably notify the general public of the existence and location of such
fire lanes.
(F) It shall be unlawful to stop or park any two or four-wheeled motor vehicles for any period of
time within the confines of any fire lanes, and/or within 10 feet of any fire hydrant or fire department
connection, whether or not such fire hydrant or fire department connection is located within a
designated fire lane.
(G) In addition to a fine, the Police Department may cause the offending motor vehicle to be
towed away and impounded. Such motor vehicle shall not be released until such time as all fines and
costs of towing and impoundment are paid.
(H) The registered owner of any motor vehicle violating any of the provisions of this section
shall be responsible for payment of all fines and charges levied hereunder.
(Ord. 84-9, passed 9-10-84; Am. Ord. 96-12, passed 9-9-96) Penalty, see § 72.99
IMPOUNDING
§ 72.20 IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES AUTHORIZED; REDEMPTION.
(A) All police officers are empowered to authorize the impoundment of a vehicle violating
vehicle-related ordinances after a citation has been issued.
26 Lebanon - Traffic Code
(B) A vehicle slated for impoundment will be tagged and placed under control of the Police
Department. Should a vehicle be moved without the consent and approval of the Police Department a
warrant shall be issued immediately for the violator’s arrest.
(C) All fines, fees, and charges must be paid in full before a release of impoundment can be
issued for the vehicle’s release.
§ 72.21 REQUIRED NOTICE TO OWNER.
(A) When a motor vehicle has been involuntarily towed or transported pursuant to order of
police, other public authority, or private person or business for any reason or when the vehicle has been
stolen or misappropriated and its removal from the public ways has been ordered by police, other
public authority, or by private person or business, or in any other situation where a motor vehicle has
been involuntarily towed or transported by order of police, other authority, or by private person or
business, the police, other authority, or private person or business shall attempt to ascertain from the
State Transportation Cabinet the identity of the registered owner of the motor vehicle or lessor of a
motor carrier as defined in KRS Chapter 281 and within ten business days of the removal shall, by
certified mail, attempt to notify the registered owner at the address of record of the make, model,
license number, and vehicle identification number of the vehicle, of the location of the vehicle, and of
the requirements for securing the release of the motor vehicle.
(B) If a vehicle described in division (A) is placed in a garage or other storage facility, the owner
of the facility shall attempt to provide the notice provided in division (A) by certified mail to the
registered owner at the address of record of the motor vehicle or lessor of a motor carrier as defined in
KRS Chapter 281 within ten business days of recovery of, or taking possession of the motor vehicle.
This notice shall contain the information as to the make, model, license number, and identification
number of the vehicle, the location of the vehicle, and the amount of reasonable charges for towing,
recovery, storage, transporting, and other applicable charges due on the vehicle. When the owner of
the facility fails to provide notice as provided herein, the motor vehicle storage facility shall forfeit all
storage fees accrued after ten business days from the date of tow. This division (B) shall not apply to a
tow lot or storage facility owned or operated by the city.
(KRS 376.275(1), (2))
§ 72.22 SALE OF VEHICLE.
(A) Any person engaged in the business of storing or towing motor vehicles in either a private
capacity or for the city who has substantially complied with the requirements of § 72.21 shall have a
lien on the motor vehicle and its contents, except as set forth in KRS 376.275(4), for the reasonable or
agreed charges for towing, recovery, storage, transporting, and other applicable charges due on the
vehicle as long as it remains in his possession.
2015 S-15
Parking Regulations 27
(B) Prior to payment of fees and release of a vehicle, a towing or storage company shall not
refuse the right of physical inspection of the towed vehicle by the owner or an insurance company
representative. Release of the vehicle shall occur to the owner or insurance company representative
upon payment and consent of the release from the owner or the owner's authorized representative. Each
additional service shall be set forth individually as a single line item in the bill with an explanation and
the exact charge for the service.
(C) If after a period of 45 days, the reasonable or agreed charges for towing, recovery, storage,
transporting, and other applicable charges due on a motor vehicle and its contents have not been paid,
the motor vehicle and its contents, except as set forth in KRS 376.275(4), may be sold to pay the
charges after the owner has been notified by certified mail ten days prior to the time and place of the
sale. If the proceeds of the sale of any vehicle pursuant to this section are insufficient to satisfy accrued
charges for towing, transporting, and storage, the sale and collection of proceeds shall not constitute a
waiver or release of responsibility for payment of unpaid towing, transporting, and storage charges by
the owner or responsible casualty insurer of the vehicle. A lien on a vehicle under this division shall be
subject to prior recorded liens.
(D) A lien holder having a prior recorded lien listed on the title issued by the Commonwealth of
Kentucky shall be notified by certified mail within the first 15 days of impoundment. The letter shall
include the make, model, license number, vehicle identification number, owner's name and last known
address, and tentative date of sale for the vehicle. If the above-referenced certified letter is not sent
within the 15 days by the towing and storage company, then only 15 days of storage may be charged.
The lien holder has the right to take possession of the motor vehicle after showing proof of lien still
enforced, and paying the reasonable or agreed towing and storage charges on the motor vehicle.
Nothing in this section shall allow the transfer of a vehicle subject to a lien, except as provided in KRS
186A.190.
(KRS 376.275(3))
SNOW EMERGENCY
§ 72.35 ANNOUNCEMENT OF SNOW EMERGENCY.
Whenever the Chief of Police or other authorized city official finds that falling snow, sleet, or
freezing rain will create a condition which makes it necessary that the parking of motor vehicles on
snow emergency routes be prohibited, or whenever he finds on the basis of a firm forecast of snow,
sleet, or freezing rain that the weather conditions so forecasted may create a condition making it
necessary that such parking be prohibited, he is authorized to announce such prohibition, to become
effective at a time specified by him. After the effective time of such prohibition no person shall park
any vehicle or permit any vehicle to remain parked on a snow emergency route. However, if a fall of
snow, sleet, or freezing rain occurs after 11:00 p.m. and prior to 6:00 a.m., and the Chief of Police or
other authorized city official has not announced prior to 11:00 p.m. that parking on snow emergency
routes is to be prohibited
2015 S-15
28 Lebanon - Traffic Code
after a specified time, a vehicle parked on a snow emergency route may remain so parked until 7:00
a.m. following such fall. The prohibition of parking announced by the Chief of Police or other
authorized city official under the authority of this section shall remain in effect until he announces the
termination of the snow emergency, in part or in which the prohibition of parking authorized by this
section shall no longer be in effect.
Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.36 TERMINATION OF EMERGENCY.
Whenever the Chief of Police or other authorized city official shall find that some or all of the
conditions which gave rise to the snow emergency prohibition no longer exist, he is authorized to
declare the termination of the emergency, in part or in whole, effective immediately on announcement.
If such announcement is made other than between 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., it shall be repeated
between those hours.
§ 72.37 SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES.
The term SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTE shall mean any route designated by the Chief of Police
or other authorized city official. On such street or highway designated as a snow emergency route,
special signs shall be posted to this effect.
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person receiving a citation for any parking violation in the city shall be deemed to have
committed a violation and shall be fined in an amount not less than $20 nor more than $100. (KRS
189.990(1))
(B) Any motor vehicle violating the provisions of § 72.14 shall be subject to a fine of $10. (Ord.
96-12, passed 9-9-96)
2015 S-15
CHAPTER 73: BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES
Section
73.01 Operation of bicycles
73.02 Operation of motorcycles and motorscooters
73.03 Skating and coasting
73.04 Clinging to vehicles
73.99 Penalty
Cross-reference:
Required obedience to traffic directions, see § 70.02(C)
§ 73.01 OPERATION OF BICYCLES.
(A) No person shall operate a bicycle on the sidewalks of the city.
(B) No person shall operate a bicycle on any section of a public park, playground, play lot, or tot
lot, except on a roadway or in a parking area.
(C) No operator of any bicycle shall carry another person on such bicycle.
Penalty, see § 73.99
Statutory reference:
Bicycles; safety regulations and standards, see KRS 189.287
§ 73.02 OPERATION OF MOTORCYCLES AND MOTORSCOOTERS.
(A) No operator of any motorcycle, motorscooter, or power-driven bicycle shall carry another
person except on a seat attached thereto or in a side car attached to the vehicle.
(B) No operator of a motorcycle, motorscooter, or power-driven bicycle shall operate such
vehicle in any public park, except on a roadway or in a parking area.
(C) No operator of a motorcycle, motorscooter, or power-driven bicycle shall operate such
vehicle in any play lot or tot lot.
Penalty, see § 73.99
Statutory reference:
Regulations for operating and riding on motorcycles, see KRS 189.285
29
30 Lebanon - Traffic Code
§ 73.03 SKATING AND COASTING.
Except on streets which may be declared from time to time as “play streets” by the city and
protected by barriers or official signs, it shall be unlawful for any person on skates or riding on a
coaster sled or toy vehicle of any kind, to go on any roadway except at a crosswalk.
Penalty, see § 73.99
§ 73.04 CLINGING TO VEHICLES.
(A) No person while riding on a bicycle, coaster sled, roller skates, or any toy vehicle shall cling
to any moving vehicle on any street, or fasten or attach the vehicle on which he is riding thereto.
(B) No person shall ride on the projection, running board, or fenders of any vehicle.
Penalty, see § 73.99
§ 73.99 PENALTY.
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed to have committed a violation
and shall be fined not more than $50 for each offense.
CHAPTER 74: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
I. Speed limits
II. Through streets
III. One-way streets
SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS.
The following speed zones, each comprised of the streets, highways and public thoroughfares, or
portions thereof, set out beside each such zone, are hereby established within and for the city. The
maximum speed limit for motor vehicles in each such speed zone is hereby established at the rate set
out beside each such zone:
Zone
Speed
(m.p.h.) Street Ord. No. Date
A 45 East Main Street (US 68) from a point 700 feet east
of Taylor Avenue extending eastward for a distance
of 3600 feet to a point equidistant to the easterly
boundary line of Lincoln Square Shopping Center
West Main Street (US 68) from KY 208 extending
westward to a point 0.2 miles west of KY 208
St. Mary’s Road (KY 49 and KY 52) from a point
200 feet north of High Street extending northward for
a distance of 1600 feet
North Spalding Avenue (KY 55) from Woodlawn
Avenue extending northward to a point 1900 feet
north of Woodlawn Avenue
86-9 9-9-86
31
32 Lebanon - Traffic Code
Zone
Speed
(m.p.h.) Street Ord. No. Date
B 35 East Main Street (US 68) from a point 200 feet east
of Spalding Avenue extending eastward to a point
700 feet east of Taylor Avenue
West Main Street (US 68) from a point 200 feet west
of Depot Street extending westward to KY 208
St. Mary’s Road, Walnut Street and Depot Street
(KY 49 and KY 52) from Water Street extending
northward to a point 200 feet north of High Street
South Proctor Knott Avenue (KY 49) from Mock
Avenue extending southward to a point 3000 feet
south of Park Drive
St. Rose Road (KY 429) from North Spalding
Avenue (KY 55) extending northward to Lee Avenue
North Spalding Avenue (KY 55) from High School
Avenue extending northward to Woodlawn Avenue
Walnut Street (KY 55) from West Main Street
extending northward to Spalding Avenue
86-9 9-9-86
C 25 Main Street (US 68) from a point 200 feet west of
Depot Street extending eastward to a point 200 feet
east of Spalding Avenue
Proctor Knott Avenue (KY 49 and KY 52) from
Main Street extending northward to Water Street
Proctor Knott Avenue (KY 49) from Main Street
extending southward to Mock Avenue
North Spalding Avenue (KY 55) from Main Street
extending northward to High School Street
86-9 9-9-86
(Ord. 82-3, passed 3- -82; Am. Ord. 85-7, passed 7-22-85; Am. Ord. 86-9, passed 9-9-86) Penalty, see
§ 71.99
Traffic Schedules 33

SCHEDULE II. THROUGH STREETS.
(A) The following streets are established as through streets:
Street Location Ord. No. Date
Rolling Avenue From its inception to intersection
with Springfield Highway
80-3 6-9-80
(B) Any person violating this schedule shall be guilty of a violation and shall be fined not less
than $10 nor more than $25 for each such offense.
(Ord. 80-3, passed 6-9-80)
34 Lebanon - Traffic Code
SCHEDULE III. ONE-WAY STREETS.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle to be operated on the following streets in a
direction other than that indicated.
Street Location Direction Ord. No. Date
Mulberry Street Between College Street and
Shuck Avenue
East 79-4 - -79
(B) Any person violating the provisions of this schedule shall be fined not less than $10 nor
more than $25 for each offense.
(Ord. 79-4, passed - -79)
CHAPTER 75: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
I. Parking prohibited at all times
II. Parking time limited
III. Handicapped permit parking
SCHEDULE I. PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES.
It shall be unlawful at any time to park a motor vehicle in the following locations within the city:
Street Side Location Ord. No. Date
West Chandler
Street
Either
Within 30 feet of the curb line of South
Proctor Knott Avenue
91-17 1-13-92
College Street
East
Between West Main Street and Mulberry
Street
91-17 1-13-92
West High
Street
Both
Within 25 feet of the intersection of North
Street and West High Street in each
direction from the actual intersection of the
two streets
2011-06 8-8-11
West High
Street
South
From the entrance to the medical offices of
William Rik Kirk, M.D., to Loretto Road
05-09 12-12-05
Kobert Avenue West From Walnut Street to Water Street 91-17 1-13-92
West Main
Street
North or
South
From a point 215 feet west of the west edge
of North Depot Street to the east edge of
South Depot Street
91-17 1-13-92
West Main
Street
Either
Within 400 feet west of its intersection with
Walnut Street
91-17 1-13-92
ML King
Avenue North
Within 300 feet of Spalding Avenue
between Spalding Avenue and Harrison
Street
2011-10 10-10-11
35
2019 S-18 Repl.
36 Lebanon - Traffic Code
Street Side Location Ord. No. Date
Mulberry Street
South
Between Proctor Knott Avenue and College
Street
91-17 1-13-92
West Mulberry
Street
Both
Within 60 feet of the three-way stop
intersection of West Mulberry and Depot
05-09 12-12-05
North Street
Both
Within 25 feet of the intersection of North
Street and West High Street in each
direction from the actual intersection of the
two streets
2011-06 8-8-11
North Spalding
Avenue Either
Within 160 feet of the north side of West
Walnut Street and within 260 feet of the
south side of West Walnut Street
91-17 1-13-92
North Spalding
Avenue
East
Between Main Street and ML King Avenue
05-09 6-12-05
South Proctor
Knott Avenue
West
Between West Main Street and Mulberry
Street
05-09 12-12-05
South Proctor
Knott Avenue
East
Between Mulberry Street and the Farmers
National Bank drive-thru entrance
05-09 12-12-05
North Proctor
Knott Avenue
East
Between West Main Street and the Citizens
National Bank drive-thru entrance
05-09 12-12-05
ML King
Avenue North
Westbound lane within a distance of 200
feet from the intersection of Harrison Street
and ML King Avenue
07-05 4-9-07
ML King
Avenue South
Eastbound lane within a distance of 350 feet
from the intersection of Harrison Street and
ML King Avenue
07-05 4-9-07
West ML King
Avenue Center
parking
aisle
Starting 174 feet from the intersection of
West ML King Avenue and North Depot
Street, and continuing for 49 feet to a point
440 from the intersection of West ML King
Avenue and North Proctor Avenue
2018-06 6-11-18
Penalty, see § 72.99
2019 S-18
Parking Schedules 37
SCHEDULE II. PARKING TIME LIMITED.
(A) It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle in excess of four consecutive hours in the
following locations:
Street Side Location Ord. No. Date
High Street
North
Within 200 feet of the intersection of
High Street and St. Mary’s Highway
91-17 1-13-92
High Street
South
Within 100 feet of the intersection of
High Street and St. Mary’s Highway
91-17 1-13-92
(B) It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle in excess of two consecutive hours in the
following locations:
Street Side Location Ord. No. Date
West Main Street
North
One space directly nearest the front
entrance of Willie Martin’s located at
211 West Main Street
2014-06 7-11-14
East Main Street
North
Two spaces directly nearest the front
entrances of Fanny Ethel Antiques and
Estes Building Apartments located at
137 East Main Street
2014-14 12-8-14
(C) It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle in excess of 30 minutes during the hours of 9:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m. of any weekday in the following locations within the city:
Street Side Location Ord. No. Date
North Spalding
Avenue
West The first two marked parking spaces
along the westbound lane
(approximately a distance of 80 feet
from the intersection of North Spalding
Avenue and West Main Street)
09-02 3-9-09
(1) The first two parking spaces on the west side of North Spalding Avenue along the
westbound lane shall be designated and clearly marked as 30-minute parking only. The 30-minute
limitation shall be applicable only on weekdays from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
(2) The City Clerk and/or other city officials are hereby authorized and directed to take
such action as shall be necessary in order to amend the city map, post 30-minute parking and/or other
required
2015 S-15
38 Lebanon - Traffic Code
signs, and such other action as may be necessary and desirable as a result of this action on parking in
the above designated areas.
(3) The city enforcement official shall be empowered to issue citations or parking tickets
for each violation of this division (B) and to have such violations prosecuted in the Marion District
Court.
(D) It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle in excess of ten minutes in the following location
within the city:
Street Side Location Ord. No. Date
Depot Street East The first marked parking space along
the northbound lane from the
intersection of Depot Street and MLK
Avenue adjacent to Willie A’s
restaurant
09-08 10-16-09
(E) It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle during the hours of any weekday from 7:30 a.m.
until 4:30 p.m. in the following location:
Street Side Location Ord. No. Date
West Main Street Both Between College Street and Hardin
Place
09-08 10-16-09
(1) Any vehicle parked within this particular no parking zone shall be subject to
impoundment and towing without prior notice to the owner thereof during the specified hours of any
weekday
(2) The City Clerk and/or other city officials are hereby authorized and directed to take
such action as shall be necessary in order to amend the city map, post appropriate parking and/or other
required signs, and such other action as may be necessary and desirable as a result of this action on
parking in the above designated areas.
(3) The city enforcement official shall be empowered to issue citations or parking tickets
for each violation of this division (D) and to have such violations prosecuted in the Marion District
Court.
(Am. Ord. 09-02, passed 3-9-09; Am. Ord. 09-08, passed 10-16-09; Am. Ord. 2014-06, passed 7-11-
14) Penalty, see § 72.99
2015 S-15
Parking Schedules 39
SCHEDULE III. HANDICAPPED PERMIT PARKING.
The following parking spaces shall be marked as handicapped permit parking only.
Street
No. of
Spaces
Location
Ord.
No.
Date
East Main Street One One space located directly nearest the front
entrance of Fanny Ethel’s Antiques and in front of
the residential complex located at 137 East Main
Street on the north side of the street adjacent to the
westbound lane of Main Street/US Highway 68
2010-
09
9-13-10
East Main Street One One space located directly in front of United
Presbyterian Church located at 157 East Main
Street
2015-
09
11-9-15
East Main Street One One space located directly in front of First
Christian Church located at 214 East Main Street,
nearest the eastbound lane of Main Street
2016-
07
11-7-16
Hood Avenue Two One space located directly in front of Lebanon
Church of Christ located at 200 Hood Avenue,
nearest the eastbound lane of Hood Avenue, and
one space located in the first spot alongside the
church nearest the northbound lane of Harrison
Street
2016-
07
11-7-16
North Proctor
Knott Avenue
One Nearest the intersection of North Proctor Knott
Avenue and West Main Street facing a southerly
direction
07-15 10-8-08
South Spalding
Avenue
One Nearest the intersection of Main Street and South
Spalding Avenue
07-15 10-8-08
West High Street One One space located directly nearest the front
entrance of the offices of William R. Kirk, M.D.
and Lebanon Medical Associates located at 312
W. High Street on the south side of the street
adjacent to the eastbound lane of High Street
2010-
10
9-13-10
2017 S-16
40 Lebanon - Traffic Code
Street
No. of
Spaces
Location
Ord.
No.
Date
West Main Street Three Two spaces located directly nearest the loading
zone in front of the existing Marion County
Courthouse at 120 West Main Street; one space
nearest the fire hydrant on the opposite side of
West Main Street. Each of these three spaces shall
be handicapped-van accessible, requiring a curb
out and a ramp.
07-15 10-8-08
West Main Street Two One space in front of the building at 225 West
Main Street; the other space nearest to the
entrance to the parking lot at 212 West Main
Street
07-15 10-8-08
West Main Street One One space directly in front of Lebanon Health and
Fitness located at 255 West Main Street
2015-
03
6-8-15
Penalty, see § 72.99
2017 S-16
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Chapter
90. ANIMALS AND LIVESTOCK
91. STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
92. NUISANCES
93. FIREWORKS; FIRE PREVENTION
94. LITTERING
95. PARKS AND RECREATION
96. TREES
97. JUNKED APPLIANCES AND MOTOR VEHICLES
1
2008 S-9
2 Lebanon - General Regulations
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS AND LIVESTOCK
Section
General Provisions
90.01 Definitions
General Animal Control
90.10 Hitching or tying animals to public objects prohibited
90.11 Awarding of live animals as prizes prohibited
90.12 Removal of animal excreta required
90.13 Exotic animals
Livestock
90.25 Swine prohibited within corporate limits
90.26 Poultry prohibited within corporate limits
90.27 Livestock prohibited within corporate limits
90.28 Rabbits limited within corporate limits
90.29 Livestock running at large prohibited
90.30 Penalty
Dogs
90.40 Duty of responsible dog owner
90.41 Limitation on number of dogs
90.42 Barking dogs considered a nuisance
90.43 Control of all dogs
90.44 Additional requirements for precautions to be taken by owners of dangerous dogs
90.45 Enforcement of restriction on dangerous dogs
90.46 Custodial liability
90.47 Dog fighting and harboring
90.48 Insurance
90.49 Action for damages; destruction of offending dangerous dog
90.50 Penalty
3
2008 S-9
4 Lebanon - General Regulations
Cats
90.60 Limitation on number of cats
90.61 Duty of responsible cat owner
90.62 Control of all cats
Control of Dogs and Cats
90.70 Annual license fee
90.71 Maximum number of animals
90.72 Destruction of impounded animals
Enforcement
90.80 Nuisance
90.81 Confiscation of victimized animals
90.82 Law enforcement animals
Cross-reference:
Nuisances, see Chapter 92
GENERAL PROVISIONS
' 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or necessitates a different meaning.
ALTERED. A dog or cat (as the context herein may require) that has been spayed or neutered.
ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY. An entity acting alone or in concert with other state or local law
enforcement officers or employees of governmental units that enforce the animal control laws of the city,
county and state, or are responsible for providing for the shelter and welfare of animals.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. Any individual employed, contracted with, or appointed by the
animal control authority for the purpose of aiding in the enforcement of this chapter, including the officials
designated by the Marion Fiscal Court to be in charge of the county animal shelter for Marion County,
Kentucky. As used in this chapter, the term also includes the agents and employees of the dog warden and
other animal control officers charged with regulating animals and owners of animals in accordance with
local, county and state laws.
CITY. All public and private areas within the jurisdiction of the City of Lebanon, Kentucky.
2015 S-15
Animals and Livestock 5
DANGEROUS DOG.
(1) Any dog that constitutes a physical threat to human beings or other domestic animals by virtue
of a known propensity to endanger life by an unprovoked assault or bite so as to cause substantial bodily
harm; or
(2) Any dog that, when unprovoked, in a vicious or terrorizing manner approaches any person in
an attitude of attack upon the streets, sidewalks, private areas, or any public grounds or places; or
(3) Any dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause
injury to or otherwise threaten the safety of human beings or domestic animals; or
(4) Any dog that bites (to the extent of puncturing or severely bruising skin), inflects injury,
assaults or otherwise attacks a human being or domestic animal without provocation on public or private
property; or
(5) Any dog owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of dog fighting, or any dog
trained for dog fighting; or
(6) Any dog that has previously attacked or bitten a human being, other than under the
circumstances deemed justifiable under division (11) of this definition; or
(7) Any dog that has behaved in such a manner that the owner thereof knows or should
reasonably know that the dog is possessed of tendencies to attack or to bite human beings other than the
type of circumstances that would be justifiable under division (11) definition; or
(8) Any dog certified by a doctor of veterinary medicine, after observation thereof, as posing a
danger to human life or property if not kept in the manner required by this chapter, based on reasonable
medical probability; or
(9) Any dog that has been trained as an attack or guard dog, except such dogs that are employed
by any law enforcement agency within the Commonwealth of Kentucky; or
(10) Any dog not licensed according to law.
(11) Exceptions. An animal shall not be deemed dangerous solely because it:
(a) Bites, attacks or menaces:
1. Any one assaulting its owner; or
2. Any person or other animal who has tormented or abused it; or
2008 S-9
6 Lebanon - General Regulations
(b) Is otherwise acting in defense of any attack from a person or other animal upon its owner
or any other person; or
(c) Is protecting or defending its young or the young of any other animal.
ENCLOSURE. Any dogs confined within a fenced yard must have an adequate space for exercise,
based on a dimension of at least 100 square feet per dog, and at least 75 square feet per cat. Provided,
further, that where dogs or cats are kept or housed on property without a fenced yard, the owner or the
person having custody of such dogs or cats shall provide an enclosure for such dogs or cats meeting a
dimension of at least 100 square feet per dog, and at least 75 square feet per cat. Such enclosure shall be
constructed of chain link or similar type materials, with all four sides enclosed. The enclosure shall be
sufficient height to prevent the dog or cat from escaping therefrom.
EXOTIC ANIMAL. A normally undomesticated animal, whether or not native to the region, including
lions, giraffes, bears, tigers and wolves (or any hybrid thereof).
FARM. Any privately owned or leased, enclosed, unified tract of property consisting of greater than
three acres shall be considered a FARM for all purposes under this chapter.
IMPOUNDMENT. Taken into the custody of the animal shelter for Marion County, Kentucky,
including but not limited to, the Marion County Humane Society Shelter.
LEAD or LEASH. A device for restraint of a dog, as defined under Arestraint@ in this section.
LIVESTOCK. Cattle, horses and other animals, regardless of age, held by the individual for draft,
breeding, dairy or sporting purposes, but does not include poultry.
OWNER. Any person, partnership, firm, corporation, or other legal entity owning, possessing,
keeping, harboring or having the care or custody of a dog.
RESTRAINT. A dog shall be deemed under RESTRAINT if on the premises of the owner and
confined in a secure enclosure, as defined above, or if accompanied by the owner and restrained with a
braided leather, nylon or manila lead or leash, having a minimum tensile strength of 300 pounds and not
exceeding ten feet in length, except such length shall not exceed four feet in the case of a dangerous dog.
SHELTER. Any owner of animals shall maintain a clean and healthful shelter and living area for any
animal being kept, which area shall be free of accumulated waste and debris so that the animal shall be free
to walk or lie down without coming in contact with any such waste or debris. All such shelters or living
areas must be cleaned and maintained regularly so as to promote proper health for the animals being kept.
All living areas shall be constructed and maintained to promote drainage of rainwater to prevent the
accumulation of mud and/or water. Insulating bedding materials shall be provided during inclement
weather extremes.
2008 S-9
Animals and Livestock 7
SPECIAL DOG WARDEN. Any member of the Lebanon City Police Department, the Bradfordsville
Police Department, a constable of Raywick or Loretto, or the Marion County Sheriff=s Office.
UNALTERED. A cat or dog (as the context herein may require) that has not been spayed or neutered.
(Ord. 08-01, passed 9-8-08)
GENERAL ANIMAL CONTROL
' 90.10 HITCHING OR TYING ANIMALS TO PUBLIC OBJECTS PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hitch animals to any telegraph, telephone, electric light or other
utility pole, water hydrant or tree, located on any street, alley or public place, or the sidewalk or grass plots
hereof, in the limits of the city.
(Ord. 08-01, passed 9-8-08)
' 90.11 AWARDING OF LIVE ANIMALS AS PRIZES PROHIBITED.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to offer, give or deliver any live animal as a prize or reward in
connection with a raffle, game, promotion or incentive of any kind.
(B) Any person who violates the terms of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a
fine not to exceed $500, or imprisonment for a term not to exceed six months, or by both fine and
imprisonment at the discretion of the court.
(Ord. 08-01, passed 9-8-08)
' 90.12 REMOVAL OF ANIMAL EXCRETA REQUIRED.
(A) The custodian of every animal shall remove any excreta deposited by his or her animal(s) within
the city limits on public walks, streets, recreation areas or private property belonging to another, excluding
the private property owned by the animal owner.
(B) Upon private property owned by the owner or custodian of the animal, the custodian of every
animal shall remove excreta deposited by his or her animal(s) no less frequently than weekly.
(C) Any excreta not removed in violation of division (A) above is declared to be a public nuisance.
2008 S-9
8 Lebanon - General Regulations
(D) Any person violating any provision of this section shall, upon conviction by a court of competent
jurisdiction, be guilty of a violation and shall be fined not more than $50 for each violation.
(Ord. 08-01, passed 9-8-08)
' 90.13 EXOTIC ANIMALS.
No person shall maintain, harbor or keep an exotic animal, or hybrids of exotic animals, within the city
limits.
(Ord. 08-01, passed 9-8-08)
LIVESTOCK
' 90.25 SWINE PROHIBITED WITHIN CORPORATE LIMITS.
Except in agricultural zoning districts, it shall be unlawful to keep swine within the corporate limits of
the city at any time during any year.
(Ord. 08-01, passed 9-8-08)
' 90.26 POULTRY PROHIBITED WITHIN CORPORATE LIMITS.
Except in agricultural zoning districts, it shall be unlawful to keep poultry within the corporate limits
of the city at any time during any year.
(Ord. 08-01, passed 9-8-08)
' 90.27 LIVESTOCK PROHIBITED WITHIN CORPORATE LIMITS.
Except in agricultural zoning districts or properties defined as a farm under this chapter, it shall be
unlawful to keep livestock of any kind, including but not limited to, llamas, alpacas, bison, horses, goats,
sheep, and cattle, within the corporate limits of the city at any time during any year. This section shall not
apply to livestock participating in a scheduled parade so long as the livestock is not kept in the city beyond
the time span established for the parade.
(Ord. 08-01, passed 9-8-08)
2008 S-9
Animals and Livestock 9
' 90.28 RABBITS LIMITED WITHIN CORPORATE LIMITS.
(A) Except in agricultural zoning districts or properties defined as a farm under this chapter, it shall be
unlawful to keep within the corporate city limits at any time during any year:
(1) Domesticated rabbits or hares;
(2) More than one unaltered domesticated rabbit or hare as a pet; or
(3) Domesticated rabbits or hares for sale or consumption.
(B) A domesticated rabbit or hare maintained as a pet must be maintained in such a manner as to
eliminate any foul odor being emitted upon property located within the corporate city limits at any time
during any year.
(Ord. 08-01, passed 9-8-08)
' 90.29 LIVESTOCK RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to suffer or permit any cow, calf, horse, mare, colt, mule, sheep,
goat, or other such stock owned by such person, or under his or her control, to run at large within the city.
(Ord. 08-01, passed 9-8-08)
' 90.30 PENALTY.
Any person violating any provision of this subchapter shall, upon conviction by a court of competent
jurisdiction, be guilty of a violation and shall be fined not more than $50 for each violation.
(Ord. 08-01, passed 9-8-08)
DOGS
' 90.40 DUTY OF RESPONSIBLE DOG OWNER.
(A) Every owner of a dog shall have the duty to exercise reasonable care, provide shelter, and take all
necessary steps and precautions to protect other people, property, and animals from injuries or damage that
might result from his or her dog's behavior, regardless of whether such behavior is motivated by
mischievousness, playfulness, or ferocity.
2008 S-9
10 Lebanon - General Regulations
(B) If the owner of any dog is a minor, the custodian, parent or guardian legally responsible for such
minor shall also be responsible to ensure that all provisions of this chapter are followed.
(Ord. 08-01, passed 9-8-08)
' 90.41 LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF DOGS.
No household shall be permitted to own or be custodian of greater than three dogs at any one time. Any
households that have more than three dogs at the time this chapter goes into effect shall be grandfathered in,
with the understanding that the animals shall be licensed.
(Ord. 08-01, passed 9-8-08)
' 90.42 BARKING DOGS CONSIDERED A NUISANCE.
No owner or custodian of a dog shall permit the dog to create excessive noise, including barking, such
that it becomes a nuisance, with the exception of a licensed veterinarian at the location of his or her
veterinary facility.
(Ord. 08-01, passed 9-8-08)
' 90.43 CONTROL OF ALL DOGS.
(A) Every owner of a dog shall have the duty to ensure that the dog is kept under control, and that
reasonable care and precautions are taken to prevent the dog from leaving, while unattended, the real
property limits of its owner, possessor or custodian; and that the dog is:
(1) Securely and humanely enclosed within a house, building, fence, pen or other enclosure, out
of which it cannot climb, dig, jump or otherwise escape on its own volition; and such enclosure must be
securely latched at any time the dog is left unattended; or
(2) On a lead or leash and under the control of a competent person; or
(3) Off lead or leash and obedient to that person's command, and that person is present with the
animal any time it is not restrained, as provided for in divisions (A)(1) and (2) above, while on the owner's
property.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper to permit any dog owned by him or her, or under his
or her control, to run at large within the city. Any owner or keeper is deemed to have permitted the dog to
run at large, if a condition exists that the owner or keeper was, or should have been, aware of that it would
allow the dog to run at large.
2008 S-9
Animals and Livestock 10A
(C) Violation of any conditions imposed on dangerous animals shall constitute a violation of this
section.
(Ord. 08-01, passed 9-8-08)
' 90.44 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PRECAUTIONS TO BE TAKEN BY
OWNERS OF DANGEROUS DOGS.
(A) All dangerous dogs shall be confined in an enclosure as defined in ' 90.01.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any owner to maintain a dangerous dog upon any premises that does
not have a locked enclosure.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow any dangerous dog to be outside of the owner=s
dwelling or outside of the enclosure, unless it is necessary for the owner to obtain veterinary care for the
dangerous dog, or to destroy the animal, or to comply with commands or directions of the animal control
authority or animal control officer with respect to the dangerous dog.
(3) In such event, the dangerous dog shall be securely muzzled and restrained with a lead or leash,
and shall be under the direct control and supervision of its owner.
(B) The owner of a dangerous dog shall display a sign conspicuously on his or her premises warning
that there is a dangerous dog on the premises.
(1) The sign shall be readily visible and capable of being read from the public highway.
(2) A similar sign shall be posted on the pen or kennel of the dangerous dog.
(C) The owner shall immediately notify a public law enforcement officer (law enforcement will notify
the animal control officer) if a dangerous dog is on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked another animal,
has attacked a human being, or has died.
(D) The animal control authority or animal control officer is hereby empowered to make whatever
inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter; and the animal
control authority or animal control officer is hereby empowered to seize and impound any dangerous dog
whose owner fails to comply with the provisions hereof, subject to the right of such owner to contest the
seizure or impoundment, as provided in this chapter, in the Marion District Court.
(E) In the event the owner of the dangerous dog refuses to surrender the dog to the animal control
authority or animal control officer, then the animal control authority or animal control officer may request a
police officer to obtain, from a judge of the Marion District Court, a search warrant or an order to take
custody of the animal, and seize the dangerous dog upon execution of the warrant.
(Ord. 08-01, passed 9-8-08)
2008 S-9
10B Lebanon - General Regulations
' 90.45 ENFORCEMENT OF RESTRICTION ON DANGEROUS DOGS.
In the event a public law enforcement officer, or the animal control authority or animal control officer
has probable cause to believe that a dangerous dog is being harbored in the city in violation of this chapter,
such individual or entity may:
(A) Order the violation immediately corrected and cite the owner or keeper to appear in Marion
District Court for the violation; or
(B) If the violation cannot be immediately corrected and the dog is posing an imminent serious threat
to human beings or other domestic animals, the dog may be seized and impounded, in which case the owner
shall be cited to appear in Marion District Court for the violation.
(1) At the owner's request and expense, such impoundment may be at a veterinarian or licensed
kennel of the owner's choosing.
(2) If the court rules that the dog is not dangerous as defined in ' 90.01, it will be released to the
owner upon payment of the expense of keeping such dog.
(3) If the court rules that the dog is dangerous as defined in ' 90.01, the dog will be released to
the owner after payment of any fees and penalties, and upon presentation of proof by the owner that the dog
will be kept restrained or confined as specified in this chapter.
(4) If, within seven days after impoundment, the owner of an alleged dangerous dog fails to either
provide proof that the dog will now be kept restrained or confined in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter, or fails to reclaim it from the animal control authority or animal shelter after impoundment, it shall
be humanely euthanized.
(C) All dogs that have been deemed dangerous must be altered and licensed.
(Ord. 08-01, passed 9-8-08)
' 90.46 CUSTODIAL LIABILITY.
In the event the owner of the dangerous dog is a minor, the custodian, parent or guardian legally
responsible for such minor shall be liable for all injuries and property damage sustained by any person or
domestic animal caused by an unprovoked attack by the dangerous dog.
(Ord. 08-01, passed 9-8-08)
2008 S-9
Animals and Livestock 10C
' 90.47 DOG FIGHTING AND HARBORING.
(A) No person shall own or harbor any dog for the purpose of dog fighting, or train, torment, badger,
bait or use any dog for the purpose of causing or encouraging the dog to unprovoked attacks upon human
beings or domestic animals.
(B) No person shall possess with intent to sell, or offer for sale, breed, or buy or attempt to buy within
the city any dangerous dog.
(Ord. 08-01, passed 9-8-08)
' 90.48 INSURANCE.
Owners of dangerous dogs must, within 30 days of the effective date of this chapter, provide proof to
the City Clerk of public liability insurance in the amount of at least $50,000, insuring the owner for any
personal injuries inflicted by his or her dangerous dog.
(Ord. 08-01, passed 9-8-08)
' 90.49 ACTION FOR DAMAGES; DESTRUCTION OF OFFENDING DANGEROUS DOG.
(A) If, when unprovoked, any dangerous dog shall kill or wound, or assist in killing or wounding, any
sheep, lamb, cattle, horse, hog, fowl or other domestic animal, belonging to or in the possession of any
person; or attack, assault, bite or otherwise injure any human being, or assist in attacking, assaulting, biting
or otherwise injuring any human being, while out of the enclosure of the owner or keeper of such dangerous
dog, or while otherwise off the property of its owner or keeper, whether or not such dangerous dog was on a
leash and securely muzzled, or whether the dangerous dog escaped without fault of the owner or keeper, the
owner or keeper of such dog shall be liable to the person damaged as aforesaid, for all damage sustained, to
be recovered in a civil action with cost of the suit.
(B) It is rebuttably presumed as a matter of law that the owning, keeping or harboring of a dangerous
dog in violation of this chapter is a nuisance.
(C) It shall not be necessary, in order to sustain any such action, to prove that the owner or keeper of
such dangerous dog knew that such dangerous dog possessed the propensity to cause such damage, or that
the dangerous dog had a vicious nature.
(D) Upon such attack or assault upon a human being, an animal control officer, including the special
dog warden as defined above in ' 90.01 (and also as defined by the Marion County Fiscal Ordinance), is
hereby empowered to confiscate and destroy such dangerous dog not less than five days after confiscation,
unless sooner destruction of the dog is necessary to prevent or stop an attack upon a person or another
animal, or for humane reasons related to sickness or injury of the dog.
2008 S-9
10D Lebanon - General Regulations
(E) Within the seven-day period after confiscation, the owner of the dog may appeal to the Marion
District Court for relief under this chapter, on the grounds that the dog is not a Adangerous dog@ as
specified herein, or that it has not violated the terms of this section.
(F) Unless relief from destruction is granted by the Marion District Court within the seven-day
period, the animal control officer or special dog warden shall follow through with the humane euthanization
of the dangerous dog.
(Ord. 08-01, passed 9-8-08)
' 90.50 PENALTY.
(A) If, when unprovoked, any dog shall kill, wound, or assist in killing or wounding, any domestic
animal, the owner of the dangerous dog shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall pay a fine of not less
than $250 nor more than $500. For each subsequent violation, the owner or keeper of the dog shall pay a
fine of not less than $350, nor more than $500.
(B) If, when unprovoked, any dog shall, attack, assault, wound or otherwise injure a human being, the
owner shall be deemed guilty of a Class A misdemeanor, and shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine
of not less than $250 nor more than $500, or imprisoned for a period not to exceed six months, or both.
(C) If, when unprovoked, any dog shall, attack, assault, wound or otherwise cause substantial physical
injury to or kill a human being, the owner shall be deemed guilty of a Class A misdemeanor, and may, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine of $500, and imprisoned for a period of not less than six months nor to
exceed 12 months.
(D) Any person or owner violating any provision of this chapter, other than specified above in this
section, shall be deemed guilty of a Class A misdemeanor, and shall, upon conviction, be punished by a
fine not to $500, or imprisoned for a period not to exceed 12 months, or both so fined and imprisoned.
Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 08-01, passed 9-8-08)
CATS
' 90.60 LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF CATS.
No household shall be permitted to own or be custodian of greater than three cats at any one time. Any
households that have more than three cats at the time of this chapter goes into effect shall be grandfathered
in, with the understanding that the animals shall be licensed.
(Ord. 08-01, passed 9-8-08)
2008 S-9
Animals and Livestock 10E
' 90.61 DUTY OF RESPONSIBLE CAT OWNER.
(A) Every owner of a cat shall have the duty to exercise reasonable care and provide shelter, and shall
take all necessary steps and precautions to protect other people, property and animals from injuries or
damage that might result from the his or her cat's behavior, regardless of whether such behavior is
motivated by mischievousness, playfulness, or ferocity.
(B) If the owner of any cat is a minor, the custodian, parent or guardian legally responsible for such
minor shall also be responsible to ensure that all provisions of this chapter are followed.
(Ord. 08-01, passed 9-8-08)
' 90.62 CONTROL OF ALL CATS.
(A) Every owner of a cat shall have the duty to ensure that the cat is kept under control, and that
reasonable care and precautions are taken to prevent the cat from leaving, while unattended, the real
property limits of its owner, possessor or custodian; and that the cat is:
(1) Securely and humanely enclosed within a house, building, fence, pen or other enclosure as set
forth in ' 90.01; or
(2) On a lead or leash and under the control of a competent person; or
(3) Off lead or leash and obedient to that person's command, and that person is present with the
animal any time it is not restrained, as provided for in divisions (A)(1) and (2) above, while on the owner's
property.
(B) The cat is restrained on a lead or leash, or is enclosed in a cage or carrier and under the control of a
competent person at any time when the cat is on property other than that of its owner, possessor or
custodian.
(Ord. 08-01, passed 9-8-08)
CONTROL OF DOGS AND CATS
' 90.70 ANNUAL LICENSE FEE.
(A) There shall be assessed annually a license fee, which shall be assessed for each dog or cat within
the city limits.
2008 S-9
10F Lebanon - General Regulations
(1) The fee shall be assessed against and paid annually by the owner, possessor or custodian of
each dog or cat.
(2) The license fee shall be paid each year on or before January 1.
(3) Before a license will be issued, the owner, possessor or custodian of each dog or cat shall be
required to show proof of rabies vaccination for each such dog or cat.
(B) The following license fees shall apply:
Altered dog or cat ....................................................................................................... $5 per year
Unaltered dog or cat .................................................................................................. $10 per year
Unaltered dog or cat with offspring .......................................................................... $25 per year
(C) The owner(s), possessor(s) or custodian of each dog/cat having offspring shall be permitted a
grace period of four months from the birth of the litter to make the necessary arrangements to give away,
sell or otherwise lawfully distribute the offspring prior to any citation for not possessing a license for the
unaltered dog or cat with offspring.
(D) The license fee may be paid to the City Clerk or the Marion County Animal Shelter, or to such
persons or entities to whom the City Clerk may delegate the authority to accept such remittance on behalf
of the city. Any person accepting delegated authority from the City Clerk for collection of license fees
under this chapter shall remit those license fees, together with a copy of the application completed by the
licensee/applicant, at least once per month (no later than 30 days after purchase of the license by the
individual owner).
(E) Any person or entity violating any provision of this section shall be punished by fine not to exceed
$50 for the first offense and each subsequent offense.
(Ord. 08-01, passed 9-8-08)
' 90.71 MAXIMUM NUMBER OF ANIMALS.
(A) Maximum number of animals per household.
(1) No household shall harbor, own or possess greater than three dogs.
(2) No household shall harbor, own or possess greater than three cats.
(3) Under no circumstance shall any household harbor, own or possess greater than five animals
in combination (i.e., imposing a maximum of either three dogs and two cats or three cats and two dogs).
2008 S-9
Animals and Livestock 10G
(4) Any households that have more than five total animals at the time this chapter goes into effect
shall be grandfathered in, with the understanding that the animals shall be licensed.
(B) Penalty. Any person or entity violating any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a
Class A misdemeanor, and shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $500, or imprisoned
for a period not to exceed 12 months, or both so fined and imprisoned. Each day a violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 08-01, passed 9-8-08)
' 90.72 DESTRUCTION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.
(A) No animal shall be destroyed within five days of being impounded, unless necessary to prevent or
stop an attack upon a person or another animal, for humane reasons related to sickness or injury of the
animal, or as otherwise provided by law.
(B) An impounded animal shall not be destroyed pending an owner's appeal of a district court order of
destruction, if the appeal has been filed within five days of the impoundment or order of destruction of such
animal, and notice has been served upon the animal control authority within five days of the impoundment
of such animal. The animal control authority shall have the burden of proving that the animal should be
destroyed pursuant to this chapter.
(C) Other provisions of this chapter notwithstanding, any animal that has bitten or scratched someone
shall be quarantined for ten days from the time the bite or scratch occurs.
(1) Any animal suspected of having rabies shall be quarantined for ten days, and the appropriate
state authorities notified to investigate as required by law.
(2) Any owner who fails to properly quarantine their animal is subject to citation for violation of
this section, and the animal shall be removed to the county animal shelter for the remainder of its
quarantine period.
(3) The owner shall be responsible for all quarantine fees.
(D) An animal whose owner is unavailable or incapable of quarantining the animal may be taken by
the animal control authority or animal control officer and quarantined at the appropriate animal shelter for
the prescribed period.
(Ord. 08-01, passed 9-8-08)
2008 S-9
10H Lebanon - General Regulations
ENFORCEMENT
' 90.80 NUISANCE.
No person shall own, keep or harbor any animal, including but not limited to, dogs and cats, that shall
do any one or more of the following objectionable actions, each of which is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance within the city:
(A) Habitual barking, howling, yelping, whining or meowing loud enough to be heard beyond the
premises of where it is kept or harbored, or while trespassing upon any property or premises not owned or
occupied by the owner or keeper of the animal;
(B) Habitual trespassing upon any property or premises not owned or occupied by the owner or keeper
of the animal;
(C) Habitual turning over, getting into, or otherwise damaging or disturbing any items of personal or
public property located on any premises other than those owned or occupied by the owner or keeper of the
animal;
(D) Habitual defecating upon any property or premise not owned or occupied by the owner or keeper
of the animal;
(E) Habitual running after, jumping upon, chasing, barking at, or in any other way frightening,
molesting or injuring any person other than the owner of the animal and the members of the owner's
immediate family; and
(F) Habitual chasing of motor vehicles, bicycles, scooters, mopeds or motorcycles other than those
owned or operated by the owner of the animal and the members of the owner's immediate family.
(Ord. 08-01, passed 9-8-08)
' 90.81 CONFISCATION OF VICTIMIZED ANIMALS.
(A) Any animal found involved in a violation of any portion of this chapter may be confiscated by any
animal control officer or any police office and held in a humane manner.
(B) (1) Upon a hearing before a district court judge, and that judge finding probable cause for the
charge, the court shall order immediate forfeiture of the animal to the Marion County Animal Control
Officer, or authorized agent, unless the owner, within 24 hours of such finding, posts a cash bond with the
court equal to the cost to the cost of care of the animal(s), including all estimated boarding and veterinary
fees in the amount of $150 ($5 per day) for each animal, for the first 30 days of its impoundment.
2008 S-9
Animals and Livestock 10I
(2) If after 30 days, the case has not been adjudicated, the owner must post another full cash bond
on the 30th day, in the same amount of the original bond, or equal to the cost and care of each animal for
the next 30-day period until the case has been adjudicated.
(C) Upon a plea or finding of guilt, the cash bond(s) shall be immediately paid to the Marion County
Animal Control Officer.
(1) The owner shall also be responsible to pay all costs of care, from the date of the impoundment
until the time of the first hearing and the posting of the initial bond, as well as any other associated
expenses not covered by the daily boarding fee(s).
(2) Upon conviction, all animals not forfeited pursuant to division (B) herein above shall become
the property of the Marion County Animal Control Officer or authorized agent.
(D) Upon a finding of innocence, any cash bond(s) posted shall be immediately returned to the owner.
(E) The city shall be allowed reasonable access to inspect the property of anyone found guilty of
violation of any of the provisions in this chapter.
(Ord. 08-01, passed 9-8-08)
' 90.82 LAW ENFORCEMENT ANIMALS.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
DEATH. The cessation of life within 180 days of the infliction of an injury to a law enforcement
animal.
INTENTIONALLY. Consciously wanting a result to occur.
LAW ENFORCEMENT ANIMAL. Any horse or dog owned by a governmental law enforcement
agency that has been trained to be ridden by a law enforcement officer in the performance of law
enforcement activities; trained to detect by scent the presence of controlled substances and marijuana as
defined in KRS 218A.010; trained to track, follow or trail persons by the detection of bodily odors; or
trained to aid law enforcement officers otherwise in the performance of law enforcement activities.
WANTONLY. Being aware of substantial and unjustifiable risk that an undesirable result (death,
injury, or serious injury) will occur but consciously disregarding the risk. This risk must be of a nature and
degree that disregarding it constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of care that a reasonable person
would observe in the situation.
2015 S-15
10J Lebanon - General Regulations
(B) Abuse of a law enforcement animal prohibited.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally or wantonly cause the death or injury of a
law enforcement animal, unless the same is done for humane purposes.
(2) A conviction under this provision is a misdemeanor and is punishable by a fine not exceeding
$500 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or by both fine and imprisonment in the
discretion of the court. Additionally, restitution for any costs or loss associated with the injury or death of
the animal may be ordered in the discretion of the Court.
(C) Attempting or threatening abuse prohibited.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to threaten or attempt to cause death or injury to a law
enforcement animal.
(2) A conviction under this provision is a misdemeanor and is punishable by a fine not exceeding
$250 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days or by both fine and imprisonment in the discretion
of the court.
(Ord. 2014-12, passed 9-10-14)
2015 S-15
CHAPTER 91: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
Excavations and Construction
91.01 Opening permit required
91.02 Application and cash deposit
91.03 Restoration of pavement
91.04 Barriers around excavations
91.05 Warning lights
91.06 Sidewalk construction
Road and Bridge Projects
91.15 Public hearing required
91.16 Notice requirements
91.17 Public may testify; effect of testimony
91.18 Hearing to be held prior to construction
91.19 Separate hearing for each project not required
91.20 Exemptions from hearing requirement
Obstructions
91.30 Unloading on street or sidewalk
91.31 Street and sidewalk obstruction
91.32 Materials on street or sidewalk
91.33 Removal of ice and snow
Transporting Structures
91.45 Definitions
91.46 Permit required
91.47 Application and fee
91.48 City Clerk to consult with Chief of Police
91.49 Permit to be displayed on vehicle
Lighting
91.65 Applicability
91.66 Overhead systems
11
2006 S-7
12 Lebanon - General Regulations
91.67 Specifications for installation
91.68 Enforcement
Street Numbers
91.75 Assignment and posting of Ahouse@ numbers
91.99 Penalty
EXCAVATIONS AND CONSTRUCTION
' 91.01 OPENING PERMIT REQUIRED.
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than an authorized city official, to make any opening in any
street, alley, sidewalk, or public way of the city unless a permit to make the opening has been obtained prior
to commencement of the work.
Penalty, see ' 91.99
' 91.02 APPLICATION AND CASH DEPOSIT.
Each permit for making an opening shall be confined to a single project and shall be issued by the
authorized city official. Application shall be made on a form prescribed by the legislative body, giving the
exact location of the proposed opening, the kind of paving, the area and depth to be excavated, and such
other facts as may be provided for. The permit shall be issued only after a cash deposit sufficient to cover
the cost of restoration has been posted with the authorized city official, conditioned upon prompt and
satisfactory refilling of excavations and restoration of all surfaces disturbed.
' 91.03 RESTORATION OF PAVEMENT.
(A) The opening and restoration of a pavement or other surface shall be performed under the direction
and to the satisfaction of the authorized city official, and in accordance with rules, regulations, and
specifications approved by the legislative body.
(B) Upon failure or refusal of the permittee satisfactorily to fill the excavation, restore the surface, and
remove all excess materials within the time specified in the permit or where not specified therein, within a
reasonable time after commencement of the work, the city may proceed without notice to make such fill
and restoration and the deposit referred to in ' 91.02 shall be forfeited. Thereupon the deposit shall be paid
into the appropriate city fund, except such part demanded and paid to the permittee as the
2007 S-8
Streets and Sidewalks 12A
difference between the deposit and the charges of the city for restoration services performed by it. If the
amount of such services performed by the city should exceed the amount of the deposit, the Clerk or other
proper administrative officer shall proceed to collect the remainder due from the permittee.
' 91.04 BARRIERS AROUND EXCAVATIONS.
Any person engaged in or employing others in excavating or opening any street, sidewalk, alley, or
other public way shall have the excavation or opening fully barricaded at all times to prevent injury to
persons or animals.
Penalty, see ' 91.99
2007 S-8
12B Lebanon - General Regulations
Streets and Sidewalks 13
' 91.05 WARNING LIGHTS.
Any person engaged in or employing others in excavating or otherwise in any manner obstructing a
portion or all of any street, sidewalk, alley, or other public way, at all times during the night season shall
install and maintain at least two illuminated red lamps which shall be securely and conspicuously posted
on, at, or near each end of the obstruction or excavation, and if the space involved exceeds 50 feet in extent,
at least one additional lamp for each added 50 feet or portion thereof excavated or obstructed.
Penalty, see ' 91.99
' 91.06 SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION.
(A) General provisions. It shall be the duty of the authorized city official to supervise construction or
repair of sidewalks within the city. He shall cause specifications to be prepared for the construction of the
various kinds of pavements and transmit the specifications to the legislative body for approval. When the
specifications are approved, the legislative body shall advertise for proposals to do all the work which may
be ordered by the city in construction and repair of sidewalks, and shall authorize the Mayor to contract
therefor, for a period not exceeding one year, with the lowest responsible bidder, who shall for the faithful
performance of the work. The Mayor, if authorized by City Council, may make separate contracts for the
different kinds of work with different parties.
(B) Downtown business area.
(1) The downtown business area, as used in this division (B), means both sides of Main Street,
both sides of Mulberry Street and both sides of Water Street between Spalding Avenue and Depot Street,
and both sides of Spalding Avenue, both sides of Proctor Knott Avenue and both sides of Depot street from
Mulberry Street to Water Street.
(2) All sidewalk installation, repair or restoration within the defined downtown business area
shall be of the materials, design and specifications which may from time to time be adopted by the Council
upon the recommendation of the City Engineer or Building Inspector.
(3) The design, materials and specifications which are contained on the blueprints attached to
Ord. No. 89-15, passed 10-9-89, are hereby approved and adopted by the city and copies shall remain on
file in the City Clerk's office.
(Ord. 89-15, passed 10-9-89)
Statutory reference:
Sidewalks; construction along public roads; specifications, see KRS 178.290
Sidewalks; ramps for wheelchairs, see KRS 66.660
14 Lebanon - General Regulations
ROAD AND BRIDGE PROJECTS
' 91.15 PUBLIC HEARING REQUIRED.
Before the city expends state derived tax revenues on a municipal highway, road, street, or bridge it
shall hold a hearing in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter to take the sense of the public with
regard to the project and to priorities for use of tax moneys for road and bridge purposes.
(KRS 174.100)
' 91.16 NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
Prior to the contemplated date of expenditure of state derived tax revenues on a road or bridge by the
city, the city shall hold a public hearing for the purpose of taking the sense of the public with regard to road
and bridge matters within the city. Notice of the hearing shall be given not less than seven days nor more
than 21 days before the scheduled date of the public hearing and before beginning work on any project
covered by this subchapter.
(KRS 174.100 (1))
' 91.17 PUBLIC MAY TESTIFY; EFFECT OF TESTIMONY.
(A) At the hearing any person may speak with regard to any proposed project, any project which he
feels should be built or done which has not been proposed, priorities for completion of projects, and any
other matter related to road or bridge projects.
(B) The city shall not be bound by the testimony heard at the hearing but shall give due consideration
to it.
(KRS 174.100 (2),(3))
' 91.18 HEARING TO BE HELD PRIOR TO CONSTRUCTION.
The city shall not begin construction on a road or bridge project wherein state derived tax revenues are
involved until the hearing as provided herein has been held.
(KRS 174.100 (4))
' 91.19 SEPARATE HEARING FOR EACH PROJECT NOT REQUIRED.
This subchapter shall not be construed to require a separate hearing for each project. A single hearing
encompassing the entire road and bridge program, provided all projects subsequently undertaken have been
identified at the hearing, shall meet the requirements of this subchapter.
(KRS 174.100 (5))
Streets and Sidewalks 15
' 91.20 EXEMPTIONS FROM HEARING REQUIREMENT.
(A) The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to emergency repair or replacement of roads or
bridges necessitated by natural or man-caused disasters nor to street cleaning or snow removal operations.
(B) The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to projects which are under construction as of the
effective date of this subchapter unless construction is suspended after the effective date of this subchapter
and the city desires to reactivate the project.
(KRS 174.100 (6),(7))
OBSTRUCTIONS
' 91.30 UNLOADING ON STREET OR SIDEWALK.
No person shall unload any heavy material in the streets of the city by throwing or letting the material
fall upon the pavement of any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public way, without first placing some
sufficient protection over the pavement.
Penalty, see ' 91.99
' 91.31 STREET AND SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTION.
No person shall obstruct any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public way within the city by erecting
thereon any fence or building, or permitting any fence or building to remain thereon. Each day that any
fence or building is permitted to remain upon the public way shall constitute a separate offense.
Penalty, see ' 91.99
' 91.32 MATERIALS ON STREET OR SIDEWALK.
No person shall encumber any street or sidewalk. No owner, occupant, or person having the care of
any building or lot of land, bordering on any street or sidewalk, shall permit it to be encumbered with
barrels, boxes, cans, articles, or substances of any kind, so as to interfere with the free and unobstructed use
thereof.
Penalty, see ' 91.99
Cross-reference:
Littering on streets or sidewalks, see Ch. 94
16 Lebanon - General Regulations
' 91.33 REMOVAL OF ICE AND SNOW.
It shall be the duty of the owner or of the occupant of each and every parcel of real estate in the city
abutting upon any sidewalk to keep the sidewalk abutting his premises free and clear of snow and ice to the
extent feasible under the prevailing weather conditions, and to remove therefrom all snow and ice, to the
extent feasible under the prevailing weather conditions, a reasonable time which will ordinarily not exceed
12 hours after the abatement of any storm during which the snow and ice may have accumulated.
Penalty, see ' 91.99
TRANSPORTING STRUCTURES
' 91.45 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
RESIDENCE, BUILDINGS, and STRUCTURES. Any residence, building or other like or similar
structure, or any part thereof, of 132 feet in height, and/or eight feet in width, and/or 35 feet in length, all
such measurements to include all supports and the transporting entity, and to be calculated at the longest,
highest and widest part, regardless of construction, other than a bona fide mobile home or house trailer.
TRANSPORT. To move or cause to be moved by any means of locomotion whatsoever.
TRANSPORTING ENTITY. The tractor and trailer, truck or other means of locomotion.
(Ord. 84-1, passed 1-16-84)
' 91.46 PERMIT REQUIRED.
It shall be unlawful to transport any residence, building or other structure, as defined herein, or any part
thereof, upon or across any street, alleyway or highway within the city without first obtaining a permit
therefor from the City Clerk. Such permit shall be good only at the times on the date or dates shown thereon
and only for the route shown thereon.
(Ord. 84-1, passed 1-16-84) Penalty, see ' 91.99
Streets and Sidewalks 17
' 91.47 APPLICATION AND FEE.
(A) A written application for the permit shall be made and filed with the City Clerk at least 24 hours in
advance, who shall have the authority to waive such time requirement in appropriate circumstances. Such
application shall specify in detail the residence, building or other structure, or part thereof, proposed to be
transported, its measurement as set out above, its approximate weight, the method of transportation or
locomotion, the exact route, the proposed day and approximate hour the transportation will begin within the
city, the length of time it is anticipated that the transportation will be taking place within the city, the name
and address of the owner of the residence, building or other structure or part thereof, the name and address
of its ultimate destination and the name, address and license number of the transporter.
(B) At the time of application, the owner or mover shall provide evidence that all arrangements have
been made with affected utilities, such as electric, telephone or cable television utilities, for necessary
personnel and equipment to be available during the time of moving the residence, building, or other
structure. The mover shall be required to show evidence that he carries adequate liability insurance for such
operations and that such coverage is in force during the time of moving.
(C) Should a permit from the Kentucky Transportation Cabinet also be required, the applicant shall
furnish evidence that such permit has been applied for, and the City Clerk shall issue the permit subsequent
to the issuance of the permit by the Kentucky Transportation Cabinet.
(D) The application shall be accompanied by a permit fee of $25, which shall not be refundable if the
permit is issued, whether or not it is used. In addition, prior to issuing the permit, the City Clerk shall
require from the applicant a cash bond, bond with corporate surety or other bond in an amount and with
surety sufficient in the Clerk's judgement to indemnify the city from any and all property damages, whether
to streets or otherwise, and from all other expenses, including the wages, costs and expenses of regular or
special city employees which in the Clerk's sole discretion shall be necessary to assist and/or facilitate the
transportation of the residence, building or other structure or part thereof through the city. The balance of
the bond remaining after the deduction of all such costs, expenses and damages shall be returned to the
person providing same within ten days after the transportation has been completed.
(Ord. 84-1, passed 1-16-84)
' 91.48 CITY CLERK TO CONSULT WITH CHIEF OF POLICE.
Before issuing any such permit, the City Clerk shall consult with the Chief of Police, who shall have
authority to reject any requested date, time or route and to direct an alternative date, time and/or route,
which shall be specified in the permit.
(Ord. 84-1, passed 1-16-84)
18 Lebanon - General Regulations
' 91.49 PERMIT TO BE DISPLAYED ON VEHICLE.
The permit issued by the City Clerk shall be fixed in plain view on the transporting entity.
(Ord. 84-1, passed 1-16-84) Penalty, see ' 91.99
LIGHTING
' 91.65 APPLICABILITY.
All street lighting improvements to be installed shall conform to the specifications contained in this
subchapter, including but not limited to, size type, quantity and location. Street lighting improvements
shall be installed to serve all properties currently being developed, or developed after the effective date of
this subchapter, whether such properties are subdivisions, business commercial, industrial or residential
developments withing the city. Existing subdivisions or other developments are exempted from application
of this section where street lighting is already in place and usage being paid by the city.
(Ord. 06-05, passed 7-12-06)
' 91.66 OVERHEAD SYSTEMS.
(A) Standard overhead system. Standard overhead lighting shall consist of wood poles, brackets,
appropriate fixtures, necessary overhead circuitry, protective equipment, controls, and transformers. They
shall be owned and maintained by the appropriate vendor for the territory as outlined by the Kentucky
Revised Statutes. The city shall be responsible for the appropriate monthly charge provided in a separate
franchise agreement with the vendor.
(B) Overhead ornamental system. At the discretion of the city, any developer installing underground
utilities will be permitted to install ornamental lighting at distances as dictated in this subchapter. The
service vendor shall provide ornamental poles at the rate the city customarily pays for decorative or
ornamental lighting as set forth in this subchapter and pursuant to the franchise agreement.
(Ord. 06-05, passed 7-12-06)
' 91.67 SPECIFICATIONS FOR INSTALLATION.
(A) Location, spacing, quantity of light systems.
(1) There should be at least one standard luminary at each intersection and interior of each
cul-de-sac and the spacing standards shall not exceed 500 feet in residential areas for standard overhead
street lighting. In commercial or manufacturing areas spacing and location standards shall be approved by
the council if different from the city's current policy of 500 foot intervals.
2006 S-7
Streets and Sidewalks 18A
(2) Spacing standards for underground utilities to use decorative or ornamental lighting.
Minimum distance shall be 200 feet with a 9,500 lumens (100 watt HPS) output bulb. Poles may either be
concrete base type or direct burial at the discretion of the vendor and developer (per billing maximum as
provided by the city).
(B) Minimum specifications.
(1) Residential areas.
(a) Standard installation will require an overhead wooden pole with a bracket arm of the
vendor's choosing as specified by the vendor/utility company.
(b) Decorative or ornamental lighting installation shall be standard pole height and a
minimum of 100 watt luminary atop the pole staggered (lights opposite on each side of street) at 200 foot
intervals in the right of way.
(2) Commercial, industrial or manufacturing areas. Standard installation shall require a
30-35-foot pole with bracket arm as necessary to extend over the street, or the maximum length provided by
the utility company specifications.
(C) Luminaries.
(1) Residential. Luminaries shall be of high-pressure sodium 4,000 HPS lumens approximately
or a 50-watt output with an approximate 3,000-hour life for a residential area.
(2) Commercial, industrial or manufacturing areas. Luminaries shall be of high-pressure sodium
9,500 HPS with a 100-watt output with an average of 3,000-hour life.
(D) Cable or multiple circuit system. The cable or multiple circuit system shall be of a #8 wire and
shall be buried a minimum of 30" below grade and shall be installed in a 2" Sch 80 PVC conduit where the
cable crosses beneath existing or proposed pavements, driveways, or sidewalks and no underground cable
splices will be permitted. Such conduit shall be installed by the Developer and shall be installed in
accordance with utility or service provider specifications.
(Ord. 06-05, passed 7-12-06)
' 91.68 ENFORCEMENT.
Prior to installation, each developer shall submit plans outlining the proposed street lighting system to
the office of the Building Inspector for the city. The Building Inspector shall inspect the plans and, after
approval of the plans, shall inspect the street lighting system upon the premises. Approval by the Building
Inspector shall be final once approval is given by the City Council for the city.
(Ord. 06-05, passed 7-12-06)
2006 S-7
18B Lebanon - General Regulations
STREET NUMBERS
' 91.75 ASSIGNMENT AND POSTING OF AHOUSE@ NUMBERS.
(A) Each dwelling, home, or business located within the city limits of the Lebanon, Kentucky, shall be
assigned a Ahouse@ number, which corresponds to the United States Postal Service designation for such
property, and a like number shall be given for approximately every 50 feet of vacant land along the streets
within the city. Numbers shall be designated by a committee appointed by the Mayor which shall consult
with postal authorities from the United States Postal Service having jurisdiction in the Lebanon city limits
to ensure synchronization of the numbers assigned by the committee and those designated by the postal
authority.
(B) Once a Ahouse@ number has been assigned by the committee under division (A) above, the
owner(s) of the property for which the house number has been assigned shall display the house number
from a conspicuous position as set forth herein:
(1) If the house is located less than 100 feet from the curb, the owner must display the house
number at one of the following locations:
(a) On the dwelling or business structure such that it is readily visible from the street or
sidewalk in front of the structure, and not further than five feet from the front door to the residence or
structure;
(b) Posted on a mailbox located on the property and visible from the roadway; or
(c) Posted at the curb, if a curb is available, or if no curb is available, posted on the front
property line nearest the street or roadway. All such displays shall include numbers no smaller than four
inches in height.
(2) If the house or structure is located more than 100 feet from the curb or roadway edge, the
owner(s) shall post the house numbers on the property in numbers no less than four inches in height and
with all numbers having a reflective surface.
(3) Numbers assigned to vacant lots shall be painted on the curb, if a curb is available, or shall be
posted on the property in the same manner as those for houses more than 100 feet from the curb.
(Ord. 07-09, passed 6-18-07)
' 91.99 PENALTY.
(A) Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no penalty is otherwise provided shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than $500.
2007 S-8
Streets and Sidewalks 18C
(B) Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of '' 91.45 through 91.49 whether as
owner, lessee, transporter, operator or driver shall be guilty of a violation and shall be fined not less than
$50 nor more than $100, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which
a violation occurs or continues.
(C) Any person who defaces, cuts, breaks or otherwise damages or impedes the function of any lamp,
bulb, post, pole, wiring or any fixture erected in accordance with '' 91.65 through 91.68 for the purpose
of extinguishing any electric lighting of the public streets shall be fined not less than $50, nor more than
$500, for each such offense. It shall be a defense to prosecution of a violation hereunder that the person
causing the damage or impeding the function of the light did so with the advance authority of the city or the
utility service vendor.
(D) Any person or entity violating ' 91.75 shall be entitled to one warning from the City of Lebanon,
or its agencies, officers, or representatives; if any person or entity violates ' 91.75 subsequent to receipt of
a warning, then said violator shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be fined not more
than $500.
(Ord. 84-1, passed 1-16-84; Am. Ord. 06-05, passed 7-12-06; Am. Ord. 07-09, passed 6-18-07)
2007 S-8
18D Lebanon - General Regulations

CHAPTER 92: NUISANCES
Section
General Provision
92.01 Definition
92.02 Common law and statutory nuisances
92.03 Certain conditions declared a nuisance
92.04 Abatement procedure
92.05 Nuisance created by others
92.06 Suspension of license
Pigeon Roosting
92.20 Restriction on pigeon roosts
92.21 Notification; remediation
92.22 Intervention
92.99 Penalty
Cross-reference:
Animals and livestock, see Chapter 90
Statutory reference:
Private nuisances, see KRS 411.500 through 411.570
GENERAL PROVISIONS
' 92.01 DEFINITION.
For the purpose of this chapter the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning.
NUISANCE. Public nuisance.
19
2008 S-9
20 Lebanon - General Regulations
' 92.02 COMMON LAW AND STATUTORY NUISANCES.
In addition to what is declared in this chapter to be a public nuisance, those offenses which are known
to the common law and statutes of Kentucky as public nuisances may be treated as such and be proceeded
against as is provided in this chapter or in accordance with any other provision of law.
Penalty, see ' 92.99
' 92.03 CERTAIN CONDITIONS DECLARED A NUISANCE.
It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant, or person having control or management of any land
within the city to permit a public nuisance to develop thereon. The following conditions are declared to be
public nuisances:
(A) Dangerous trees or stacks adjoining street. Any tree, stack, or other object standing in such a
condition that it will, if the condition is allowed to continue, endanger the life, limb, or property of, or cause
hurt, damage, or injury to persons or property upon the public streets or public ways adjacent thereto, by the
falling thereof or of parts thereof.
(B) Accumulation of rubbish. An accumulation on any premises of filth, refuse, trash, garbage, or
other waste material which endangers the public health, welfare, or safety, or materially interferes with the
peaceful enjoyment by owners or occupants of adjacent property because of the danger that it will catch or
communicate fire, attract and propagate vermin, rodents, or insects, or blow rubbish into any street,
sidewalk, or property of another.
(C) Storage of explosives. The storage of explosive material which creates a safety hazard to other
property or persons in the vicinity.
(D) Weeds and grass. The excessive growth of weeds, grass, or other vegetation. Unless otherwise
provided, EXCESSIVE shall mean growth to a height of 12 inches or more.
(E) Open wells. The maintenance of any open, uncovered, or insecurely covered cistern, cellar, well,
pit, excavation, or vault situated upon private premises in any open or unfenced lot or place.
(F) Trees and shrubbery obstructing streets, sidewalks, and drainage. The growing and maintenance
of trees or shrubbery which in any way interferes with the use, construction, or maintenance of streets or
sidewalks, causes injury to streets or sidewalks, or constitutes an obstruction to drainage.
(G) Keeping of animals. The failure to keep an animal's pen, yard, lot, or other enclosure in a sanitary
condition and free from preventable offensive odors.
Penalty, see ' 92.99
2002 S-4
Nuisances 21
' 92.04 ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
(A) Except as provided in KRS 65.8840, it shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant, or person having
control or management of any land within the city to permit a public nuisance, health hazard, or source of
filth to develop thereon through the accumulation of:
(1) Junked or wrecked automobiles, vehicles, machines, or other similar scrap or salvage
materials, excluding inoperative farm equipment;
(2) One or more mobile or manufactured homes as defined in KRS 227.550 that are junked,
wrecked or nonoperative and which are not inhabited;
(3) Rubbish; or
(4) The excessive growth of weeds or grass.
(KRS 65.8840(3))
(B) Whenever a nuisance situation is discovered, the authorized city official shall give five days=
written notice to remedy the nuisance situation. The notice shall be mailed to the last known address of the
owner of property, as it appears on the current tax assessment roll. Upon the failure of the owner of the
property to comply, the authorized city official is authorized to send employees upon the property to
remedy the situation.
(C) (1) The city shall have a lien against the property for the reasonable value of labor and materials
used in remedying the nuisance situation. The affidavit of the authorized city official shall constitute prima
facie evidence of the amount of the lien and the regularity of the proceedings pursuant to KRS 65.8840, and
shall be recorded in the office of the County Clerk. The lien shall be notice to all persons from the time of
its recording and shall bear interest at the rate established by the city thereafter until paid. The lien created
shall take precedence over all other liens, except state, county, school board, and city taxes, except as
provided in division (C)(2) below. The lien may be enforced by judicial proceeding.
(KRS 65.8840(8))
(2) The lien provided in division (C)(1) above shall not take precedence or priority over a
previously recorded lien if:
(a) The city failed to provide the lien holder a copy of the determination in accordance with
KRS 65.8840; or
(b) The lien holder received a copy of the determination as required by KRS 65.4480, and the
lien holder corrected the violations or paid the fines, penalty charges, and costs incurred in remedying the
violation.
(KRS 65.8840(9))
2017 S-16
22 Lebanon - General Regulations
(3) In addition to this remedy or any other remedy authorized by law, the owner of a property
upon which a lien has been attached pursuant to this section shall be personally liable for the amount of the
lien, including all interest, civil penalties, and other charges, and the city may bring a civil action against
the owner and shall have the same remedies as provided for the recovery of a debt owed. The failure of the
city to comply with KRS 65.8840, and the failure of a lien to take precedence over previously filed liens as
provided in division (C)(2) above, shall not limit or restrict any remedies that the city has against the owner
of the property.
(KRS 65.8840(10))
' 92.05 NUISANCE CREATED BY OTHERS.
For the purposes of this chapter, it shall not be essential that the nuisance be created or contributed to
by the owner, occupant, or person having control or management of the premises, but merely that the
nuisance be created or contributed to by licensees, invitees, guests, or other persons for whose conduct the
owner or operator is responsible, or by persons for whose conduct the owner or operator is not responsible,
but by the exercise of reasonable care ought to have become aware of.
' 92.06 SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
(A) Whenever it is brought to the attention of the City Council that a nuisance exists and the City
Council deems that there is an immediate threat to the public health, safety, or welfare, the City Council
may by majority vote suspend the license of any person conducting business upon the premises where the
nuisance exists.
(B) The City Clerk shall cause notice of the suspension to be served personally upon the licensee or at
the premises where the nuisance exists.
(C) Upon application of the licensee, the City Council may remove the suspension upon such terms as
it may direct.
PIGEON ROOSTING
' 92.20 RESTRICTION ON PIGEON ROOSTS.
It shall be unlawful to allow or permit the interior of any structure originally intended for human
occupation to be used by one or more wild pigeons as a roost, nesting place or breeding area.
(Ord. 01-07, passed 6-28-01) Penalty, see ' 92.99
2017 S-16
Nuisances 22A
' 92.21 NOTIFICATION; REMEDIATION.
Upon receipt of written notice from the city through its Building Inspector or other designated official
that the interior of a building originally intended for human occupation is being utilized by wild pigeons in
violation of ' 92.20, the owner of such structure shall have 30 days in which to clean the interior of the
structure of all pigeon waste, feathers and nesting materials and to seal all entrances utilized by the pigeons
to access the structure so as to prevent continued utilization of the structure in violation of ' 92.20.
(Ord. 01-07, passed 6-28-01)
' 92.22 INTERVENTION.
Upon the failure of the property owner to fully and promptly comply with the provisions of ' 92.21,
the city may do so without further notice to the owner and may place a lien against the property for all costs
thereof, including but not limited to labor, materials and disposal of any waste removed.
(Ord. 01-07, passed 6-28-01)
' 92.99 PENALTY.
(A) Whoever violates '' 92.01 through 92.06 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not
more than $500 for each offense. Each day's continued violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(B) Any person violating ' 92.20 shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $300 for each offense
and each day in which a violation of ' 92.20 shall occur shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense.
(C) Any person violating ' 92.21 shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $300 for each offense
and each day in which a violation of ' 92.21 shall occur shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense.
2012 S-12
22B Lebanon - General Regulations
CHAPTER 93: FIREWORKS; FIRE PREVENTION
Section
Fireworks
93.01 Definitions; legality of items
93.02 Sale or use prohibited; exception for public display
93.03 Consumer fireworks; restrictions on sale
93.04 Bond or liability insurance requirement
93.05 Exempted sales and uses
93.06 Sale or disposal of seized fireworks
Fire Prevention
93.20 Blasting permit
93.21 Storage of flammables and other matter
93.99 Penalty
FIREWORKS
' 93.01 DEFINITIONS; LEGALITY OF ITEMS.
(A) As used in this subchapter, FIREWORKS means any composition or device for the purpose of
producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation, and which meets the
definition of Aconsumer fireworks@ as defined in division (D) below and as set forth in the U.S.
Department of Transportation=s (DOT) hazardous materials regulations. FIREWORKS does not include:
(1) Exception number 1. Toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices in which paper or
plastic caps manufactured in accordance with DOT regulations, and packed and shipped according to said
regulations, are not considered to be fireworks and shall be allowed to be used and sold at all times.
(2) Exception number 2. Model rockets and model rocket motors designed, sold, and used for the
purpose of propelling recoverable aero models are not considered to be fireworks.
23
2012 S-12
24 Lebanon - General Regulations
(3) Exception number 3. Propelling or expelling charges consisting of a mixture of sulfur,
charcoal, and saltpeter are not considered as being designed for producing audible effects.
(KRS 227.700)
(B) As used in this subchapter, CONSUMER FIREWORKS means fireworks that are suitable for use
by the public, designed primarily to produce visible effects by combustion and must comply with the
construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the U.S. Consumer Product Safety
Commission. The types, sizes, and amount of pyrotechnic contents of these devices are limited as
enumerated in this chapter. Some small devices designed to produce audible effects are included, such as
whistling devices, ground devices containing 50 milligrams or less of explosive composition, and aerial
devices containing 130 milligrams or less of explosive composition. CONSUMER FIREWORKS are
further defined by the Consumer Product Safety Commission in CPSC, 16 CFR Pts. 1500 and 1507, are
classified as Division 1.4G explosives by the U.S. Department of Transportation and include the following:
(1) Ground and hand-held sparkling devices.
(a) Dipped stick-sparkler or wire sparkler. These devices consist of a metal wire or wood
dowel that has been coated with pyrotechnic composition. Upon ignition of the tip of the device, a shower
of sparks is produced. Sparklers may contain up to 100 grams of pyrotechnic composition per item. Those
devices containing any perchlorate or chlorate salts may not exceed five grams of pyrotechnic composition
per item. Wire sparklers which contain no magnesium and which contain less than 100 grams of
composition per item are not included in this category, in accordance with DOT regulations.
(b) Cylindrical fountain. Cylindrical tube containing not more than 75 grams of pyrotechnic
composition. Upon ignition, a shower of colored sparks, and sometimes a whistling effect or smoke, is
produced. This device may be provided with a spike for insertion into the ground (spike fountain), a wood
or plastic base for placing on the ground (base fountain), or a wood or cardboard handle, if intended to be
hand-held (handle fountain). When more than one tube is mounted on a common base, total pyrotechnic
composition may not exceed 200 grams, or 500 grams if the tubes are separated from each other on the base
by a distance of at least one-half inch.
(c) Cone fountain. Cardboard or heavy paper cone containing up to 50 grams of pyrotechnic
composition. The effect is the same as that of a cylindrical fountain. When more than one cone is mounted
on a common base, the total pyrotechnic composition may not exceed 200 grams, or 500 grams if the tubes
are separated from each other on the base by a distance of at least one-half inch.
(d) Illuminating torch. Cylindrical tube containing up to 100 grams of pyrotechnic
composition. Upon ignition, colored fire is produced. May be spike, base, or hand-held. When more than
one cone is mounted on a common base, the total pyrotechnic composition may not exceed 200 grams, or
500 grams if the tubes are separated from each other on the base by a distance of at least one-half inch.
2012 S-12
Fireworks; Fire Prevention 25
(e) Wheel. A device attached to a post or tree by means of a nail or string. A wheel may
have one or more drivers, each of which may contain not more than 60 grams of pyrotechnic composition.
No wheel may contain more than 200 grams total pyrotechnic composition. Upon ignition, the wheel
revolves, producing a shower of color and sparks and, sometimes, a whistling effect.
(f) Ground spinner. Small device containing not more than 20 grams of pyrotechnic
composition, similar in operation to a wheel but intended to be placed on the ground and ignited. A shower
of sparks and color is produced by the rapidly spinning device.
(g) Flitter sparkler. Narrow paper tube attached to a stick or wire and filled with not more
than 100 grams of pyrotechnic composition that produces color and sparks upon ignition. The paper at one
end of the tube is ignited to make the device function.
(h) Toy smoke device. Small plastic or paper item containing not more than 100 grams of
pyrotechnic composition that, upon ignition, produces white or colored smoke as the primary effect.
(2) Aerial devices.
(a) Sky rockets and bottle rockets. Cylindrical tube containing not more than 20 grams of
pyrotechnic composition. Sky rockets contain a wooden stick for guidance and stability and rise into the air
upon ignition. A burst of color or noise or both is produced at the height of flight.
(b) Missile-type rocket. A device similar to a sky rocket in size, composition, and effect that
uses fins rather than a stick for guidance and stability.
(c) Helicopter, aerial spinner. A tube containing up to 20 grams of pyrotechnic
composition. A propeller or blade is attached, which, upon ignition, lifts the rapidly spinning device into
the air. A visible or audible effect is produced at the height of flight.
(d) Roman candles. Heavy paper or cardboard tube containing up to 20 grams of pyrotechnic
composition. Upon ignition, up to ten stars (pellets of pressed pyrotechnic composition that burn with
bright color) are individually expelled at several second intervals.
(e) Mine, shell. Heavy cardboard or paper tube usually attached to a wood or plastic base
and containing up to 60 grams of total chemical composition (lift charge, burst charge, and visible or
audible effect composition.) Upon ignition, Astars,@ components producing reports containing up to 140
milligrams of explosive composition per report, or other devices are propelled into the air. The term MINE
refers to a device with no internal components containing a bursting charge, and the termASHELL refers to
a device that propels a component that subsequently bursts open in the air. A mine or shell device may
contain more than one tube provided the tubes fire in sequence upon ignition of one external fuse. The term
CAKE refers to a dense-packed collection of mine or shell tubes. Total chemical composition including lift
charges of any multiple tube devices may not exceed 200 grams. The maximum quantity of life charge in
any one tube of a mine or shell device shall not exceed 20 grams, and the maximum quantity of break or
bursting charge in any component shall not exceed 25% of the total weight of chemical composition in the
component. The tube remains on the ground.
2012 S-12
26 Lebanon - General Regulations
(f) Aerial shell kit, reloadable tube. A package kit containing a cardboard, high-density
polyethylene (HDPE), or equivalent launching tube with multiple-shot aerial shells. Each aerial shell is
limited to a maximum of 60 grams of total chemical composition (lift charge, burst charge, and visible or
audible effect composition), and the maximum diameter of each shell shall not exceed one and threefourths
inches. In addition, the maximum quantity of lift charge in any shell shall not exceed 20 grams, and
the maximum quantity of break or bursting charge in any shell shall not exceed 25% of the total weight of
chemical composition in the shell. The total chemical composition of all the shells in a kit, including lift
charge, shall not exceed 400 grams. The user lowers a shell into a launching tube, at the time of firing, with
the fuse extending out of the top of the tube. After the firing, the rube is then reloaded with another shell for
the next firing. All launching tubes shall be capably of firing twice the number of shells in the kit without
failure of the tube. Each package of multiple-shot aerial shells must comply with all warning label
requirements of the Consumer Product Safety Commission.
(3) Audible ground devices.
(a) Firecrackers, salutes. Small paper-wrapped or cardboard tube containing not more than
50 milligrams of pyrotechnic composition. Those used in aerial devices may contain not more than 130
milligrams of explosive composition per report. Upon ignition, noise and a flash of light is produced.
(b) Chaser. Small paper or cardboard tube that travels along the ground upon ignition. A
whistling effect, or other noise, is often produced. The explosive composition used to create the noise may
not exceed 50 milligrams.
(KRS 227.702)
(C) Items listed below are classified as NOVELTIES and TRICK NOISEMAKERS and are not
classified as consumer fireworks by the U.S. Department of Transportation, and their transportation,
storage, retail sale, possession, sale, and use shall be allowed throughout the state at all times.
(1) Snake, glow worm. Pressed pellet of pyrotechnic composition that produces a large, snakelike
ash upon burning. The ash expands in length as the pellet burns. These devices may not contain
mercuric thiocyanate.
(2) Smoke device. Tube or sphere containing pyrotechnic composition that, upon ignition,
produces white or colored smoke as the primary effect.
(3) Wire sparkler. Wire coated with pyrotechnic composition that produces a shower of sparks
upon ignition. These items may not contain magnesium and must not exceed 100 grams of composition per
item. Devices containing any chlorate or perchlorate salts may not exceed five grams of composition per
item.
(4) Trick noisemaker. Item that produces a small report intended to surprise the user. These
devices include:
2012 S-12
Fireworks; Fire Prevention 27
(a) Party popper. Small plastic or paper item containing not more than 16 milligrams of
explosive composition that is friction sensitive. A string protruding from the device is pulled to ignite it,
expelling paper streamers and producing a small report.
(b) Booby trap. Small tube with string protruding from both ends, similar to a party popper
in design. The ends of the string are pulled to ignite the friction sensitive composition, producing a small
report.
(c) Snapper. Small, paper-wrapped item containing a minute quantity of explosive
composition coated on small bits of sand. When dropped, the device explodes producing a small report.
(d) Trick match. Kitchen or book match that has been coated with a small quantity of
explosive or pyrotechnic composition. Upon ignition of the match a small report or a shower of sparks is
produced.
(e) Cigarette load. Small wooden peg that has been coated with a small quantity of
explosive composition. Upon ignition of a cigarette containing one of the pegs, a small report is produced.
(f) Auto burglar alarm. Tube which contains pyrotechnic composition that produces a loud
whistle or smoke, or both, when ignited. A small quantity of explosive, not exceeding 50 milligrams may
also be used to produce a small report. A squib is used to ignite the device.
(KRS 227.704)
(D) As used in this subchapter, DISPLAY FIREWORKS means large fireworks designed primarily to
produce visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration, or detonation. This term includes, but is not
limited to, firecrackers containing more than two grains (130 milligrams) of explosive composition, aerial
shells containing more than 40 grams of pyrotechnic composition, and other display pieces which exceed
the limits for classification as consumer fireworks. DISPLAY FIREWORKS are defined by the Consumer
Product Safety Commission in CPSC, 16 CFR Pts. 1500 and 1507, and are classified as class B explosives
by the U.S. Department of Transportation.
(KRS 227.706)
(E) Legality of items.
(1) Items described in division (B)(1) above are legal for retail sale provided all applicable federal
and state requirements with respect thereto are met.
(2) Items described in divisions (B)(2), (B)(3), and (D) are not legal for retail sale but are legal
under permits granted pursuant to this chapter for the purposes specified in this chapter for public displays
and may be sold at wholesale as provided in this chapter.
(3) Items described in division (C) are legal for retail sale provided all applicable federal and state
requirements with respect thereto are met.
(KRS 227.708)
2012 S-12
28 Lebanon - General Regulations
' 93.02 SALE OR USE PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION FOR PUBLIC DISPLAY.
No person, firm, co-partnership, or corporation shall offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail, keep
with intent to sell, possess, use, or explode, any display fireworks, except for the following:
(A) (1) The Chief of the Fire Department or other authorized city official may grant permits for
supervised public displays of fireworks by the city, fair associations, amusement parks, and other
organizations or groups of individuals.
(2) Every display shall be handled by a competent display operator to be approved by the public
official by whom the permit is granted, and shall be of such character, and so located, discharged or fired as
in the opinion of the official, after proper inspection, to not be hazardous to property or endanger any
person.
(3) COMPETENT DISPLAY OPERATOR shall be defined as the person with overall
responsibility for the operation and safety of a fireworks display. The COMPETENT DISPLAY
OPERATOR shall have a Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives (ATF) License and have
participated as an assistant in firing at least five public displays. A COMPETENT DISPLAY OPERATOR
is also an employee possessor. A permit under division (A)(1) above shall be issued only to a competent
display operator holding an ATF license.
(4) At least one competent display operator shall be on site during display setup and firing. This
competent display operator shall maintain a copy of the permit application, as signed by the local authority
having jurisdiction as identified in this section, on site and at all times the display is in place, and shall be
presented on demand of the State Fire Marshal or local Fire Chief. All public displays that require issuance
of a permit shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of National Fire Protection Association
(NFPA) 1123 - Code for Fireworks Display (adopted edition).
(5) Permits shall be filed with the State Fire Marshal at least 15 days in advance of the date of the
display. After the privilege is granted, sales, possession, use and distribution of fireworks for the display
shall be lawful for that purpose only. No permit granted under this division shall be transferable. For the
purposes of this subchapter, Apublic display of fireworks@ shall include the use of pyrotechnic devices or
pyrotechnic materials before a proximate audience, whether indoors or outdoors.
(6) Any person remaining within the display area shall be identified as licensed by the ATF, or an
employee thereof, or be an assistant in training to become a competent display operator. All persons
remaining within the display area shall be at least 18 years of age.
(7) The Commissioner of the Department of Housing, Buildings and Construction with
recommendation from the State Fire Marshal shall promulgate administrative regulations in accordance
with KRS Chapter 13A to administer the provisions of this division (A). The regulations shall address the
process by which permits are issued and any other procedures that are reasonably necessary to effectuate
this division (A).
2012 S-12
Fireworks; Fire Prevention 29
(B) The sale, at wholesale, of any display fireworks for permitted displays by any resident
manufacturer, wholesaler, dealer, or jobber, in accordance with regulations of the U.S. Bureau of Alcohol,
Tobacco, and Firearms and Explosives if the sale is to the person holding a display permit as outlined in
division (A) of this section. The permit holder shall present the permit along with other verifiable
identification at the time of sale.
(C) The sale of display fireworks in accordance with a license issued by the United States Bureau of
Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives.
(D) The sale and use in emergency situations of pyrotechnic signaling devices and distress signals for
marine, aviation, and highway use.
(E) The use of fuses and railway torpedoes by railroads.
(F) The sale and use of blank cartridges for use in a show or theater or for signal or ceremonial
purpose in athletics or sports.
(G) The use of any pyrotechnic device by military organizations.
(H) The use of fireworks for agricultural purposes under the direct supervision of the U.S. Department
of the Interior or any equivalent or local agency.
(I) Nothing in this section shall prohibit a person, firm, co-partnership, non-profit, or corporation
from offering for sale, exposing for sale, selling at retail, keeping with intent to sell, possessing or using
consumer fireworks as defined in ' 93.01(B) and as permitted pursuant to ' 93.03.
(KRS 227.710) Penalty, see ' 93.99
' 93.03 CONSUMER FIREWORKS; RESTRICTIONS ON SALE.
Except as provided in ' 93.02, the consumer fireworks described in ' 93.01(B) may be offered for
sale, sold at retail, or kept with the intent to sell, only if the following requirements are met:
(A) Any person, firm, co-partnership, nonprofit, or business intending to sell consumer fireworks
described in ' 93.01(B)(1) shall register annually with the State Fire Marshal, who may assess a fee of no
more than $25 for each site at which fireworks shall be sold. The registration requirement under this section
shall not apply to permanent business establishments which are open year round and in which the sale of
fireworks is ancillary to the primary course of business. Each location shall be required to charge sales tax
at the current rate imposed on retailers in KRS 139.200;
(B) Permanent business establishments open year-round and in which the sale of consumer fireworks
is ancillary to the primary course of business shall only be permitted to sell those consumer fireworks
described in ' 93.01(B)(1), or shall meet the criteria for Aseasonal retailer@ described in division (C) of this
section;
2012 S-12
30 Lebanon - General Regulations
(C) SEASONAL RETAILERS shall be defined as any person, firm, co-partnership, nonprofit, or
corporation intending to sell consumer fireworks between June 10 and July 7, or December 26 and January
4 of each year or both, and shall include permanent businesses, temporary businesses, stores, stands, or
tents. A seasonal retailer shall register with the State Fire Marshal, who may assess a fee of no more than
$250 for each site at which fireworks shall be sold. Each location shall be required to charge sales tax at the
current rate imposed on retailers in KRS 139.200;
(D) Any person, firm, co-partnership, nonprofit, or corporation intending to sell consumer fireworks,
as defined in ' 92.01(B)(2) and (3) as the primary source of business, that is not a seasonal retailer as
defined in division (C) above, shall register with the state fire marshal, who may assess a fee of no more
than $500 for each site at which fireworks will be sold. Each location shall be required to charge sales tax
at the current rate imposed on retailers in KRS 139.200;
(E) The annual registration required by this section shall be received by the State Fire Marshal at least
15 days prior to offering fireworks for sale at the site for which the registration is intended. Evidence that a
sales and use tax permit has been obtained from the Department of Revenue shall be presented to the state
fire marshal as a condition of registration. If the registration is received less than 15 days prior to offering
fireworks for sale at the site for which registration is intended, an additional assessment of $100 shall be
added to the initial fee;
(F) Each site at which fireworks are offered for sale shall have its registration certificate displayed in a
conspicuous location at the site;
(G) Each site at which fireworks are offered for sale shall comply with all applicable provisions of the
International Building Code, with Kentucky Amendments (adopted edition), and NFPA 1124 (National Fire
Protection Association) - Code for the Manufacture, Transportation, Storage, and Retail Sales of Fireworks
and Pyrotechnic Articles (adopted edition);
(H) No person or business shall give, offer for sale, or sell any consumer fireworks listed in ' 93.01(B)
to any person under 18 years of age;
(I) No person under 18 years of age may be employed by a fireworks distribution facility or
manufacturing facility. No person under 18 years of age shall sell consumer fireworks at a consumer
fireworks retail sales facility registered under this section unless the individual is supervised by a parent or
guardian;
(J) The State Fire Marshal may revoke the registration of any site which is in violation of a
requirement of this section, or any other requirement provided pursuant to this chapter. If the violation
renders any property especially susceptible to fire loss, and there is present such hazard to human life or
limb that the public safety imperatively requires emergency action, the State Fire Marshal may take that
action, as provided in KRS 227.330(6); and
(K) A person lawfully possessing consumer fireworks, as defined in ' 93.02(B)(2) and (3) may use
those items if:
2012 S-12
Fireworks; Fire Prevention 30A
(1) He or she is at least 18 years of age;
(2) Fireworks are not ignited within 200 feet of any structure, vehicle, or any other person; and
(3) Use of the fireworks does not place him or her in violation of any lawfully enacted local
ordinance.
(KRS 227.715) Penalty, see ' 93.99
' 93.04 BOND OR LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIREMENT.
No permit shall be issued under ' 93.02 unless the applicant shall give bond or evidence of liability
insurance deemed adequate by the official to whom application for the permit is made, in a sum not less
than $1,000,000. However, the appropriate city official or the State Fire Marshal may require a larger
amount if in their judgment the situation requires it, conditioned for the payment of all damages which may
be caused thereby either to a person or to property by reason of the permitted display, and arising from any
acts of the licensee, his agents, employees or subcontractors.
(KRS 227.720) Penalty, see ' 93.99
' 93.05 EXEMPTED SALES AND USES.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the retail sale and use of explosives or signaling flares used in the
course of ordinary business or industry, or gold star producing sparklers, which contain no magnesium or
chlorate, toy snakes which contain no mercury, smoke novelties and party novelties, which contain less
than twenty-five hundredths of a grain of explosive mixture, or shells or cartridges, used as ammunition in
firearms, or blank cartridges for a show or theater, or for signal or ceremonial purposes in athletics or
sports, or for use by military organizations, or the sale of any kind of fireworks provided the same are to be
shipped by the seller directly out of the state.
(KRS 227.730)
' 93.06 SALE OR DISPOSAL OF SEIZED FIREWORKS.
(A) The State Fire Marshal, or any fire department having jurisdiction which has been deputized to act
on behalf of the State Fire Marshal, shall cause to be removed at the expense of the owner all stocks of
fireworks which are stored and held in violation of this chapter. After a period of 60 days, the seized
fireworks may be offered for sale by closed bid to a properly certified fireworks wholesaler.
(B) After a period of 60 days, the seized fireworks may be offered for sale by closed bid to a properly
certified manufacturer, distributor, or wholesaler. All seized fireworks or explosives with a Class 1.3G or
Adisplay@ designation shall require the notification of the United States Bureau of Alcohol,
2012 S-12
30B Lebanon - General Regulations
Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives. The State Fire Marshal shall provide the owner or possessor a receipt
containing the complete inventory of any fireworks seized within five business days of the seizure.
(C) Before any seized fireworks may be disposed of:
(1) If the owner of the seized fireworks is known to the State Fire Marshal, the State Fire Marshal
shall give notice by registered mail or personal service to the owner of the State Fire Marshal=s intention to
dispose of the fireworks. The notice shall inform the owner of the State Fire Marshal=s intent. The State
Fire Marshal shall conduct an administrative hearing in accordance with KRS Chapter 13B concerning the
disposal of fireworks; or
(2) If the identity of the owner of any seized fireworks is not known to the State Fire Marshal, the
State Fire Marshal shall cause to be published, in a newspaper of general circulation in the county in which
the seizure was made, notice of the seizure, and of the State Fire Marshal=s intention to dispose of the
fireworks. The notice shall be published once each week for three consecutive weeks. If no person claims
ownership of the fireworks within ten days of the date of the last publication, the State Fire Marshal may
proceed with disposal of the fireworks. If the owner does claim the fireworks within ten days of the date of
the last publication, a hearing as set out in division (C)(1) above shall be held.
(D) Nothing in KRS 227.700 to 227.750 shall restrict a local government from enacting ordinances
that affect the sale or use of fireworks within its jurisdiction.
(KRS 227.750)
FIRE PREVENTION
' 93.20 BLASTING PERMIT.
No person shall cause a blast to occur within the city without making application in writing
beforehand, setting forth the exact nature of the intended operation, and receiving a permit to blast from the
authorized city official. The authorized city official, before granting such permit may require the applicant
to provide a bond to indemnify the city and all other persons against injury or damages which might result
from the proposed blasting.
Penalty, see ' 93.99
' 93.21 STORAGE OF FLAMMABLES AND OTHER MATTER.
(A) All flammable or combustible materials shall be arranged and stored in a manner which affords
reasonable safety against the danger of fire.
2012 S-12
Fireworks; Fire Prevention 30C
(B) Waste paper, ashes, oil rags, waste rags, excelsior, or any material of a similar hazardous nature
shall not be accumulated in any cellar or any other portion of any building of any kind. Proper fireproof
receptacles shall be provided for such hazardous materials.
(C) No matter shall be stored or arranged in a manner which impedes or prevents access to or exit
from any premises in case of fire.
Penalty, see ' 93.99
' 93.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person violating the provisions of '' 93.02 or 93.04, the regulations issued thereunder or any
order issued thereunder, or who knowingly induces another, directly or indirectly, to violate the provisions
of those sections, shall be fined not more than $1,000, or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both.
(KRS 227.990 (4))
(B) Any person who violates any other provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be fined not more than $500.
2012 S-12
30D Lebanon - General Regulations
CHAPTER 94: LITTERING
Section
94.01 Throwing litter from vehicle
94.02 Tracking foreign matter on streets
94.03 Hauling loose material
94.04 Sweeping litter into gutters
94.05 Litter on private property
94.99 Penalty
' 94.01 THROWING LITTER FROM VEHICLE.
No person while a driver or passenger in a vehicle shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or other
public place within the city or upon private property.
Penalty, see ' 94.99
' 94.02 TRACKING FOREIGN MATTER ON STREETS.
No person shall drive or move any vehicle or truck within the city, the wheels or tires of which carry
onto or deposit upon any street, alley, or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter, or foreign
matter of any kind.
Penalty, see ' 94.99
' 94.03 HAULING LOOSE MATERIAL.
Every person hauling or causing to be hauled dirt, sand, gravel, cement, fill dirt, or loose material of
any kind in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public place shall haul it, or cause it to be hauled in
vehicles provided with tight boxes or beds so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of the contents from
falling or being thrown, blown, or deposited upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public place. Any
materials which fall from, or which are thrown, blown, or deposited from any vehicle upon any street, alley,
sidewalk, or other public place, shall be removed immediately by the person in charge of the vehicle.
Penalty, see ' 94.99
31
32 Lebanon - General Regulations
' 94.04 SWEEPING LITTER INTO GUTTERS.
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, or other public place within the city the
accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons
owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter.
Penalty, see ' 94.99
' 94.05 LITTER ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
(A) No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property within the city, whether
owned by that person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain
authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being
carried or deposited by the elements upon streets, sidewalks, or other public places, or upon any private
property.
(B) No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property within the city
whether owned by that person or not.
Penalty, see ' 94.99
' 94.99 PENALTY.
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
fined not more than $500. Each day the violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a
separate offense.
CHAPTER 95: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
95.01 Policies and procedures adopted by reference
' 95.01 POLICIES AND PROCEDURES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
The Parks and Recreation Department's Policies and Procedures are hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated as if set out at length herein. Copies of the policies and procedures are on file in the office of
the City Clerk and shall be available for public inspection during regular business hours.
(Ord. passed 9-9-96)
33
34 Lebanon - General Regulations
CHAPTER 96: TREES
Section
96.01 Definitions
96.02 City Tree Board
96.03 Street tree species to be planted
96.04 Spacing of trees
96.05 Distance from curbs, sidewalks and power lines
96.06 Distance from street corners and fireplugs
96.07 Public tree care
96.08 Tree topping
96.09 Pruning, corner clearance
96.10 Dead or diseased tree removal on private property
96.11 Arborists license and bond
96.12 Interference with City Tree Board
96.13 Review by City Council
96.99 Penalty
' 96.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning.
PARK TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public parks having
individual names, and all areas owned by the city, or to which the public has free access as a park.
STREET TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on land lying between
property lines on either side of all streets, avenues or ways within the city.
(Ord. 92-2, passed 3-9-92)
' 96.02 CITY TREE BOARD.
(A) Creation and establishment. There is hereby created and established a City Tree Board which
shall consist of five members, citizens and residents of this city, who shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the approval of the City Council.
35
36 Lebanon - General Regulations
(B) Term of office. The term of the five persons to be appointed by the Mayor shall be three years
except that the term of two of the members appointed to the first Board shall be for only one year, and the
term of two members of the first Board shall be for two years. In the event that a vacancy shall occur during
the term of any member, his successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term.
(C) Compensation. Members of the Board shall serve without compensation.
(D) Duties and responsibilities.
(1) It shall be the responsibility of the Board to study, investigate, counsel, develop and/or update
annually, and administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or
disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public areas. Such plan will be presented
annually to the City Council and, upon their acceptance and approval, shall constitute the official
comprehensive tree plan for the city.
(2) The Board, when requested by the City Council, shall consider, investigate, make finding,
report and recommend upon any special matter of question coming within the scope of its work.
(E) Operation. The Board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations and keep
a journal of its findings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business.
(Ord. 92-2, passed 3-9-92)
' 96.03 STREET TREE SPECIES TO BE PLANTED.
The Tree Board will formulate an official street tree species list for the city. The list of allowable
species shall be broken down into categories of small, medium and large trees. No species other than those
included in this list may be planted as street trees without written permission of the City Tree Board.
(Ord. 92-2, passed 3-9-92)
' 96.04 SPACING OF TREES.
The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three species classes referred to in ' 96.03,
and no trees may be planted closer together than the following: small trees, 30 feet; medium trees, 40 feet;
and large trees, 50 feet, except in special plantings designed or approved by a landscape architect.
(Ord. 92-2, passed 3-9-92) Penalty, see ' 96.99
Trees 37
' 96.05 DISTANCE FROM CURBS, SIDEWALKS AND POWER LINES.
The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curblines and sidewalks will be in accordance with the
three species size classes listed in ' 96.03, and no trees may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than
the following: small trees, two feet; medium trees, three feet; and large trees, four feet. Only small trees can
be planted within 15 feet of powerlines.
(Ord. 92-2, passed 3-9-92) Penalty, see ' 96.99
' 96.06 DISTANCE FROM STREET CORNERS AND FIREPLUGS.
No street tree shall be planted closer than 20 feet of any street corner, measured from the point of
nearest intersecting curbs or curblines. No street tree shall be planted closer than ten feet of any fireplug.
(Ord. 92-2, passed 3-9-92) Penalty, see ' 96.99
' 96.07 PUBLIC TREE CARE.
The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the
lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to insure public
safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. The City Tree Board may
remove or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which
by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines or other public
improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. This section does not prohibit
the planting of street trees by adjacent property owners providing that the selection and location of said
trees is in accordance with '' 96.03 through 96.07 of this chapter.
(Ord. 92-2, passed 3-9-92)
' 96.08 TREE TOPPING.
It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm or city department to top any street tree,
park tree or other tree on public property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs
larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal
canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under
utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempt from this
chapter at the determination of the City Tree Board.
(Ord. 92-2, passed 3-9-92)
38 Lebanon - General Regulations
' 96.09 PRUNING, CORNER CLEARANCE.
Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city shall prune the branches
so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street
intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet above the surface of the street or sidewalk.
Said owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees or broken or decayed limbs which constitute
a menace to the safety of the public. The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private
property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a street light or interferes
with visibility of any traffic control device or sign.
(Ord. 92-2, passed 3-9-92) Penalty, see ' 96.99
' 96.10 DEAD OR DISEASED TREE REMOVAL ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
The city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees on private property
within the city when such trees constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease which
constitute a potential threat to other trees within the city. The City Tree Board will notify in writing the
owners of such trees. Removal shall be done by said owners at their own expense within 60 days after the
date of service of notice. In the event of failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the city shall
have the authority to remove such trees and to recover such amount from the owner(s).
(Ord. 92-2, passed 3-9-92)
' 96.11 ARBORISTS LICENSE AND BOND.
It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business or occupation of pruning, treating
or removing street or park trees within the city without first applying for and procuring a license. The
license fee shall be $25 annually in advance; provided, however, that no license shall be required of any
public service company or city employee doing such work in the pursuit of their public service endeavors.
Before any license shall be issued, each applicant shall first file evidence of possession of liability
insurance in the minimum amounts of $25,000 for bodily injury and $10,000 property damage
indemnifying the city or any person injured or damaged resulting from the pursuit of such endeavors as
herein described.
(Ord. 92-2, passed 3-9-92)
' 96.12 INTERFERENCE WITH CITY TREE BOARD.
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the City Tree Board or any of its
agents or servants while engaging in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or
removing of any street tree, park trees or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this chapter.
(Ord. 92-2, passed 3-9-92) Penalty, see ' 96.99
Trees 39
' 96.13 REVIEW BY CITY COUNCIL.
The City Council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and decisions of the City Tree Board.
Any person may appeal from any ruling or order of the City Tree Board to the City Council who may hear
the matter and make the final decision.
(Ord. 92-2, passed 3-9-92)
' 96.99 PENALTY.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon
conviction or a plea of guilt, be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
(Ord. 92-2, passed 3-9-92)
40 Lebanon - General Regulations
CHAPTER 97: JUNKED APPLIANCES AND MOTOR VEHICLES
Section
97.01 Definitions
97.02 Conditions constituting public nuisance
97.03 Right of entry of enforcement officials
97.04 Notice to abate
97.05 Abatement by city
97.06 Hearing; appeal
97.07 Regulations supplemental
97.99 Penalty
' 97.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL. The City's Building Inspector or his deputy.
JUNKED APPLIANCES. Any unit, or part thereof, of machinery, furniture or equipment, whether
functional or ornamental, and whether mechanical or powered by some source of energy or not, including,
but not limited to, stoves, refrigerators, television sets, beds, lamps, tools, objects of art, and the like, the
condition of which is one of the following: wrecked; dismantled; partially dismantled; inoperative;
abandoned; or discarded.
JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES. Any contrivance, or part thereof, designed to be propelled by power
and used for transportation of persons or property on public streets and highways, the condition of which is
one or more of the following: wrecked; dismantled; partially dismantled; inoperative; abandoned or
discarded.
(Ord. 89-8, passed 6-19-89)
41
42 Lebanon - General Regulations
' 97.02 CONDITIONS CONSTITUTING PUBLIC NUISANCE.
(A) The presence of any junked motor vehicle or junked appliance upon a public street or on public
property for a period of 72 consecutive hours, or on any private lot, tract or parcel of land for a period of 30
consecutive days shall be deemed a public nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or
maintain such a public nuisance by wrecking, dismantling, partially dismantling, rendering inoperable,
abandoning or discarding any junked motor vehicle or junked appliance upon a public street, upon public
property or upon his own real property or on the real property of another, or to suffer, permit or allow a
junked motor vehicle or junked appliance to be parked, left or maintained upon his own real property, upon
a public street, upon public property, or upon the real property of another. Provided, however, that these
provisions shall not apply to:
(1) Any junked motor vehicle or junked appliance inside an enclosed building;
(2) Any junked motor vehicle or junked appliance on the premises of a business enterprise
operated in a lawful manner, when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise. Nevertheless,
any such junked motor vehicle or junked appliance must be hidden from view by an artificial or natural
screen or by virtue of natural topography; or
(3) Any junked motor vehicle or junked appliance on property occupied, and regularly and
lawfully used for repair, reconditioning and remodeling of motor vehicles or appliances. Nevertheless, any
such junked motor vehicle or junked appliance must be hidden from view by an artificial or natural screen
or by virtue of natural topography.
(B) The screening required in divisions (2) and (3) above may be effected by the construction of a
fence or by planting shrubs, trees or flowering plants, the foliage of which provides a sufficient screen or by
making such screening out of foliage already in existence. Any business referred to in divisions (2) and (3)
above which is lawfully in operation at the time of adoption of this chapter shall have the required
screening in place and effective within six months after the enactment hereof.
(Ord. 89-8, passed 6-19-89) Penalty, see ' 97.99
' 97.03 RIGHT OF ENTRY OF ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS.
The provisions hereof shall be administered and enforced by the Administrative Official. In the
enforcement hereof, such officer and/or his duly authorized agents, assistants, employees or contractors
may enter upon private or public property to examine any apparently junked motor vehicle or junked
appliance, to obtain information as to the identity of any junked motor vehicle or junked appliance and/or
its owner, to obtain information as the identity of the person causing the junked motor vehicle or junked
appliance to be located there, and/or to remove or cause removal of any junked motor vehicle or junked
appliance deemed to be a nuisance.
(Ord. 89-8, passed 6-19-89)
Junked Appliances and Motor Vehicles 43
' 97.04 NOTICE TO ABATE.
(A) Whenever the Administrative Official deems a nuisance to exist in violation of this chapter, he
shall issue a notice to the parties hereinafter stated, and such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Specify the public nuisance and its location;
(3) Advise such party that he has 30 days in which to abate the nuisance or to make a written
demand for a hearing before the Administrative Official, or else the public nuisance will be removed and
abated by the city at such party's expense.
(B) Such notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the last known
address of the owner of the property upon which the nuisance is located. In the event that the owner of the
property is not the occupant thereof, such notice shall also be similarly mailed to the occupant of the
property. The Administrative Official shall coordinate his efforts to determine ownership of junked motor
vehicles with the Police Department and notice in accordance herewith shall be sent to the last registered
and legal owner of record of junked motor vehicles, unless the owner is the owner or occupant of the
premises upon which the nuisance is located and unless identification numbers are not available to
determine ownership of the junked motor vehicle. If the owner, or his address, of any junked motor vehicle
is not known or cannot be readily ascertained, the notice to him to abate, and of his right to a hearing may
be given by attaching such notice to the junked motor vehicle not less than ten days before action is to be
taken. If the latter method of providing notice is used, the Administrative Official shall make an affidavit
attesting to such facts. Where a junked motor vehicle is found to be upon any public property within the
city, notice send to the last registered and legal owner of the junked motor vehicle is all that shall be
required. Where a junked appliance is found on public property, no notice is required.
(Ord. 89-8, passed 6-19-89)
' 97.05 ABATEMENT BY CITY.
Upon failure, neglect or refusal to abate a nuisance hereunder by any occupant or owner of private
property who has been notified and ordered to abate such nuisance under the provisions hereof, the
Administrative Official is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to remove and dispose of the
nuisance. The cost of removal and disposal shall be accounted for by the Administrative Official and a
demand for reimbursement in such amount shall be provided to such occupant or owner in accordance with
the notice provisions hereof. In the event that the full amount due to the city for such service is not paid
within 30 days after the mailing of such notice, the Administrative Official may proceed in the name of the
city to collect such amount by any legal process, including initiating legal action against the person or
persons responsible for payment.
(Ord. 89-8, passed 6-19-89)
44 Lebanon - General Regulations
' 97.06 HEARING; APPEAL.
(A) In the event any affected person demands a hearing as provided for under ' 97.04 above, such
hearing shall be held within ten days after written demand is made and shall be conducted by the
Administrative Official, who shall hear all the facts and testimony on the condition of the junked motor
vehicle or junked appliance and the circumstances concerning the location. Such hearing shall not be
limited by technical rules of evidence. The Administrative Official may impose such conditions and take
such other action as he deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purposes hereof. He may
delay the time for removal of the nuisance if, in his opinion, circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of
any hearing the Administrative Official may find that a junked motor vehicle or junked appliance has been
abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or is inoperative on private or public property and order the same removed
from the property as a public nuisance and order disposal of same. The order requiring removal shall
include a description of the junked motor vehicle or junked appliance and the correct identification number
and state license tag number, if any, of the junked motor vehicle.
(B) Any interested party may appeal the decision of the Administrative Official by appealing to a court
of competent jurisdiction within seven days after the Administrative Official's decision is made. If no
appeal is taken within the time prescribed, and if the person or persons responsible have not abated the
nuisance within such time, the Administrative Official shall cause the junked motor vehicle or junked
appliance to be removed and be disposed of in such manner as he may provide and shall proceed to recover
the costs thereof from the responsible party in accordance with the provision of ' 97.05.
(Ord. 89-8, passed 6-19-89)
' 97.07 REGULATIONS SUPPLEMENTAL.
This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles
and appliances within the city, but is supplemental and in addition to all other regulatory codes, statutes and
ordinances.
(Ord. 89-8, passed 6-19-89)
' 97.99 PENALTY.
In addition to the civil remedies provided for in this chapter, it is deemed to be unlawful for any person
to allow or continue to maintain a public nuisance as described herein, and any person violating any
provisions hereof shall be guilty of a violation and fined not less than $25 and not more than $100 for each
offense and each day in which a violation of this chapter shall occur shall be deemed to constitute a
separate offense.
(Ord. 89-8, passed 6-19-89)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter
110. OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAX
111. PEDDLERS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS,
AND SOLICITORS
112. PAWNBROKERS
113. INSURANCE COMPANIES
114. FLEA MARKETS AND YARD SALES
115. PRECIOUS METALS
116. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
APPENDIX A: OUTDOOR DINING PERMIT AGREEMENT
APPENDIX B: OUTDOOR DINING PERMIT AGREEMENT,
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SALES
117. AMUSEMENTS
118. ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
1
2008 S-9
2 Lebanon - Business Regulations
CHAPTER 110: OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAX
Section
110.01 Definitions
110.02 Application and updates required
110.03 Occupational License Tax payment required
110.04 Apportionment
110.05 Employers to withhold
110.06 Returns required
110.07 Extensions and estimated payments
110.08 Refunds
110.09 Federal audit provisions
110.10 Administrative provisions
110.11 Information to remain confidential
110.12 Penalties
110.13 Use of Occupational License Tax
110.14 Annual business license fee imposed
Cross-reference:
Taxation, see Chapter 35
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
As used in this chapter, the following terms and their derivatives shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended.
BUSINESS. An enterprise, activity, profession or undertaking of any nature conducted for gain or
profit. BUSINESS shall not include boards of trade, chambers of commerce, trade associations, unions
or civic or fraternal organizations recognized by the Internal Revenue Service. BUSINESS shall not
include funds, foundations, corporations or associations organized and operated for the exclusive and
sole purpose of religious, charitable, scientific, literary, educational, civic or fraternal purposes, where
no part of the earnings, incomes or receipts of such unit, group or association inures to the benefit of
any private shareholder or other person.
BUSINESS ENTITY. Each separate corporation, limited liability company, business
development corporation, partnership, limited partnership, registered limited liability partnership, sole
proprietorship, association, joint-stock company, receivership, trust, professional service organization,
or other legal entity through which business is conducted.
3
2008 S-9
4 Lebanon - Business Regulations
CITY. The City of Lebanon, Kentucky.
COMPENSATION. Wages, salaries, commissions, or any other form of remuneration paid or
payable by an employer for services performed by an employee, which are required to be reported for
federal income tax purposes, and are adjusted as follows:
(1) Include any amounts contributed by an employee to any retirement, profit sharing, or
deferred compensation plan, which are deferred for federal income tax purposes under a salary
reduction agreement or similar arrangement, including but not limited to, salary reduction
arrangements under Sections 401 (a), 401 (k), 402 (e), 403 (a), 403 (b), or 408, 414 (h) or 457 of the
Internal Revenue Code; and
(2) Include any amounts contributed by an employee to any welfare benefit, fringe benefit, or
other benefit plan made by salary reduction or other payment method that permits employees to elect to
reduce federal taxable compensation under the Internal Revenue Code, including but not limited to,
Sections 125 and 152 of the Internal Revenue Code.
CONCLUSION OF THE FEDERAL AUDIT. The date that the adjustments made by the Internal
Revenue Service to net income as reported on the business entity’s federal income tax return become
final and unappealable.
EMPLOYEE. Any person who renders services to another person or any business entity for
compensation, including an officer of a corporation and any officer, employee or elected official of the
United States, a state, or any political subdivision of a state, or any agency of instrumentality of any
one or more of the above. A person classified as independent contractor under the Internal Revenue
Code shall not be considered an employee.
EMPLOYER. The person for whom an individual performs or performed any service, of whatever
nature, as the employee of such person, except that:
(1) If the person for whom the individual performs or performed the service does not have
control of the payment of wages for such services, the term EMPLOYER means the person having
control of the payment of such wages; and
(2) In case of the person paying wages on behalf of a nonresident alien individual, foreign
partnership, or foreign corporation not engaged in trade or business within the United States, the term
EMPLOYER means such person.
FINAL DETERMINATION OF THE FEDERAL AUDIT. The revenue agent’s report or other
documents reflecting the final and unappealable adjustments made by the Internal Revenue Service.
FISCAL YEAR. FISCAL YEAR as defined in Section 7701 (a)(24) of the Internal Revenue
Code.
2008 S-9
Occupational License Tax 5
NET PROFIT. Gross income as defined in Section 61 of the Internal Revenue Code, minus all
the deductions from the gross income allowed by Chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code, and adjusted
as follows:
(1) Include any amount claimed as a deduction for state tax or local tax that is computed, in
whole or in part, by reference to gross or net income, and that is paid or accrued to any state of the
United States, local taxing authority in a state, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto
Rico, any territory or possession of the United States, or any foreign country or political subdivision
thereof;
(2) Include any amount claimed as a deduction that directly or indirectly is allocable to
income that is either exempt from taxation or otherwise not taxed;
(3) Include any amount claimed as a net operating loss carryback or carryforward allowed
under Section 172 of the Internal Revenue Code;
(4) Include any amount of income and expenses passed through separately, as required by the
Internal Revenue Code, to an owner of a business entity that is a pass-through entity for federal tax
purposes; and
(5) Exclude any amount of income that is exempt from state taxation by the Kentucky
Constitution or the Constitution and statutory laws of the United States.
PERSON. Every natural person, whether a resident or nonresident of the city. Whenever the term
PERSON is used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty in the nature of a fine or
imprisonment, the word, as applied to a partnership or other form of unincorporated enterprise, shall
mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to a corporation, shall mean the officers and
directors thereof.
RETURN or REPORT. Any properly completed and, if required, signed form, statement,
certification, declaration, or any other document permitted or required to be submitted or filed with the
city.
SALES REVENUE. Receipts from the sale, lease, or rental of goods, services, or property.
TAX DISTRICT. Any county or city with the authority to levy net profits or occupational license
taxes.
TAXABLE NET PROFIT.
(1) In case of a business entity having payroll or sales revenue only within the city, means
“net profit” as defined herein.
2008 S-9
6 Lebanon - Business Regulations
(2) In case of a business entity having payroll or sales revenue both within and without the
city, means “net profit” as defined herein, and as apportioned under § 110.04.
TAXABLE YEAR. The calendar year or fiscal year ending during the calendar year upon the basis
of which net income is computed.
(Ord. 85-4, passed 6-24-85; Am. Ord. 07-17, passed 11-19-07)
§ 110.02 APPLICATION AND UPDATES REQUIRED.
(A) Every person or business entity engaged in any trade, occupation, profession, or other activity
for profit, or anyone required to file a return under this chapter in the city, shall be required to complete
and execute a questionnaire prescribed by the Occupational Tax Office.
(1) Each person shall be required to complete a separate questionnaire for each separate
business before the commencement of business, or in the event of a status change other than change of
address.
(2) Licensees are required to notify the Occupational Tax Office of changes of address, or the
cessation of business activity, and of other changes that render inaccurate the information supplied in
the completed questionnaire.
(B) Every person or business entity engaged in any trade, occupation or profession, or other
activity for profit, or anyone required to file a return under this chapter in the city, shall be required to
obtain a business license annually on January 1, or prior to the commencement of business operations
within the city limits pursuant to § 110.14.
(Ord. 85-4, passed 6-24-85; Am. Ord. 07-17, passed 11-19-07)
§ 110.03 OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAX PAYMENT REQUIRED.
(A) Except as provided in division (B) and division (E) of this section, every person or business
entity engaged in any business for profit, and any person or business entity that is required to make a
filing with the Internal Revenue Service or the Kentucky Revenue Cabinet, shall be required to file and
pay to the city an Occupational License Tax for the privilege of engaging in such activities within the
city limits. The Occupational License Tax shall be measured by 1% of the following:
(1) All wages and compensation paid or payable in the city for work done or services
performed or rendered in the city by every resident and nonresident who is an employee;
(2) The net profit from business conducted in the city by a resident or nonresident business
entity.
2008 S-9
Occupational License Tax 7
(B) All partnerships, S Corporations, and all other entities where income is “passed through” to
the owners are subject to this chapter. The Occupational License Tax imposed in this chapter is
assessed against income before it is “passed through” these entities to the owners.
(C) If any business entity dissolves, ceases to operate, or withdraws from the city during any
taxable year, or if any business entity in any manner surrenders or loses its charter during any taxable
year, the dissolution, cessation of business, withdrawal, or loss or surrender of charter shall not defeat
the filing of returns and the assessment and collection of any Occupational License Tax for the period
of that taxable year during which the business entity had business activity in the city.
(D) If a business entity makes, or is required to make, a federal income tax return, the
Occupational License Tax shall be computed for the purposes of this chapter on the basis of the same
calendar or fiscal year required by the federal government, and shall employ the same methods of
accounting required for federal income tax purposes.
(E) The Occupational License Tax imposed in this section shall not apply to the following persons
or business entities:
(1) Any bank, trust company, combined bank and trust company, combined trust, banking
and title business organized and doing business in this state, any savings and loan association, whether
state or federally chartered.
(2) Any compensation received by members of the Kentucky National Guard for active duty
training, unit training assembles and annual field training;
(3) Any compensation received by precinct workers for election training or work at election
booths in state, county or city, and local primary, regular or special elections;
(4) Public service corporations that pay an ad valorem tax on property valued and assessed by
the Kentucky Department of Revenue pursuant to the provisions of KRS 136.120. Licensees whose
businesses are predominantly nonpublic service, who are also engaged in public service activity, are
required to pay a license fee on their net profit derived from the nonpublic service activities
apportioned to the city;
(5) Persons or business entities that have been issued a license under KRS Chapter 243 to
engage in manufacturing or trafficking in alcoholic beverages. Persons engaged in the business of
manufacturing or trafficking in alcoholic beverages are required to file a return, but exclude the portion
of their net profits derived from the manufacturing or trafficking in alcoholic beverages;
(6) Insurance companies incorporated under the laws of and doing business in the
Commonwealth of Kentucky, except as provided in KRS 91A.080;
2008 S-9
8 Lebanon - Business Regulations
(7) Any profits, earnings, distributions of an investment fund that would qualify under KRS
154.20-250 to KRS 154.20-284 to the extent any profits, earnings, or distributions would not be taxable
to an individual investor;
(8) Farmers’ markets;
(9) Domestic servants employed in a private home; and
(10) Governmental entities and bona fide nonprofit organizations, but only to the extent of
filing an annual return of net profits and from payment of an annual license fee, but such exemption
shall not extend to the requirement of withholding and reporting license fees for employees of such
governmental entities or nonprofit corporations.
(Ord. 85-4, passed 6-24-85; Am. Ord. 94-09, passed 6-14-94; Am. Ord. 07-17, passed 11-19-07)
§ 110.04 APPORTIONMENT.
(A) Except as provided in division (D) of this section, net profit shall be apportioned as follows:
(1) For business entities with both payroll and sales revenue in more than one tax district, by
multiplying the net profit by a fraction, the numerator of which is the payroll factor, described in
division (B) of this section, plus the sales factor, described in division (C) of this section, and the
denominator of which is two; and
(2) For business entities with sales revenue in more than one tax district, by multiplying the
net profit by the sales factor as set forth in division (C) of this section; and
(3) For the purposes of divisions (A) through (D) of this section, the business entity shall file
an apportionment form provided by the Occupational Tax Office.
(B) The payroll factor is a fraction, the numerator of which is the total amount paid or payable in
the city during the tax period by the business entity for compensation, and the denominator of which is
the total compensation paid or payable by the business entity everywhere during the tax period.
Compensation is paid or payable to the city, based on the time the individual’s service is performed
within the city limits;
(C) The sales factor is a fraction, the numerator of which is the total sales revenue of the business
entity in the city during the tax period, and the denominator of which is the total sales revenue of the
business entity everywhere during the tax period.
(1) The sale, lease or rental of tangible personal property is in the city if:
2008 S-9
Occupational License Tax 9
(a) The property is delivered or shipped to a purchaser, other than the United States
Government, or to the designee of the purchaser within the city, regardless of the f.o.b point or other
conditions of the sale; or
(b) The property is shipped from an office, store, warehouse, factory, or other place of
storage in the city and the purchaser is the United States Government;
(2) Sales revenues other than revenue from the sale, lease or rental of tangible personal
property, or the lease or rental of real property, are apportioned to the city, based upon a fraction, the
numerator of which is the time spent in performing such income-producing activity within the city, and
the denominator of which is the total time spent performing that income-producing activity;
(3) Sales revenue from the sale, lease or rental of real property is allocated to the tax district
where the property is located.
(D) If the apportionment provisions of this section do not fairly represent the extent of the
business entity’s activity in the city, the business entity may petition the city, or the city may require, in
respect to all or any part of the business entity’s business activity, if reasonable, such as:
(1) Separate accounting;
(2) The exclusion of any one or more of the factors;
(3) The inclusion of one or more additional factors that will fairly represent the business
entity’s business activity in the city; or
(4) The employment of any other method to effectuate an equitable allocation and
apportionment of net profit.
(E) When compensation is paid or payable for work done or services performed or rendered by an
employee, both within and without the city, the License Tax shall be measured by that part of the
compensation paid or payable as a result of work done or service performed or rendered within the city.
(1) The License Tax shall be computed by obtaining the percentage which the compensation
for work performed or services rendered within the city limits bears to the total wages and
compensation paid or payable.
(2) In order for the city to verify the accuracy of a taxpayer’s reported percentages under this
division, the taxpayer shall maintain adequate records.
(Ord. 85-4, passed 6-24-85; Am. Ord. 07-17, passed 11-19-07)
2008 S-9
10 Lebanon - Business Regulations
§ 110.05 EMPLOYERS TO WITHHOLD.
(A) Every employer making payment of compensation to an employee shall deduct and withhold,
upon the payment of the compensation, any tax imposed against the compensation by the city.
Amounts withheld shall be paid to the city in accordance with § 110.03.
(B) Every employer required to deduct and withhold tax under this section shall, for the quarter
ending January 1, and for each quarter ending thereafter, on or before the end of the month following
the close of each quarter, make a return and report to the city and pay to the city the tax required to be
withheld under this section, unless the employer is permitted or required to report within a reasonable
time after some other period as determined by the city.
(C) Every employer who fails to withhold or pay to the city any sums required by this chapter to
be withheld and paid shall be personally and individually liable to the city for any sum or sums
withheld or required to be withheld in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(D) The city shall have a lien upon all the property of any employer who fails to withhold or pay
over to the city sums required to be withheld under this section.
(1) If the employer withholds but fails to pay the amounts withheld were required to be paid
to the city.
(2) If the employer fails to withhold, the lien shall commence at the time the liability of the
employer is assessed by the city.
(E) (1) Every employer required to deduct and withhold tax under this section shall annually, on
or before February 28 of each year, complete and file, on a form furnished or approved by the city, a
reconciliation of the Occupational License Tax withheld, where compensation is paid or payable to
employees.
(2) Either copies of federal forms W-2 and W-3, transmittal of wage and tax statements, or a
detailed employee listing with the required equivalent information as determined by the city, shall be
submitted.
(F) Every employer shall furnish each employee a statement, on or before January 31 of each
year, showing the amount of compensation and Occupational License Tax deducted by the employer
from the compensation paid to the employee for payment to the city during the preceding calendar
year.
(G) An employer shall be liable for the payment of the tax required to be deducted and withheld
under this section.
2008 S-9
Occupational License Tax 11
(H) (1) The president, vice president, secretary, treasurer or any other person holding an
equivalent corporate office of any business entity subject to this chapter shall be personally and
individually liable, both jointly and severally, for any tax required to be withheld from compensation
paid to one or more employees of any business entity, and neither the corporate dissolution or
withdrawal of the business entity from the city, nor the cessation of holding any corporate office, shall
discharge that liability of any person; provided that the personal and individual liability shall apply to
each or every person holding the corporate office at the time the tax becomes or became obligated.
(2) No person shall be personally and individually liable under this division who had no
authority to collect, truthfully account for, or pay over any tax imposed by this chapter at the time that
the taxes imposed by this chapter become or became due.
(I) Every employee receiving compensation in the city, subject to the tax imposed under §
110.03, shall be personally liable for the tax, notwithstanding the provisions of divisions (G) and (H) of
this section.
(1) In all cases where the employer does not withhold the tax levied under this chapter from
the employee, such employee or employees shall be responsible for filing with the city each quarter in
the same manner as if they were the employer.
(2) If an employer fails to or is not required to withhold, report or pay the license fee, it shall
become the duty of the employee to file with the city.
(3) The only employer that is not required to withhold, report and pay the Occupational
License Tax is the federal government, including the United States Postal Service.
(4) The payment required to be made by an employee can be made quarterly, for the periods
ending March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31 of each year, or at any time the employee
wishes to make an estimated payment for the year in which wages are earned.
(5) All license fees must be received by February 28 for the preceding calendar year, together
with a copy of the employee’s W-2 form.
(6) Employers not required to withhold, report or pay the license fee must annually, during
the month of January of each year, make a return to the Occupational Tax Administrator, in which is
set forth the name and Social Security number of each employee of the employer during the preceding
calendar year, giving the amount of salaries, wages, commissions or other compensation earned during
such preceding year by each such employees. This list shall include all current full-time employees,
part-time employees, temporary employees and terminated employees, whether it be voluntary or
involuntary.
(Ord. 85-4, passed 6-24-85; Am. Ord. 07-17, passed 11-19-07)
2008 S-9
12 Lebanon - Business Regulations
§ 110.06 RETURNS REQUIRED.
(A) All business entity returns for the preceding taxable year shall be made by April 15 of each
year, except returns made on the basis of a fiscal year, which shall be made by the 15th day of the
fourth month following the close of the fiscal year. Blank forms for the return shall be supplied by the
city.
(B) Every business entity shall submit a copy of its federal income tax return and all supporting
statements and schedules at the time of filing its Occupational License Tax return with the city.
(1) Whenever, in the opinion of the city, it is necessary to examine the federal income tax
return of any business entity in order to audit the return, the city may compel the business entity to
produce for inspection a copy of any statements and schedules in support thereof that have not been
previously filed.
(2) The city may also require copies of reports of adjustments made by the federal
government.
(C) (1) Every business entity subject to an Occupational License Tax governed by the provisions
of this chapter shall keep records, render under oath statements, make returns, and comply with rules as
the city from time to time may prescribe.
(2) Whenever it deems it necessary, the city may require a business entity, by notice served
to the business entity, to make a return, render statements under oath, or keep records, as the city deems
sufficient to determine the tax liability of the business entity.
(D) The city may require, for the purpose of ascertaining the correctness of any return or for the
purposes of making an estimate of the taxable income of any business entity, the attendance of a
representative of the business entity or of any other person having knowledge in the premises.
(E) The full amount of the unpaid tax payable by any business entity, as appears from the face of
the return, shall be paid to the city at the time prescribed for filing the Occupational License Tax return,
determined without regard to any extension of time for filing the return.
(Ord. 85-4, passed 6-24-85; Am. Ord. 07-17, passed 11-19-07)
§ 110.07 EXTENSIONS AND ESTIMATED PAYMENTS.
(A) The city may grant any business entity an extension of not more than six months, unless a
longer extension has been granted by the Internal Revenue Service or is agreed to by the city, and the
business entity, for filing its return, if the business entity, on or before the date prescribed for payment
of the Occupational License Tax, requests the extension and pays the amount properly estimated as its
tax.
2008 S-9
Occupational License Tax 12A
(B) If the time for filing a return is extended, the business entity shall pay, as part of the tax, an
amount equal to 12% per annum simple interest on the tax shown due on the return, but not previously
paid, from the time the tax was due until the return is actually filed and the tax paid to the city. A
fraction of a month is counted as an entire month.
(C) Every business entity, other than a sole proprietorship, subject to a net profits or Occupation
License Tax levied by the city shall make quarterly estimated tax payments on or before the 15th day
of the fourth, sixth, ninth and 12th month of each taxable year, if the tax liability for the taxable year
exceeds $5,000.
(D) The quarterly estimated tax payments required under division (C) of this section shall be
based on the lesser of:
(1) Twenty-two and one-half percent of the current taxable year tax liability;
(2) Twenty-five percent of the preceding full year taxable year tax liability; or
(3) Twenty-five percent of the average tax liability for the three preceding full taxable years’
tax liabilities, if the tax liability for any of the three preceding full taxable years exceeded $20,000.
(E) Any business entity that fails to submit the minimum quarterly payment required under
division (D) of this section by the date for the quarterly payment shall pay an amount equal to 12% per
annum simple interest on the amount of the quarterly payment required under division (D) of this
section from the earlier of:
(1) The due date for the quarterly payment until the time when the aggregate quarterly
payments submitted for the taxable year equal the minimum aggregate payments due under division
(D) of this section; or
(2) The due date of the annual return.
A fraction of a month is counted as an entire month.
(F) The provisions of this section shall not apply to any business entity’s first full or partial
taxable year of doing business in the city, or any first taxable year in which business entity’s tax
liability exceeds $5,000.
(G) At the election of the business entity, any installment of the estimated tax may be paid prior to
the date prescribed for its payment.
(Ord. 07-17, passed 11-19-07)
2008 S-9
12B Lebanon - Business Regulations
§ 110.08 REFUNDS.
(A) Where there has been an overpayment of tax under § 110.05, a refund or credit shall be made
to the employer only to the extent that the amount of the overpayment was not deducted and withheld
under § 110.05 by the employer.
(B) Unless written application for refund or credit is received by the city from the employer within
two years from the date of overpayment was made, no refund or credit shall be allowed.
(C) An employee who has compensation attributable to activities performed outside the city,
based on time spent outside the city, whose employer has withheld and remitted to the city the
Occupational License Tax on the compensation attributable to activities performed outside the city,
may file for a refund within two years of the date prescribed by law for the filing of a return.
(1) The employee shall provide a schedule and computation sufficient to verify the refund
claim.
(2) The city may confirm with the employer the percentage of time spent outside the city and
the amount of compensation attributable to activities performed outside the city prior to approval of the
refund.
(D) In the case where the tax computed under this chapter is less than the amount which has been
declared and paid as estimated tax for the same taxable year, a refund shall be made upon the filing of a
return.
(E) (1) Overpayment resulting from the payment of estimated tax in excess of the amount
determined to be due upon the filing of a return for the same taxable year, or for any deficiency or
nonpayment of tax for any previous taxable year;
(2) No refund shall be made of any estimated tax paid unless a complete return is filed as
required by this chapter.
(Ord. 07-17, passed 11-19-07)
§ 110.09 FEDERAL AUDIT PROVISIONS.
(A) As soon as practicable after each return is received, the city may examine and audit the return.
If the amount of tax computed by the city is greater than the amount returned by the business entity, the
additional tax shall be assessed, and a notice of assessment mailed to the business entity by the city
within five years from the date the return was filed, except as otherwise provided in this division.
2008 S-9
Occupational License Tax 12C
(1) In the case of a failure to file a return or of a fraudulent return, the additional tax may be
assessed at any time.
(2) In the case of a return where a business entity understates net profit or omits an amount
properly included in net profits, or both, which understatement or omission, or both, is in excess of
25% of the amount of net profit stated in the return, the additional tax may be assessed at any time
within six years after the return was filed.
(3) In the case of an assessment of additional tax relating directly to adjustments resulting
from a final determination of a federal audit, the additional tax may be assessed before the expiration of
the times provided in this division or six months from the date the city receives the final determination
of the federal audit from the business entity, whichever is later. The times provided in this division
may be extended by agreement between the business entity and the city.
(4) For the purposes of this division, a return filed before the last day prescribed by law for
filing the return shall be considered as filed on the last day.
(5) Any extension granted for filing the return shall also be considered as extending the last
day prescribed by law for filing the return.
(B) Every business entity shall submit a copy of the final determination of the federal audit within
30 days of the conclusion of the federal audit;
(C) The city may initiate a civil action for the collection of any additional tax within the times
prescribed in division (A) of this section.
(Ord. 07-17, passed 11-19-07)
§ 110.10 ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.
(A) No suit shall be maintained in any court to restrain or delay the collection or payment of the
tax levied by this chapter.
(B) Any tax collected pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be refunded or credited
within two years of the date prescribed by law for the filing of a return, or the date the money was paid
to the city, whichever is the later, except that:
(1) In any case where the assessment period contained in § 110.09 has been extended by an
agreement between the business entity and the city, the limitation contained in this division shall be
extended accordingly;
2008 S-9
12D Lebanon - Business Regulations
(2) If the claim for refund or credit relates directly to adjustments resulting from a federal
audit, the business entity shall file a claim for refund or credit within the time provided for in this
division, or six months from the conclusion of the federal audit, whichever is later.
For the purpose of this division and division (C) of this section, a return filed before the last
day prescribed by law for filing the return shall be considered as filed on the last day.
(C) The authority to refund or credit overpayments of taxes collected pursuant to this chapter is
vested exclusively in the city.
(Ord. 07-17, passed 11-19-07)
§ 110.11 INFORMATION TO REMAIN CONFIDENTIAL.
(A) No person or former employee of the city shall intentionally and without authorization inspect
or divulge any information acquired by him or her of the affairs of any person, or information
regarding the tax schedules, returns or reports required to be filed with the city or other proper officer,
or any information produced by a hearing or investigation, insofar as the information may have to do
with the affairs of the person’s business.
(1) This prohibition does not extend to information required in prosecutions for making false
reports or returns for taxation, or any other infraction of the tax laws, or in any way made a matter of
public record; nor does it prelude furnishing any taxpayer or the taxpayer’s properly authorized agent
with information respecting his or her own return.
(2) Further, this prohibition does not prelude any employee of the city from testifying in any
court, or from introducing as evidence returns or reports filed with the city, in an action for violation of
the city tax laws or in any action challenging the city’s laws.
(B) (1) The city reserves the right to disclose to the Commissioner of Revenue of the
Commonwealth of Kentucky, or his or her duly authorized agent, all such information and rights to
inspect any of the books and records of the city, if the Commissioner of Revenue of the
Commonwealth of Kentucky grants to the city the reciprocal right to obtain information form the files
and records of the Kentucky Department of Revenue, and maintains the privileged character of the
information so furnished.
(2) Provided, further, that the city may publish statistics based on such information in such a
manner as not to reveal data respecting net profits or compensation of any person or business entity.
(C) In addition, the city is empowered to execute similar reciprocity agreements as described in
division (B) of this section with any other taxing entity, should there be a need for exchange of
information in order to effect diligent enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 85-4, passed 6-24-85; Am. Ord. 07-17, passed 11-19-07)
2008 S-9
Occupational License Tax 12E
§ 110.12 PENALTIES.
(A) A business entity subject to tax on net profits may be subject to a penalty equal to 5% of the
tax due for each calendar month, or fraction thereof, if the business entity:
(1) Fails to file any return or report on or before the due date prescribed for filing or as
extended by the city; or
(2) Fails to pay the tax computed on the return or report on or before the due date prescribed
for payment.
The total penalty levied pursuant to this division shall not exceed 25% of the total tax due;
however, the penalty shall not be less $25.
(B) Every employer who fails to file a return or pay the tax on or before the date prescribed under
§ 110.03 may be subject to a penalty in an amount equal to 5% of the tax due for each calendar month
or fraction thereof. The total penalty levied pursuant to this division shall not exceed 25% of the total
tax due; however, the penalty shall not be less $25.
(C) In addition to the penalties prescribed in this section, any business entity or employer shall
pay, as part of the tax, an amount equal to 12% per annum simple interest on the tax shown due, but not
previously paid, from the time the tax was due until the tax is paid to the city.
(D) Every tax imposed by this chapter, and all increases, interest, and penalties thereon, shall
become, from the time the tax is due and payable, a personal debt of the taxpayer to the city.
(E) (1) The city may enforce the collection of the Occupational Tax due under § 110.03, and any
fees, penalties and interest as provided in division s (A), (B), (C) and (D) of this section, by civil action
in a court of appropriate jurisdiction.
(2) To the extent authorized by law, the city shall be entitled to recover all court costs and
reasonable attorney fees it incurred in enforcing any provision of this chapter.
(F) In addition to the penalties prescribed in this section, any person, business entity or employer
who willfully fails to make a return, willfully makes a false return, or willfully fails to pay taxes owing
or collected, with the intent to evade payment of the tax or amount collected, or any part thereof, shall
be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
(G) Any person who willfully aids or assists in, or procures, counsels, or advises the preparation
or presentation under, or in connection with, any matter arising under this chapter of a return, affidavit,
claim or other document that is fraudulent or is false to any material matter, whether or not the falsity
or fraud is with the knowledge or consent of the person authorized or required to present the return,
affidavit, claim or document, shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
2008 S-9
12F Lebanon - Business Regulations
(H) For the purposes of this section, a RETURN shall mean and include any RETURN,
declaration or form prescribed by the city, and required to be filed with the city by the provisions of
this chapter, or by the rules of the city, or by written request for information to the business entity by
the city.
(I) Any person violating the provisions of § 110.11 by intentionally inspecting confidential
taxpayer information without authorization shall be fined not more than $500, or imprisoned for not
longer than six months, or both.
(J) Any person violating the provisions of § 110.11 by divulging confidential taxpayer
information shall be fined not more than $1,000, or imprisoned for not more than one year, or both.
(Ord. 85-4, passed 6-24-85; Am. Ord. 07-17, passed 11-19-07)
§ 110.13 USE OF OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAX.
All funds collected under any section of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically set forth in an
order of a court having appropriate jurisdiction over the city during the pendency of litigation, shall be
allocated to the General Fund.
(Ord. 85-4, passed 6-24-85; Am. Ord. 07-17, passed 11-19-07)
§ 110.14 ANNUAL BUSINESS LICENSE FEE IMPOSED.
(A) Every person conducting a business as defined in this chapter shall first obtain a license from
the Administrator before the commencement of such business, the fee for which shall be $25, except as
provided in division (B) hereunder. Such fee shall be credited upon the payment of the annual license
fee at the time of the annual filing, as provided elsewhere in this chapter.
(B) The legislative body of the city hereby finds that the following occupations and businesses are
of such a nature as to require special regulation and supervision for the public good and safety, and
therefore the following minimum license fees are imposed on every person, corporation, association, or
other entity engaged in the enumerated businesses, occupations, callings or professions, or using,
holding or exhibiting articles or things named in this section, and each such person, association,
corporation or other entity shall pay in advance to the city for each calendar year or fiscal year, in
accordance with the yearly basis used by the licensee in making a return under the terms of this
chapter, the license fee as otherwise provided under this chapter. In the event a licensee engages in
more than one type of activity within a single business entity, the highest minimum license fee shall
apply.
(1) Agents, representatives or solicitors, not otherwise specifically licensed or specifically
provided for, taking or soliciting orders or making sales: the fee of $10 per day or $100 yearly, payable
before commencing the activity.
2008 S-9
Occupational License Tax 12G
(2) Auction house or lot: the fee of $10 per day or $100 yearly, payable before commencing
the activity.
(3) Auctioneers, nor otherwise licensed: the fee of $10 per day or $100 yearly, payable
before commencing the activity.
(4) Collection agencies: the fee of $100 yearly, payable at the beginning of the year.
(5) Itinerant contractors, painters, plumbers, plasterers and like or similar occupations: the
fee of $10 yearly for each person engaged in the employment or occupation, payable at the beginning
of the year or before commencing the activity.
(6) Pawnbrokers: the fee of $100 yearly, payable at the beginning of the year.
(7) Peddlers and itinerant merchants of any kind of merchandise from any car, truck, lot or
premises: the fee of $35 per day or $100 per year, payable before commencing the activity.
(8) Pool room, billiards parlor or game room: the fee of $100 per year, payable at the
beginning of the year.
(9) Trucks, truck-trailers, semi-trailers, trailers, automobiles, wagons or drays used for the
purpose of hauling, transporting, loading or unloading any freight, livestock, furniture, machinery,
junk, fruit, vegetables, groceries, fixtures, produce, appliances, equipment or any other merchandise:
the fee of $5 per day or $30 per year for each such vehicle, payable before commencing the activity.
No license shall be required for any truck or vehicle which is either:
(a) Exempted by the Kentucky Revised Statutes from the payment of city license taxes;
or
(b) Operated by any farmer exclusively for the transportation of the products of his/her
farm or land; or
(c) Used exclusively by any person, firm or corporation otherwise licensed by the city to
engage in a business or occupation when used by such person, firm or corporation to call on or make
deliveries to its customers.
(C) (1) It shall be the duty of the Administrator to collect, and of the Treasurer to receive, the
license fees imposed by this chapter.
(2) The Administrator shall keep records showing the amount received by him or her from
each licensee and employer, and the date of such receipt, but such records shall be subject to the
safeguards provided in § 110.11.
(Ord. 85-4, passed 6-24-85; Am. Ord. 07-17, passed 11-19-07)
2008 S-9
12H Lebanon - Business Regulations
CHAPTER 111: PEDDLERS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS, AND SOLICITORS
Section
111.01 Definitions
111.02 License requirement
111.03 Application procedure
111.04 Standards for issuance
111.05 Revocation procedure
111.06 Standards for revocation
111.07 Appeal procedure
111.08 Exhibition of identification
111.09 Sale of food from motor vehicles
111.10 Standards for on-street solicitation
111.99 Penalty
Cross-reference:
Minimum license fees required of certain businesses, see § 110.09
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
BUSINESS. The business carried on by any person who is an itinerant merchant, peddler, or
solicitor as defined in this section.
GOODS. Merchandise of any description whatsoever, and includes, but is not restricted to, wares
and foodstuffs.
ITINERANT MERCHANT. Any person, whether as owner, agent, or consignee, who engages in
a temporary business of selling goods within the city and who, in the furtherance of such business, uses
any building, structure, vehicle, or any place within the city.
PEDDLER.
(1) Any person who travels from place to place by any means carrying goods for sale, or
making sales, or making deliveries; or
13
2004 S-5
14 Lebanon - Business Regulations
(2) Any person who, without traveling from place to place, sells or offers goods for sale from
any public place within the city.
A person who is a peddler is not an itinerant merchant.
SOLICITOR. Any person who travels by any means from place to place, taking or attempting to
take orders for sale of goods to be delivered in the future or for services to be performed in the future.
A person who is a solicitor is not a peddler.
§ 111.02 LICENSE REQUIREMENT.
(A) Any person who is an itinerant merchant, peddler, or solicitor shall obtain a license before
engaging in such activity within the city.
(B) The fee for the license required by this chapter shall be as set forth in § 110.09.
(C) No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable.
(D) All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire 90 days after the date of issuance thereof.
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.03 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
(A) All applicants for licenses required by this chapter shall file an application with the City
Clerk. This application shall be signed by the applicant if an individual, or by all partners if a
partnership, or by the president if a corporation. The applicant may be requested to provide
information concerning the following items:
(1) The name and address of the applicant;
(2) (a) The name of the individual having management authority or supervision of the
applicant’s business during the time that it is proposed to be carried on in the city;
(b) The local address of such individual;
(c) The permanent address of such individual;
(d) The capacity in which such individual will act;
(3) The name and address of the person, if any, for whose purpose the business will be
carried on, and, if a corporation, the state of incorporation;
(4) The time period or periods during which it is proposed to carry on applicant’s business;
Peddlers, Itinerant Merchants, and Solicitors 15
(5) (a) The nature, character, and quality of the goods or services to be offered for sale or
delivered;
(b) If goods, their invoice value and whether they are to be sold by sample as well as
from stock;
(c) If goods, where and by whom such goods are manufactured or grown, and where
such goods are at the time of application;
(6) The nature of the advertising proposed to be done for the business;
(7) Whether or not the applicant, or the individual identified in division (A)(2)(a) above, or
the person identified division (A)(3) has been convicted of any crime or misdemeanor and, if so, the
nature of each offense and the penalty assessed for each offense.
(B) Applicants for peddler or solicitor licenses may be required to provide further information
concerning the following items, in addition to that requested under division (A) above:
(1) A description of the applicant;
(2) A description of any vehicle proposed to be used in the business, including its registration
number, if any.
(C) All applicants for licenses required by this chapter shall attach to their application the
following:
(1) If required by the city, copies of all printed advertising proposed to be used in connection
with the applicant’s business;
(2) If required by the city, credentials from the person, if any, for which the applicant
proposes to do business, authorizing the applicant to act as such representative.
(D) Applicants who propose to handle foodstuffs shall also attach to their application, in addition
to any attachments required under division (C), a statement from a licensed physician, dated not more
than ten days prior to the date of application, certifying the applicant to be free of contagious or
communicable disease.
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.04 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE.
(A) Upon receipt of an application, an investigation of the applicant’s business reputation and
moral character shall be made.
16 Lebanon - Business Regulations
(B) The application shall be approved unless such investigation discloses tangible evidence that
the conduct of the applicant’s business would pose a substantial threat to the public health, safety,
morals, or general welfare. In particular, tangible evidence of any the following will constitute valid
reasons for disapproval of an application:
(1) Has been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude; or
(2) Has made willful misstatements in the application; or
(3) Has committed prior violations of ordinances pertaining to itinerant merchants, peddlers,
solicitors, and the like; or
(4) Has committed prior fraudulent acts; or
(5) Has a record of continual breaches of solicited contracts; or
(6) Has an unsatisfactory moral character.
§ 111.05 REVOCATION PROCEDURE.
Any license or permit granted under this chapter may be revoked by the City Clerk after notice and
hearing, pursuant to the standards in § 111.06. Notice of hearing for revocation shall be given in
writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the hearing.
Such notice shall be mailed to the licensee at his last known address, at least ten days prior to the date
set for the hearing.
§ 111.06 STANDARDS FOR REVOCATION.
A license granted under this chapter may be revoked for any of the following reasons:
(A) Any fraud or misrepresentation contained in the license application; or
(B) Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in connection with the business being
conducted under the license; or
(C) Any violation of this chapter; or
(D) Conviction of the licensee of any felony, or conviction of the licensee of any misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude; or
(E) Conducting the business licensed in an unlawful manner or in such a way as to constitute a
menace to the health, safety, morals, or general welfare of the public.
Peddlers, Itinerant Merchants, and Solicitors 17
§ 111.07 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
(A) Any person aggrieved by a decision under §§ 111.04 or 111.06 shall have the right to appeal
to the legislative body. The appeal shall be taken by filing with the legislative body, within 14 days
after notice of the decision has been mailed to such person’s last known address, a written statement
setting forth the grounds for appeal. The legislative body shall set the time and place for a hearing, and
notice for such hearing shall be given to such person in the same manner as provided in § 111.05.
(B) The order of the legislative body after the hearing shall be final.
§ 111.08 EXHIBITION OF IDENTIFICATION.
(A) Any license issued to an itinerant merchant under this chapter shall be posted conspicuously in
or at the place named therein. In the event more than one place within the city shall used to conduct
the business licensed, separate licenses shall be issued for each place.
(B) The City Clerk shall issue a license to each peddler or solicitor licensed under this chapter.
The license shall contain the words “Licensed Peddler” or “Licensed Solicitor,” the expiration date of
the license, and the number of the license. The license shall be kept with the licensee during such time
as he is engaged in the business licensed.
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.09 SALE OF FOOD FROM MOTOR VEHICLES.
(A) No individual, firm, corporation or association shall sell foodstuffs or other merchandise from
motor vehicles, carriages, wagons or carts which are parked on any street or public thoroughfare in the
city.
(B) Nothing herein contained shall prevent or prohibit the sale of foodstuffs or other merchandise
by vendors thereof who peddle their products from house to house in the residential sections of the city.
(Ord. 420.1, passed 8-3-48) Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.10 STANDARDS FOR ON-STREET SOLICITATION.
(A) Except as otherwise provided, no person shall stand on a highway or street for the purpose of
soliciting contributions from the occupant of any vehicle except when the person is doing so pursuant
to a solicitation permit issued to a soliciting agency that complies with the conditions as set forth
below.
(B) The City Administrator or his or her designee shall issue a solicitation permit to a soliciting
agency that meets all of the following requirements:
2004 S-5
18 Lebanon - Business Regulations
(1) The agency must be qualified and approved by the Internal Revenue Service as a nonprofit
tax exempt organization under Internal Revenue Code, Section 501, and must at the time of its
application provide to the city a copy of said exemption. Such agency shall, in addition to meeting the
Internal Revenue Code, Section 501 requirement, also be either a charitable agency or an agency which
is community based and providing a benefit to the entire community, such as the Crusade for Children,
Toys for Kids, Marion County Project Graduation, Relay for Life, Knights of Columbus, St. Jude’s or
Lions Club, which specifically named organizations are exempt from the Section 501 requirement.
(2) The agency shall be liable for any injuries to any person or property during the
solicitation which is casually related to an act of ordinary negligence of the agency or its agent, and the
agency must file with the city, with its application for a solicitation permit, a certificate of insurance (or
as an alternative, an insurance certificate evidencing an umbrella policy for its parent organization and
containing at least equal provisions protecting the city) showing liability insurance in the minimum
amount of $300,000 for personal injury per occurrence and $100,000 for property damage during the
period of requested solicitation, and the city shall be named as an additional insured on the certificate.
(3) All applications for a solicitation permit shall be filed with the city in writing at least 30
days in advance. No more than ten roadblock permits shall be issued by the city in any calendar year.
(C) The soliciting agency shall be subject to the following conditions:
(1) Any person engaged in solicitation on behalf of the soliciting agency shall be at least 16
years of age and shall at all times wear a high visibility vest provided by the city.
(2) Traffic cones shall be placed along the street lane(s) where the soliciting person or
persons stand.
(3) Should any persons engaged in solicitation be under the age of 18, an adult sponsor must
be present at all times to supervise such persons.
(4) No more than one solicitation permit shall be issued by the city to a soliciting agency for
each calendar year. The permit shall be good for no more than two days and the two days shall be
consecutive days.
(5) Soliciting pursuant to a permit shall take place only at intersections in travel lanes where
the traffic has come to a complete stop. Solicitation may take place only at the intersections of Spalding
and Main and Walnut and Main.
(6) Each solicitor shall wear an identification card which clearly displays the name of the
soliciting agency. Signage in all directions shall be displayed in four inch letters showing the name of
the agency and the purpose which the solicitation is for.
(7) No more than one soliciting agency shall be authorized to solicit at a particular
intersection.
2004 S-5
Peddlers, Itinerant Merchants, and Solicitors 18A
(8) Solicitation shall take place during daylight hours only, for no more than eight
consecutive hours, shall conclude at least one-half hour before dark, and shall take place only on a
Saturday, Sunday or both.
(9) The soliciting agency shall be required to file an application for a solicitation permit on a
form provided by the city and apply for any other permits that may be required by any applicable law
or ordinance.
(D) No person shall stand on a highway or street, or on any street or highway, or highway right-ofway,
for the purpose of handing out pamphlets and/or distributing literature to the occupant of any
vehicle, unless such pamphlets or literature is directly connected to a solicitation for which a
solicitation permit has been issued.
(Ord. 04-02, passed 5-10-04)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
(A) Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
fined not more than $500. Each day’s violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(B) Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions hereof shall be deemed guilty
of a punishable violation, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not exceeding $250
or be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 90 days, or both so fined and imprisoned. Each day such
violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(Am. Ord. 04-02, passed 5-10-04)
2004 S-5
18B Lebanon - Business Regulations
CHAPTER 112: PAWNBROKERS
Section
112.01 Definitions
112.02 Bond
112.03 Register to be kept; daily reports
112.04 Receipt to be given for each article; sale of article
112.05 Maximum interest, resale price
112.06 Receipt to be given for payment of loan
112.07 Prohibited activities
112.08 Enforcement
112.99 Penalty
§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
PAWNBROKER. Any person who loans money on deposit of personal property; deals in the
purchase of personal property on condition of selling the property back again at a stipulated price;
makes a public display at his place of business of the sign generally used by pawnbrokers to denote
their business; or who publicly exhibits a sign advertising money to loan on personal property or
deposit.
(KRS 226.010)
§ 112.02 BOND.
Every person to whom a city license is granted to carry on the business of a pawnbroker shall
annually enter into bond to the city, with good and sufficient surety to be approved by City Council, in
the penal sum of $1000. This bond shall be conditioned that he will observe the provisions of this
chapter and all ordinances and laws in force in the city not inconsistent with this chapter.
(KRS 226.020)
19
20 Lebanon - Business Regulations
§ 112.03 REGISTER TO BE KEPT; DAILY REPORTS.
(A) Every pawnbroker shall keep a register of all loans and purchases of all articles by the
pawnbroker from the general public. The register shall:
(1) Be reported to an online, Internet-based transaction recording service accessible to law
enforcement agencies;
(2) Show the dates and the amounts of all loans or purchases by the pawnbroker from the
general public, and the names and:
(a) A driver’s license number;
(b) Another state or federally issued picture identification card number; or
(c) If the identification specified in division (A)(2)(a) or (b) is not available, a Social
Security number may be accepted;
of all persons who have left any property that has been pawned or sold;
(3) At all times be available to the inspection of any law enforcement officer of this state
when in the discharge of his or her official duty; and
(4) Contain a full description of all property purchased by the pawnbroker from the general
public or received on deposit as collateral or security. When requested by law enforcement and
pertaining to an investigation, a photograph of the merchandise shall be made available to law
enforcement if the property is still in the possession of the pawnbroker. For purposes of this paragraph,
FULL DESCRIPTION includes but is not limited to:
(a) Make;
(b) Model;
(c) Color;
(d) Size;
(e) Manufacturer;
(f) Vintage; and
(g) Distinguishing marks or characteristics.
2019 S-18
Pawnbrokers 21
(B) When secondhand merchandise is sold to a pawnbroker, the merchandise shall be held for a
minimum of 12 days before being resold.
(C) Prior to the release of property to a representative of law enforcement, the law enforcement
representative shall provide to the pawnbroker a case report or other documentation that the item has
been reported as stolen.
(KRS 226.040)
(D) Every pawnbroker shall, by 11:00 a.m. each day, make available to the Chief of Police a true
and correct written report of all goods received by him or her, whether by pawn or purchase, during the
24 hours preceding each report. The report shall describe the goods as accurately as practicable. The
Chief of Police shall furnish blanks for these reports.
(KRS 226.070) Penalty, see § 112.99
§ 112.04 RECEIPT TO BE GIVEN FOR EACH ARTICLE; SALE OF ARTICLE.
(A) Every pawnbroker shall give a plain written or printed ticket for the loan to the person
negotiating or selling, and a plain written or printed receipt of the articles that have been purchased or
upon which money is loaned, having on each a copy of the entries required by § 112.03(A) to be kept
in his register. He shall not make any charge for the ticket or receipt.
(B) A pawnbroker may sell any article pawned after the expiration of 60 days from the maturity of
the loan. However, not less than ten days before making the sale, the pawnbroker shall give notice to
the person by whom the article was pawned by mail addressed to the post office address of that person
as shown on the pawnbroker’s register, notifying such person that, unless he redeems the article within
ten days from the date of mailing of the notice, the article will be sold.
(KRS 226.050) Penalty, see § 112.99
§ 112.05 MAXIMUM INTEREST, RESALE PRICE.
Any pawnbroker as defined in § 112.01, may, in loaning money on deposit of personal property,
charge, contract for, or receive interest at a rate not exceeding 2% per month on the unpaid principal
balance of the loan, and may charge, contract for, and receive a reasonable fee, not to exceed one-fifth
of the value of the loan per month, for investigating the title, storing and insuring the property, closing
the loan, making daily reports to local law enforcement officers if required by § 112.03, and for other
expenses, losses, and incidental costs associated with servicing such loans. Further, this fee, when
made and collected, shall not be deemed as interest for any purpose of law. No pawnbroker shall
directly or indirectly charge, receive, or contract for any interest or consideration greater than that
allowed by this section.
(KRS 226.080) Penalty, see § 112.99
2019 S-18
22 Lebanon - Business Regulations
§ 112.06 RECEIPT TO BE GIVEN FOR PAYMENT OF LOAN.
Every pawnbroker, upon receiving any payment of money from a borrower, shall give to that
person a plain and complete receipt for such payment, specifying separately the amount applied to
principal and the amount applied to interest. In a case where the pawnbroker has purchased personal
property under an agreement to sell it back at a stipulated price, the pawnbroker shall, on receiving any
payment of money from the person from whom the purchased, give that person a receipt stating the
original purchase price, the stipulated resale price, and the amount received.
(KRS 226.090) Penalty, see § 112.99
§ 112.07 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
No pawnbroker shall receive, by way of either pledge or pawn, any article whatever from a minor
at any time nor from any person between 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(KRS 226.030) Penalty, see § 112.99
§ 112.08 ENFORCEMENT.
The Police Department shall enforce the provisions of this chapter unless otherwise provided by
KRS 226.100. However, county police, for the purpose of locating stolen goods, may carry out the
provisions of KRS 226.060 within the city.
(KRS 226.100)
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any pawnbroker or pawnbroker’s clerk who violates any of the provisions of this chapter for
which no penalty is otherwise provided shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
fined not less than $50 nor more than $500, and his license may be forfeited to the city. (KRS
226.990(1))
(B) Any pawnbroker who violates any of the provisions of § 112.03(B) shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than $20 nor more than $100. (KRS 226.990(3))
2019 S-18
CHAPTER 113: INSURANCE COMPANIES
Section
113.01 Imposition of license fee
113.02 Amount of fee for companies issuing life insurance
113.03 Amount of fee for companies issuing policies other than life insurance
113.04 Due date; interest
113.05 Written breakdown of collections
113.06 Minimum fee
§ 113.01 IMPOSITION OF LICENSE FEE.
There is hereby imposed on each insurance company a license fee for the privilege of engaging in
the business of insurance within the corporate limits of the city, on a calendar-year basis.
(Ord. 84-12, passed 10-24-84)
§ 113.02 AMOUNT OF FEE FOR COMPANIES ISSUING LIFE INSURANCE.
The license fee imposed upon each insurance company which issues life insurance policies on the
lives of persons residing within the corporate limits of the city shall be 10% of the first year’s
premiums actually collected within each calendar quarter by reason of the issuance of such policies.
(KRS 91A.080(2)) (Ord. 84-12, passed 10-24-84; Am. Ord. 88-1, passed 3-8-88; Am. Ord. 90-1,
passed 4-9-90)
§ 113.03 AMOUNT OF FEE FOR COMPANIES ISSUING POLICIES OTHER THAN LIFE
INSURANCE.
The license fee imposed upon each insurance company which issues any insurance policy which is
not a life insurance policy shall be 10% of the premiums actually collected within each calendar quarter
by reason of the issuance of such policies on risks located within the corporate limits of the city on
those classes of business which such company is authorized to transact, less all premiums returned to
policyholders; however, any license fee or tax imposed upon premium receipts shall not include
premiums received for insuring employers against liability for personal injuries to their employees, or
death caused thereby, under the provisions of the Workers’ Compensation Act and shall not include
23
24 Lebanon - Business Regulations
premiums received on policies of group health insurance provided for state employees under KRS
18A.225(2), or premiums received by any state employee benefit fund created pursuant to KRS
Chapter 18A for the purpose of providing health benefits to state employees.
(KRS 91A.080(3), (10)) (Ord. 84-12, passed 10-24-84; Am. Ord. 88-1, passed 3-8-88; Am. Ord. 89-
12, passed 8-7-89; Am. Ord. 90-1, passed 4-9-90)
§ 113.04 DUE DATE; INTEREST.
All license fees imposed by this chapter shall be due no later than 30 days after the end of each
calendar quarter. License fees which are not paid on or before the due date shall bear interest at the tax
interest rate as defined in KRS 131.010(6).
(KRS 91A.080(8), (9)) (Ord. 84-12, passed 10-24-84)
§ 113.05 WRITTEN BREAKDOWN OF COLLECTIONS.
Every insurance company subject to the license fees imposed by this chapter shall annually, by
March 31, furnish the city a written breakdown of all collections in the preceding calendar year for the
following categories of insurance:
(A) Casualty.
(B) Automobile.
(C) Inland marine.
(D) Fire and allied perils.
(E) Health.
(F) Life.
(KRS 91A.080(8)) (Ord. 84-12, passed 10-24-84)
§ 113.06 MINIMUM FEE.
The minimum license fee imposed hereunder shall be $10 per year.
(Ord. 84-12, passed 10-24-84)
2002 S-4
CHAPTER 114: FLEA MARKETS AND YARD SALES
Section
114.01 Definitions
114.02 Regulation of flea markets
114.03 Regulation of yard sales
114.99 Penalty
§ 114.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
FLEA MARKET. The outdoor display and sale of personal property, including, but not limited to,
antiques and semi-antiques, collectibles, junk, weapons, clothing, and new and used goods and items,
generally acquired for purposes of resale and not initially acquire for the personal use of the seller
and/or the seller’s family.
YARD SALE. The outdoor display and sale and the display and sale within a garage, tent, carport
or other similar structure of the above-referenced items of personalty which were generally initially
acquired for the personal use of the seller and/or the seller’s family.
(Ord. 92-4, passed 5-11-92)
§ 114.02 REGULATION OF FLEA MARKETS.
It shall be unlawful to conduct, sell at, or participate in a flea market at any time within the city,
other than those properly licensed and approved flea markets conducted during the Country Ham Days
Festival.
(Ord. 92-4, passed 5-11-92) Penalty, see § 114.99
Cross-reference:
Marion County Country Ham Days Festival, see §§ 117.15, 117.16
25
2019 S-18
26 Lebanon - Business Regulations
§ 114.03 REGULATION OF YARD SALES.
It shall be unlawful to conduct, sell at, or participate in, other than as a purchaser or prospective
purchaser, at any yard sale within the city during all or any part of more than six days during any
calendar year.
(Ord. 92-4, passed 5-11-92) Penalty, see § 114.99
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of § 114.02 or failing or
refusing to comply with same shall be guilty of a violation and shall be fined not less than $25 nor
more than $100 for each offense and each day a violation hereof exists shall constitute a separate
offense.
(B) Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of § 114.03 or failing or
refusing to comply with same shall be guilty of a violation and shall be fined not less than $25 nor
more than $50 for each offense and each day a violation hereof exists shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ord. 92-4, passed 5-11-92)
CHAPTER 115: PRECIOUS METALS
Section
115.01 Dealers to keep daily register
115.02 Copy of register to be furnished to Chief of Police
115.03 Articles to be kept separate; examination by Police Department
115.04 Photograph of seller required
115.05 Transactions with minors prohibited
115.06 Exemptions
115.99 Penalty
§ 115.01 DEALERS TO KEEP DAILY REGISTER.
It shall be the duty of all persons dealing in the purchase or exchange of second-hand or antique
jewelry, coins, watches, diamonds or other precious stones, cutlery, old gold, silver, platinum, or other
precious metals, or any other second-hand manufactured articles, composed wholly or in part of gold,
silver, platinum or other precious metals to keep a daily register on a form provided by the Lebanon
Police Department, of every article purchased or exchanged by them in the course of their business and
the persons from whom such articles were acquired. Said register shall contain as minute a description
of each article as is possible, including any identification numbers and the manufacturer’s name, as
well as the name, age, sex, race, address, driver’s license number, general description of the individual
or individuals selling or exchanging the articles, and their signatures.
(Ord. 81-3, passed 2-9-81) Penalty, see § 115.99
§ 115.02 COPY OF REGISTER TO BE FURNISHED TO CHIEF OF POLICE.
All persons engaged in business as described in § 115.01 above, shall furnish to the Chief of Police
each day at the Police office by 11:00 a.m., a copy of the register for all transactions which took place
during the preceding day.
(Ord. 81-3, passed 2-9-81) Penalty, see § 115.99
27
28 Lebanon - Business Regulations
§ 115.03 ARTICLES TO BE KEPT SEPARATE; EXAMINATION BY POLICE
DEPARTMENT.
All persons engaged in business as described in § 115.01 above, shall retain each and every article
received by them in the same state or condition in which it was received, and all articles received
during any one day’s transaction shall be kept separately and shall not be co-mingled with articles
received during any other day’s transactions. Furthermore, all articles shall be made available for
examination within the city to members of the Police Department, and the Sheriff’s Department, State
Police, or other law enforcement officials for a period of five consecutive days after their receipt,
before such articles are resold, exchanged or removed from the city, unless written permission is
obtained from the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 81-3, passed 2-9-81) Penalty, see § 115.99
§ 115.04 PHOTOGRAPH OF SELLER REQUIRED.
No person engaged in business as described in § 115.01 above shall purchase or exchange secondhand
or antique jewelry, coins, watches, diamonds or other precious stones, cutlery or old gold, silver,
platinum or other precious metals, or other second-hand manufactured articles composed wholly or in
part of gold, silver, platinum, or other precious metals unless the person first obtains an instant
developing photograph of the seller or exchanger of the above enumerated items. The photograph is to
be identified in such a way that the person or persons shown in the photograph can be identified with
each entry of the register identified in § 115.01. The photograph and register shall be maintained for a
period of one year after the date on which the transaction occurred.
(Ord. 81-3, passed 2-9-81) Penalty, see § 115.99
§ 115.05 TRANSACTIONS WITH MINORS PROHIBITED.
No person engaged in business as described in § 115.01 above, shall purchase or exchange secondhand
or antique jewelry, coins, watches, diamonds or other precious stones, cutlery, or old gold, silver,
platinum or other precious metals, or any other second hand manufactured articles composed wholly or
in part of gold, silver, platinum or other precious metals from any person less than 18 years of age.
(Ord. 81-3, passed 2-9-81) Penalty, see § 115.99
§ 115.06 EXEMPTIONS.
Nothing contained herein shall require compliance of §§ 115.01 through 115.05 by a person
engaging in business within the city who possesses a current business license for the operation of such
a business from the city and is:
(A) Accepting returns for cash, credit, or replacement of any item originally purchased from said
person;
Precious Metals 29
(B) Exchanging an item for another item of greater value.
(Ord. 81-3, passed 2-9-81)
§ 115.99 PENALTY.
Violation of any of the duties, requirements, or prohibitions contained in this chapter shall be
punishable as a Class A Misdemeanor as defined by the Kentucky Revised Statutes, subject to a fine of
up to $500 and imprisonment for up to 12 months.
(Ord. 81-3, passed 2-9-81)
30 Lebanon - Business Regulations
CHAPTER 116: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
Licensing
116.01 Definitions
116.02 License required
116.03 Application for license
116.04 License fees
116.05 Reasons for denial of license
116.06 Hours sales prohibited
116.07 Termination of license
Regulations Concerning Minors
116.20 Definition
116.21 Sales to minors prohibited
116.22 Unlawful acts by persons underage
116.23 Aiding or assisting persons underage
116.24 Gift card for alcoholic beverages to be redeemed only by persons 21 and older
116.25 Enforcement by State Alcoholic Beverage Control Board
Disorderly Conduct
116.26 Retail premises not to be disorderly; acts constituting disorderly behavior
Outdoor Dining
116.35 Location of permitted areas
116.36 Permit fee
116.37 Permit application
116.38 Packaging prohibition
116.39 City’s retention of sidewalks and pedestrian rights-of-way
116.99 Penalty
Appendix A: Outdoor dining permit agreement
Appendix B: Outdoor dining permit agreement, alcoholic beverage sales
2014 S-14 31
32 Lebanon - Business Regulations
LICENSING
§ 116.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ALCOHOL. Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl or spirit of wine, from whatever source or by
whatever process it is produced.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Every liquid or solid, whether patented or not, containing alcohol in
an amount in excess of more than 1% of alcohol by volume, which is fit for beverage purposes. It
includes every spurious or imitation liquor sold as, or under any name commonly used for, alcoholic
beverages, whether containing any alcohol or not. It does not include the following products:
(1) Medicinal preparations manufactured in accordance with formulas prescribed by the
United States Pharmacopoeia, National Formulary, or the American Institute of Homeopathy;
(2) Patented, patent, and proprietary medicines;
(3) Toilet, medicinal, and antiseptic preparations and solutions;
(4) Flavoring extracts and syrups;
(5) Denatured alcohol or denatured rum;
(6) Vinegar and preserved sweet cider;
(7) Wine for sacramental purposes; and
(8) Alcohol unfit for beverage purposes that is to be sold for legitimate external use.
ALCOHOL VAPORIZING DEVICE or AWOL DEVICE. Any device, machine, or process that
mixes liquor, spirits, or any other alcohol product with pure oxygen or by any other means produces a
vaporized alcoholic product used for human consumption. ALCOHOL VAPORIZING DEVICE or
AWOL DEVICE does not include an inhaler, nebulizer, atomizer, or other device that is designed and
intended by the manufacturer to dispense a prescribed or over-the-counter medication or a device
installed and used by a licensee under this chapter to demonstrate the aroma of an alcoholic beverage.
BOTTLE. Any container which is used for holding alcoholic beverages for the use and sale of
alcoholic beverages at retail.
2014 S-14
Alcoholic Beverages 33
BREWER. Any person who manufactures malt beverages or owns, occupies, carries on, works, or
conducts any brewery, either alone or through an agent.
BREWERY. Any place or premises where malt beverages are manufactured for sale, and includes
all offices, granaries, mash rooms, cooling rooms, vaults, yards, and storerooms connected with the
premises; or where any part of the process of the manufacture of malt beverages is carried on; or where
any apparatus connected with manufacture is kept or used; or where any of the products of brewing or
fermentation are stored or kept.
BUILDING CONTAINING LICENSED PREMISES. The licensed premises themselves and
includes the land, tract of land, or parking lot in which the premises are contained, and any part of any
building connected by direct access or by an entrance which is under the ownership or control of the
licensee by lease holdings or ownership.
CATERER. A corporation, partnership, or individual that operates the business of a food service
professional by preparing food in a licensed and inspected commissary, transporting the food and
alcoholic beverages to the caterer’s designated and inspected banquet hall or to a location selected by
the customer, and serving the food and alcoholic beverages to the customer’s guest.
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION. A nonprofit entity recognized as exempt from federal
taxation under section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code (26 U.S.C. § 501(c)) or any organization
having been established and continuously operating within the commonwealth for charitable purposes
for three years and which expends at least 60% of its gross revenue exclusively for religious,
educational, literary, civic, fraternal, or patriotic purposes.
CIDER. Any fermented fruit-based beverage containing more than 0.1% alcohol by volume and
includes hard cider and perry cider.
CITY ADMINISTRATOR. As used in this chapter, the term shall mean city alcoholic beverage
control administrator.
CONVENTION CENTER. Any facility which, in its usual and customary business, provides
seating for a minimum of 1,000 people and offers convention facilities and related services for
seminars, training and educational purposes, trade association meetings, conventions, or civic and
community events or for plays, theatrical productions, or cultural exhibitions.
CONVICTED and CONVICTION. A finding of guilt resulting from a plea of guilty, the decision
of a court, or the finding of a jury, irrespective of a pronouncement of judgment or the suspension of
the judgment.
DISTILLED SPIRITS or SPIRITS. Any product capable of being consumed by a human being
which contains alcohol in excess of the amount permitted by KRS Chapter 242 obtained by distilling,
mixed with water or other substances in solution, except wine, hard cider, and malt beverages.
2014 S-14
34 Lebanon - Business Regulations
DISTILLER. Any person who is engaged in the business of manufacturing distilled spirits at any
distillery in the state and is registered in the Office of the Collector of Internal Revenue for the United
States at Louisville, Kentucky.
DISTILLERY. Any place or premises where distilled spirits are manufactured for sale and which
are registered in the office of any collector of internal revenue for the United States. It includes any
United States government bonded warehouse.
DISTRIBUTOR. Any person who distributes malt beverages for the purpose of being sold at
retail.
HOTEL. A hotel, motel, or inn for accommodation of the traveling public, designed primarily to
serve transient patrons.
LICENSE. Any license issued pursuant to KRS Chapters 241 to 244.
LICENSEE. Any person to whom a license has been issued, pursuant to KRS Chapters 241 to
244.
LIMITED RESTAURANT.
(1) A facility where the usual and customary business is the serving of meals to consumers,
which has a bona fide kitchen facility, which receives at least 70% of its gross income from the sale of
food, which maintains a minimum seating capacity of 100 persons for dining, and which is located in a
wet or moist territory under KRS 242.1244(2); or
(2) A facility where the usual and customary business is the serving of meals to consumers,
which has a bona fide kitchen facility, which receives at least 70% of its gross income from the sale of
food, which maintains a minimum seating capacity of 50 persons for dining, which has no open bar,
which requires that alcoholic beverages be sold in conjunction with the sale of a meal, and which is
located in a wet or moist territory under KRS 242.1244.
MALT BEVERAGE. Any fermented undistilled alcoholic beverage of any name or description,
manufactured from malt wholly or in part, or from any substitute for malt.
MANUFACTURE. Distill, rectify, brew, bottle, and operate a winery.
MANUFACTURER. A winery, distiller, rectifier, or brewer, and any other person engaged in the
production or bottling of alcoholic beverages.
MINOR. Any person who is not 21 years of age or older.
PREMISES. The land and building in and upon which any business regulated by alcoholic
beverage statutes is operated or carried on. PREMISES shall not include as a single unit two or more
separate businesses of one owner on the same lot or tract of land, in the same or in different buildings,
if physical
2014 S-14
Alcoholic Beverages 35
and permanent separation of the premises is maintained, excluding employee access by keyed entry and
emergency exists equipped with crash bars, and each has a separate public entrance accessible directly
from the sidewalk or parking lot. Any licensee holding an alcoholic beverage license on July 15, 1998,
shall not, by reason of this subsection, be ineligible to continue to hold his or her license or obtain a
renewal of the license.
PRIVATE CLUB. A nonprofit social, fraternal, military, or political organization, club, or entity
maintaining or operating a club room, club rooms, or premises from which the general public is
excluded.
PUBLIC NUISANCE. A condition that endangers safety or health, is offensive to the senses, or
obstructs the free use of property so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property
by a community or neighborhood or by any considerable number of persons.
QUALIFIED HISTORIC SITE. A contributing property with dining facilities for at least 50
persons at tables, booths, or bars where food may be served within a commercial district listed in the
National Register of Historic Places, or a site that is listed as a National Historic Landmark or in the
National Register of Historic Places with dining facilities for at least 50 persons at tables, booths, or
bars where food may be served. Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection: (a) A distillery
which is listed as a National Historic Landmark and which conducts souvenir retail package sales under
KRS 243.0305; and (b) A not-for-profit or nonprofit facility listed on the National Register of Historic
Places shall be deemed a “qualified historic site” under this section.
RECTIFIER. Any person who rectifies, purifies, or refines distilled spirits or wine by any
process other than as provided for on distillery premises, and every person who, without rectifying,
purifying, or refining distilled spirits by mixing alcoholic beverages with any materials, manufactures
any imitations of or compounds liquors for sale under the name of whiskey, brandy, gin, rum, wine,
spirits, cordials, bitters, or any other name.
REPACKAGING. The placing of alcoholic beverages in any retail container irrespective of the
material from which the container is made.
RESTAURANT. A facility where the usual and customary business is the serving of meals to
consumers that has a bona fide kitchen facility and that receives at least 50% of its food and beverage
receipts from the sale of food.
RETAIL CONTAINER. Any bottle, can, barrel, or other container which, without a separable
intermediate container, holds alcoholic beverages and is suitable and destined for sale to a retail outlet,
whether it is suitable for delivery to the consumer or not.
RETAIL OUTLET. Retailer, hotel, motel, restaurant, railroad dining car, club, and any facility
where alcoholic beverages are sold directly to the consumers.
2014 S-14
36 Lebanon - Business Regulations
RETAIL SALE. Any sale where delivery is made in the state to any consumers.
RETAILER. Any person who sells at retail any alcoholic beverage for the sale of which a license
is required.
SALE. Any transfer, exchange, or barter for consideration, and includes all sales made by any
person, whether principal, proprietor, agent, servant, or employee, of any alcoholic beverage.
SELL. Includes solicit or receive an order for, keep or expose for sale, keep with intent to sell,
and the delivery of any alcoholic beverage.
SERVICE BAR. A bar, counter, shelving, or similar structure used for storing or stocking
supplies of alcoholic beverages that is a workstation where employees prepare alcoholic beverage
drinks to be delivered to customers away from the service bar. A service bar shall be located in an area
where the general public, guest, or patrons are prohibited.
SMALL FARM WINERY. A winery producing wines in an amount not to exceed 50,000 gallons
in a calendar year.
SOUVENIR PACKAGE. A special package of Kentucky straight bourbon whiskey available for
retail sale at a licensed state distillery where the whiskey was produced or bottled that is available from
a licensed retailer.
SUPPLEMENTAL BAR. A bar, counter, shelving, or similar structure used for serving and
selling distilled spirits or wine by the drink for consumption on the licensed premises to guests and
patrons from additional locations other than the main bar. A supplemental bar shall be continuously
constructed and accessible to patrons for distilled spirits or wine sales or service without physical
separation by walls, doors, or similar structures.
TERRITORY. A county, city, district, or precinct.
VEHICLE. Any device or animal used to carry, convey, transport, or otherwise move alcoholic
beverages or any products, equipment, or appurtenances used to manufacture, bottle, or sell these
beverages.
WAREHOUSE. Any place in which alcoholic beverages are housed or stored.
WHOLESALE SALE. A sale to any person for the purpose of resale.
WHOLESALER. Any person who distributes alcoholic beverages for the purpose of being sold at
retail, but the term shall not include a subsidiary of a manufacturer or cooperative of a retail outlet.
2014 S-14
Alcoholic Beverages 36A
WINE. The product of the normal alcoholic fermentation of the juices of fruits, with the usual
processes of manufacture and normal additions, and includes champagne and sparkling and fortified
wine of an alcoholic content not to exceed 24% by volume. It includes cider, hard cider, and perry
cider and also includes preparations or mixtures vended in retail containers if these preparations or
mixtures contain not more than 15% of alcohol by volume. It includes ciders, perry, or sake.
WINERY. Any place or premises in which wine is manufactured from any fruit, or brandies are
distilled as a by-product of wine or other fruit, or cordials are compounded, except a place or premises
that manufactures wine for sacramental purposes exclusively.
(Ord. 88-11, passed 8-8-88; Am. Ord. 2013-09, passed 12-12-13)
§ 116.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at wholesale or at retail in the city any alcoholic
beverage without having the appropriate wholesale or retail license hereinafter provided for, or in
violation of the terms of such license. Each license issued shall be applicable only to the specific
premises shown thereon and shall not entitle the holder of the license to sell from any other premises
within the city.
(Ord. 88-11, passed 8-8-88; Am. Ord. 2013-09, passed 12-12-13) Penalty, see § 116.99
§ 116.03 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
(A) Applications for licenses shall be made to the City Administrator, in writing, signed by the
applicant, if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent thereof, if a corporation. Such applications
shall be made on forms supplied by the City Administrator, and no license shall be issued until
completed in full and the appropriate fee therefor has been paid.
(B) All applicants, all officers of any applicant corporation, all persons holding 5% or more of the
stock in an applicant corporation, or owners or partners of an applicant partnership shall each submit
fingerprints and a current color photograph of themselves with all other documents as required in the
application process or during any subsequent renewal if not previously provided, or otherwise deemed
necessary by the City Administrator.
(C) Any qualified applicant may submit the appropriate application for any one or more of the
licenses for alcoholic beverage industry which the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control has
deemed available within the city limits. All such licenses are defined in KRS Chapter 243.0305
through KRS 243.355, and the city hereby adopts the classification system utilized in those statutes for
use within the city limits as well.
(Ord. 88-11, passed 8-8-88; Am. Ord. 97-06, passed 11-10-97; Am. Ord. 2013-09, passed 12-12-13)
2014 S-14
36B Lebanon - Business Regulations
§ 116.04 LICENSE FEES.
(A) The licenses authorized under this subchapter shall be divided into the following categories,
and the applicant shall at the time of his or her application pay to the City Administrator the
appropriate fee for each license applied for:
(1) Distilled spirit licenses as set forth in KRS 243.030:
(a) ............................................................................ Distiller’s license, per annum:
$500
(b) Rectifier’s license, per annum:
1. Class A ............................................................................ $3,000 or;
2. Class B .....................................................................................$825
(c) .................................Wholesaler’s distilled spirit and wine license, per annum:
$3,000
(d) ........................................................... Quota retail package license, per annum:
$550
(e) ................................................................ Quota retail drink license, per annum:
$500
(f) .................................................................. Special temporary license, per event:
$105
(g) Nonquota type 1 retail drink license (includes
distilled spirits, wine, and malt beverages), per annum: ......................................$2,000
(h) Nonquota type 2 retail drink license (includes
distilled spirits, wine, and malt beverages), per annum: .........................................$498
(i) Nonquota type 3 retail drink license (includes
distilled spirits, wine, and malt beverages), per annum: .........................................$300
(j) Distilled spirits and wine special temporary
auction license, per event: .......................................................................................$200
(k) ................................................. Special Sunday retail drink license, per annum:
$0
(l) .............................................. Extended hours supplemental license, per annum:
$2,000
(m) ............................................................................. Caterer’s license, per annum:
$200
(n) ............................ Bottling house or bottling house storage license, per annum:
$1,000
2018 S-17
Alcoholic Beverages 36C
(2) Malt beverage licenses as set forth in KRS 243.040, follows:
(a) .............................................................................. Brewer’s license, per annum:
$500
(b) ..................................................................... Microbrewery license, per annum:
$500
(c) ................................................. Malt beverage distributor’s license, per annum:
$400
(d) .............................. Nonquota retail malt beverage package license, per annum:
$105
(e) Nonquota type 4 retail malt beverage drink license, per annum: ..........$78
(f) ........................................ Malt beverage brew-on-premises license, per annum:
$100
(3) Limited restaurant license (includes distilled
spirits, wine, and malt beverages), per annum: ...........................................................$1,200
(4) Limited golf course license (includes distilled
spirits, wine, and malt beverages), per annum: ..............................................................$500
(5) The fee for each of the first five supplemental bar licenses shall be the same as the fee for
the primary drink license. There shall be no charge for each supplemental license issued in excess of
five to the same licensee at the same premises.
(6) The holder of a nonquota retail malt beverage package license may obtain a nonquota
type 4 malt beverage drink license for a fee of $50. The holder of a nonquota type 4 malt beverage
drink license may obtain a nonquota retail malt beverage package license for a fee of $50.
(B) Persons desiring to obtain a license hereunder for only part of a license year shall pay a
prorated fee equal to as many twelfths of the annual license fee as there are calendar months remaining
in the license year, including the month in which the license is granted. In no event shall the prorated
license fee be less than one-half the full annual license fee.
(C) The license year shall be a 12-month period commencing with the first day of the month for
renewal of county licenses according to the revised renewal schedule promulgated by the state
Alcoholic Beverage Control Board.
(Ord. 88-11, passed 8-8-88; Am. Ord. 98-04, passed 10-12-98; Am. Ord. 09-01, passed 1-2-09; Am.
Ord. 2013-09, passed 12-12-13; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 4-28-17)
2018 S-17
36D Lebanon - Business Regulations
§ 116.05 REASONS FOR DENIAL OF LICENSE.
No license provided for in this chapter shall be issued to:
(A) A person who has been convicted of a felony, except if the person has had his or her civil
rights restored by the authority of the governor of the state in which the adjudication was made.
(B) A person whose license under this section has been revoked for any cause.
(C) A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license issued hereunder would not
be eligible for such license upon a first application.
(D) A partnership, unless all the members of the partnership shall be qualified to obtain such a
license.
(E) A corporation, if any officer, manager, or director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders
owning in the aggregate more than 5% of the stock of such corporation would not be eligible to receive
a license hereunder for any such reason.
(F) A person whose place of business is to be conducted by a manager or agent unless such
manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the licensee.
(G) A person who has, within five years of the application date, been convicted of a violation of
any federal or state law concerning the manufacture, possession, transportation, or sale of alcoholic
beverages, or who shall have forfeited his or her bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such
violation.
(H) Any person, firm, or corporation not eligible for a state alcoholic beverage license regulating
the sale of the same alcoholic beverages for which such person proposes to acquire a city license.
(Ord. 88-11, passed 8-8-88; Am. Ord. 97-06, passed 11-10-97; Am. Ord. 2013-09, passed 12-12-13)
§ 116.06 HOURS SALES PROHIBITED.
(A) Unless otherwise permitted under this subsection, no premises for which there has been
granted any license for the sale of distilled spirits, wine, or malt beverages shall remain open for any
purpose between 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday, or between the hours of 1:00 a.m.
and 12:00 p.m. noon on Sunday, provided that if a licensee provides a separate department within the
licensed premises capable of being locked and closed off, within which is kept all stocks of distilled
spirits, wine, and malt beverages, and all fixtures and apparatus connected with the alcohol business,
and said department is kept locked during times mentioned above, the licensee shall be deemed to have
complied with this section.
2018 S-17
Alcoholic Beverages 36E
(B) Pursuant to KRS 244.290 and 244.480, a licensed premises receiving a minimum of 50% of
its income from the sale of food and meeting the requirements of KRS 243.084 shall be eligible to
receive a Sunday retail drink license. Likewise, private clubs meeting the requirements below shall be
eligible to receive a Sunday retail drink license. The retail drink license shall permit the sale of
alcoholic beverages by the drink, including wine, distilled spirits, or malt beverages. The hours of
operation for a facility holding a Sunday retail drink license shall be the hours of 12:00 p.m. to 10:00
p.m. on Sundays. This division shall not apply to package liquor stores and does not exempt retailers
from observing all other conditions and requirements under any other ordinance or laws of the
commonwealth.
(C) Pursuant to KRS § 244.290 and KRS § 244.480, years in which December 31 (New Year's
Eve) falls on a Sunday, the hours of operation, on December 31, for any licensed premises holding a
valid distilled spirits and wine retail drink license, or a malt beverage retail drink license, or a special
one-day license issued by the state Alcoholic Beverage Control Board, shall be from 12:00 p.m. to 1:00
a.m. Monday morning. This division does not include package liquor stores, nor does it exempt
retailers from observing all other conditions and requirements under any other ordinance or laws of the
Commonwealth of Kentucky.
(Ord. 88-11, passed 8-8-88; Am. Ord. 2006-09, passed 11-16-06; Am. Ord. 2007-03, passed 2-15-07;
Am. Ord. 2008-18, passed 12-22-08; Am. Ord. 2009-06, passed 7-15-09; Am. Ord. 2013-09, passed
12-12-13;) Penalty, see § 116.99
§ 116.07 TERMINATION OF LICENSE.
Each license issued hereunder shall terminate on April 30 following the issuance thereof. Should
any such license be issued by the city and any required city, county, or federal approval, certification,
or licensing not be obtained by the applicant or should same be voluntarily or involuntarily withdrawn,
removed, relinquished, or suspended, then the license issued hereunder by the city shall immediately
become null and void and shall be surrendered to the City Administrator. Any license fee paid shall
thereupon be automatically forfeited and shall not be prorated. Following a license suspension or
revocation, a new license may be applied for upon the making of a new application and the payment of
a new license fee.
(Ord. 88-11, passed 8-8-88; Am. Ord. 2013-09, passed 12-12-13)
REGULATIONS CONCERNING MINORS
§ 116.20 DEFINITION.
For the purpose of §§ 116.21 through 116.26, the following definition shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
2018 S-17
36F Lebanon - Business Regulations
PREMISES. The meaning given in §116.01 and KRS 241.010, and also the place of business of a
person licensed to sell alcoholic beverages, including, in the case of drive-in establishments, the entire
lot upon which the business establishment is situated.
(Ord. 88-11, passed 8-8-88; Am. Ord. 2013-09, passed 12-12-13)
§ 116.21 SALES TO MINORS PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell alcoholic beverages to a person under 21 years of age.
(Ord. 1020.3, passed 1-12-59; Am. Ord. 2013-09, passed 12-12-13) Penalty, see § 116.99
§ 116.22 UNLAWFUL ACTS BY PERSONS UNDERAGE.
(A) A person under 21 years of age shall not enter any premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic
beverages for the purpose of purchasing or receiving any alcoholic beverages.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to possess, purchase, or attempt
to purchase, or engage another to purchase for him or her, directly or indirectly, any alcoholic
beverages.
(C) It shall be unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to misrepresent his or her age for the
purpose of inducing any licensee, or the licensee’s agent, servant, or employee, to sell or serve any
alcoholic beverages to the underage person.
(D) A person under 21 years of age shall not misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of
inducing any licensee, or the licensee’s agent, servant, or employee, to sell or serve any alcoholic
beverages to the underage person.
(E) A person under 21 years of age shall not use or attempt to use any false, fraudulent, or altered
identification card, paper, or any other document to purchase or attempt to purchase or otherwise obtain
any alcoholic beverage.
(F) Except as provided in KRS 244.087 and 244.090, a licensee, or his or her agents, servants, or
employees shall not permit any person under 21 years of age to remain on any premises where
alcoholic beverages are sold by the drink or consumed on the premises, unless:
(1) The usual and customary business of the establishment is a hotel, motel, restaurant,
convention center, convention hotel complex, racetrack, simulcast facility, golf course, private club,
park, fair, church, school, athletic complex, athletic arena, theater, small farm winery, distillery or
brewery or winery tour, convenience store, grocery store, drug store, or similar establishment;
(2) All alcoholic beverage inventory is kept in a separate, locked department at all times
when minors are on the premises;
2018 S-17
Alcoholic Beverages 36G
(3) Written approval had been granted by the department to allow minors on the premises
until 10 p.m. where the sale of alcohol is incidental to a specific family or community event, including
but of limited to weddings, reunions, or festivals. The licensee’s request shall be in writing and shall
specifically describe the event for which approval is requested. The state director shall approve or
deny the request in writing; or
(4) The usual and customary business of the establishment is an entertainment facility where
prebooked concerts are held. For the purpose of this paragraph, house bands, disc jockeys, and karaoke
are not considered concerts. During the times minors are on the premises under this paragraph the
licensee shall comply with all provisions of KRS 244.085(6)(d).
2018 S-17
36H Lebanon - Business Regulations
Alcoholic Beverages 37
(G) Excepts as provided in division (F) of this section, a licensee or the licensee’s agent, servant,
or employee shall not allow any person under the age of 21 to remain on any premises that sells
alcoholic beverages by the package unless the underage person is accompanied by a parent or guardian
or the usual and customary business of the establishment is a convenience store, grocery store,
drugstore, or similar establishment.
(H) Except as provided in division (F) of this section, a person under the age of 21 shall not
remain on any premises that sell alcoholic beverages by the package unless he or she is accompanied
by a parent or guardian or the usual and customary business of the establishment is a convenience
store, grocery store, drugstore, or similar establishment.
(I) A violation of division (A), (B), (C), (D) or (H) of this section shall be deemed a status
offense if committed by a person under the age of 18 subject to the jurisdiction of the juvenile session
of the district court.
(Ord. 1020.3, passed 1-12-59; Am. Ord. 2013-09, passed 12-12-13)
§ 116.23 AIDING OR ASSISTING PERSONS UNDERAGE.
It shall be unlawful for any person to aid or assist any person under the age of 21 years in
purchasing, or having served or delivered to the underage person, or in any way procuring directly or
indirectly any alcoholic beverages.
(Ord. 1020.3, passed 1-12-59; Am. Ord. 2013-09, passed 12-12-13) Penalty, see § 116.99
§ 116.24 GIFT CARD FOR ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES TO BE REDEEMED ONLY BY
PERSONS 21 AND OLDER.
No person under the age of 21 may redeem a gift card or any portion of a gift card for the purchase
of alcoholic beverages. A person holding a license under KRS 243.030 or 243.040 may redeem a gift
card for the purchase of alcoholic beverages if the person presenting the card is 21 years of age or
older.
(Ord. 2013-09, passed 12-12-13) Penalty, see § 116.99
§ 116.25 ENFORCEMENT BY STATE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL BOARD.
Any fine or penalty imposed under this subchapter shall be in addition to and independent of any
action which may be taken by, through, or on behalf of the state Alcoholic Beverage Control Board or
its agents.
(Ord. 1020.3, passed 1-12-59; Am. Ord. 2013-09, passed 12-12-13)
2014 S-14
38 Lebanon - Business Regulations
DISORDERLY CONDUCT
§ 116.26 RETAIL PREMISES NOT TO BE DISORDERLY; ACTS CONSTITUTING
DISORDERLY BEHAVIOR.
(A) A retail licensee, a patron, or the licensee’s agents, servants, or employees shall not cause,
suffer, or permit the licensed premises to be disorderly.
(B) Acts which constitute disorderly premises consist of causing, suffering, or permitting patrons,
the licensee, or the licensee’s servants, agents, or employees to cause public inconvenience, annoyance,
or alarm, or create a risk through:
(1) Engaging in fighting or in violent, tumultuous, or threatening behavior;
(2) Making unreasonable noise;
(3) Refusing to obey an official order to disperse issued to maintain public safety in
dangerous proximity to a fire, hazard, or other emergency;
(4) Creating a hazardous or physically offensive condition by any act that serves no
legitimate purpose;
(5) Creating a public nuisance;
(6) Engaging in criminal activity that would constitute a capital offense, felony, or
misdemeanor; or
(7) Failing to maintain the minimum health, fire, safety, or sanitary standards established by
the state or a local government, or by state administrative regulations, for the licensed premises.
(Ord. 2013-09, passed 12-12-13) Penalty, see § 116.99
OUTDOOR DINING
§ 116.35 LOCATION OF PERMITTED AREAS.
Tables and chairs used for outdoor dining shall be permitted upon city sidewalks located between
Harrison Street and Depot Street and fronting upon Main Street, also including those premises located
within one block in either a northerly or southerly direction of Main Street on Proctor Knott Avenue,
Spalding Avenue, or Depot Street, in front of or alongside any business establishment operated as a
2014 S-14
Alcoholic Beverages 38A
restaurant, holding a valid or occupational license for the sale of food and beverage only, upon the
issuance of a permit agreement with the city authorizing such activity, so long as the same shall not
obstruct, impede or endanger the free flow of pedestrian traffic.
(Ord. 07-10, passed 6-18-07; Am. Ord. 2013-09, passed 12-12-13) Penalty, see § 116.99
§ 116.36 PERMIT FEE.
The city shall assess an annual fee of $10 for the issuance or renewal of any permit agreement.
(Ord. 07-10, passed 6-18-07; Am. Ord. 2013-09, passed 12-12-13)
§ 116.37 PERMIT APPLICATION.
(A) Applications for such permit agreement shall be made to the City Clerk and approved by the
city License Inspector.
(1) In the event that the applicant is, or is seeking to be, an establishment serving alcoholic
beverages, the application for outdoor dining permit agreement must first be approved (in addition to
any documentation and/or application for status as a “licensed premises” under KRS Chapter 244) by
the city Alcoholic Beverage Control Administrator.
(2) Such permit agreement may be suspended or revoked, for cause, upon hearing before the
City Council.
(B) Applicants shall utilize the appropriate permit agreement application and form found in
Appendices A and B, as amended from time to time.
(C) Any applicant may appeal the denial of any application, or any licensee may appeal the
suspension or revocation of any existing permit agreement, within 30 days to the county circuit court,
as provided by law.
(Ord. 07-10, passed 6-18-07; Am. Ord. 2013-09, passed 12-12-13)
§ 116.38 PACKAGING PROHIBITION.
No restaurant holding a permit under this subchapter shall serve, or allow to be served, to its
patrons, invitees, or other persons upon the permitted area, alcoholic beverages in original
manufacturers’ packaging.
(Ord. 07-10, passed 6-18-07; Am. Ord. 07-13, passed 9-10-07; Am. Ord. 2013-09, passed 12-12-13)
Penalty, see § 116.99
2014 S-14
38B Lebanon - Business Regulations
§ 116.39 CITY’S RETENTION OF SIDEWALKS AND PEDESTRIAN RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
Nothing herein shall be construed to convey, transfer, assign, or otherwise encumber the city’s title
to any sidewalk and/or pedestrian right-of-way.
(Ord. 07-10, passed 6-18-07; Am. Ord. 2013-09, passed 12-12-13)
§ 116.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person violating any provision of §§ 116.02 through 116.07 shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500 for each offense, and each day
in which a violation shall occur shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. Any person or
licensee violating any provision of §§ 116.02 through 116.07 twice in a 24-month period shall have, in
addition to the fines involved, all alcoholic beverage licenses issued by the city revoked, and all license
fees paid shall thereupon be automatically forfeited and shall not be prorated.
(B) Any person who violates any provision of § 116.21 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
subject to a fine of $100 and not more than $500 in addition to court cost. The punishment provided
herein shall apply not only to the holder of any alcoholic beverage licensee, but also to any employee
or clerk of the licensee.
(C) Any person violating any provision of § 116.22 and 116.24 shall be guilty of a violation and
shall be fined a minimum of $20 and a maximum of $50 in addition to court costs.
(D) Any person who violates any provision of § 116.23 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall
be subject to a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $500 in addition to court costs.
(E) Any owner or licensee of such establishment violating any provision of § 116.26 shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500 for each offense, and
each day in which a violation shall occur shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. Any person
or licensee violating any provision of § 116.26 twice in a 24-month period shall have, in addition to the
fines involved, all alcoholic beverage licenses issued by the city revoked, and all license fees paid shall
thereupon be automatically forfeited and shall not be prorated.
(Ord. 1020.3, passed 1-12-59; Am. Ord. 88-11, passed 8-8-88; Am. Ord. 2013-09, passed 12-12-13)
2014 S-14
Alcoholic Beverages 38C
APPENDIX A: OUTDOOR DINING PERMIT AGREEMENT.
PERMIT AGREEMENT
This AGREEMENT is entered into this day of , 20 , by and
between the City of Lebanon, Kentucky, a municipal corporation of the second class (the city), and
(the permit holder), in conjunction with City Ordinance No. 07-10, as may be amended.
WHEREAS, the city is the owner of the sidewalk and/or pedestrian rights-of-way along the front
and/or side of the permit holder’s premises; and
WHEREAS, the permit holder is the owner/leaseholder/occupant/licensee of the premises located
at and operating a business
establishment at such location, which business is a restaurant, commonly known as
, which is directly adjacent to the said city sidewalk and/or pedestrian rights-of-way; and
WHEREAS, the permit holder desires to utilize a portion of the said city sidewalk and/or
pedestrian rights-of-way for outdoor dining; and
WHEREAS, the permit holder also has a current occupational license with the city;
NOW THEREFORE, IT IS HEREBY AGREED, as follows:
The city hereby grants to the permit holder, a permit to utilize the said city sidewalk and/or
pedestrian rights-of-way along the front and/or side of the permit holder’s premises (i.e., the permitted
area), for the purpose of outdoor dining.
The term of this permit agreement shall be for a period of one (1) year, commencing on July 1 of
the year, and shall automatically be renewable, on a yearly basis, from July 1 of each year forward, to
2008 S-9
38D Lebanon - Business Regulations
coincide with the issuance of the occupational license for such premises. However, this permit shall
immediately expire upon notice of non-renewal being given by either party within thirty (30) days prior
to expiration. This permit shall be subject to revocation in the event of the permit holder’s failure to
maintain a current occupational license for the premises or to obtain the requisite insurance coverage
set forth below.
The permit holder shall be required to pay the city an annual fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for the
issuance or renewal of any permit agreement.
The permit holder shall be prohibited from making any permanent improvements within the
permitted area, and shall only be permitted to maintain suitable tables and chairs that can easily be
removed therefrom.
The permit holder shall be required to place any tables, chairs or other obstructions within the
permitted area so as not to impede the free flow of pedestrian traffic.
The permit holder shall comply with all building, fire and safety codes and health department
regulations required in conjunction with the use of this permit
The permit holder shall maintain and repair the permitted area and shall keep the same in a clean,
safe and healthy condition, free and clear from all trash, during the time of this permit agreement.
The permit holder shall indemnify and hold the city harmless from any loss, damage, claims,
causes of action or expense which the city may incur or suffer with respect to any claim based
upon the permit holder’s use or occupancy of the permitted area.
The permit holder shall further be required to maintain comprehensive general liability insurance
coverage, which shall protect against all claims of personal injury, death or property damage occurring
upon the permitted area, resulting from the permit holder’s use thereof under the terms and conditions
2008 S-9
Alcoholic Beverages 38E
of this permit agreement, and shall supply the city with proof of such coverage at the time of the
issuance and subsequent renewals.
This permit agreement shall not be assigned without prior written consent of the city.
This permit agreement shall only apply to those establishments that are not licensed to sell
alcoholic beverages.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have executed this permit agreement as of the first date
written above.
CITY OF LEBANON, KENTUCKY
BY:
NIKKI WHEATLEY , City Clerk
BY:
JOHN THOMPSON , City License Inspector
PERMIT HOLDER
BY:
TITLE:
(Ord. 07-10, passed 6-18-07)
2008 S-9
38F Lebanon - Business Regulations
Alcoholic Beverages 38G
APPENDIX B: OUTDOOR DINING PERMIT AGREEMENT, ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE
SALES.
PERMIT AGREEMENT
Alcoholic Beverage Sales
This AGREEMENT is entered into this day of , 20 , by and
between the City of Lebanon, Kentucky, a municipal corporation of the second class (the city), and
(the permit holder), in conjunction with City Ordinance No. 07-13, as may be amended.
WHEREAS, the city is the owner of the sidewalk and/or pedestrian rights-of-way along the front
and/or side of the permit holder’s premises; and
WHEREAS, the permit holder is the owner/leaseholder/occupant/licensee of the premises located
at and operating a business
establishment at such location, which business is a restaurant, commonly known as
, which is directly adjacent to the said city sidewalk and/or pedestrian rights-of-way; and
WHEREAS, the permit holder also has a current occupational license with the city; and
WHEREAS, the permit holder has a current alcoholic beverage control license issued by the City
of Lebanon and the State Alcoholic Beverage Control Board;
NOW THEREFORE, IT IS HEREBY AGREED, as follows:
The city hereby grants to the permit holder a permit to utilize the said city sidewalk and/or
pedestrian rights-of-way along the front and/or side of the permit holder’s premises (hereinafter
collectively referred to as “the permitted area”) for the purpose of outdoor dining.
2008 S-9
38H Lebanon - Business Regulations
The term of this permit agreement shall be for a period of one (1) year, commencing on July 1 of
the year of issuance, expiring on June 30 of the following year, and shall automatically be renewable,
on a yearly basis, from July 1 of each year forward, to coincide with the issuance of the occupational
license for the permitted area. However, this permit shall immediately expire upon notice of nonrenewal
being given by either party within thirty (30) days prior to expiration. This permit shall be
subject to revocation in the event of the permit holder’s failure to maintain a current occupational
license for the premises, to obtain the requisite insurance coverage set forth below, to comply with any
provision of this permit, or to maintain a valid, unrestricted alcoholic beverage license.
The permit holder shall inspect and maintain control over the area where its patrons are permitted
to dine and consume beverages pursuant to this permit, and shall maintain said premises/area in an
orderly manner. Permit holder shall also insure that no patron drinks alcoholic beverages in bottles,
cans or other original manufacturers’ packaging.
The permit holder shall be required to pay the city an annual fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for the
issuance or renewal of any permit agreement.
The permit holder shall be prohibited from making any permanent improvements within the
permitted area without the written consent of the city, and shall only be permitted to maintain suitable
tables and chairs which can easily be removed therefrom.
The permit holder shall be required to place any tables, chairs or other obstructions within the
permitted area so as not to impede the free flow of pedestrian traffic.
The permit holder shall comply with all building, fire and safety codes and health department
regulations required in conjunction with the use of this permit.
2008 S-9
Alcoholic Beverages 38I
The permit holder shall maintain and repair the permitted area and shall keep the same in a clean,
safe and healthy condition, free and clear from all trash and debris, during the time of this permit
agreement.
The permit holder shall indemnify and hold the city harmless from any loss, damage, claims,
causes of action, or expense which the city may incur or suffer with respect to any claim based
upon the permit holder’s use or occupancy of the permitted area.
The permit holder shall further be required to maintain comprehensive general liability insurance
coverage, which shall protect against all claims of personal injury, death or property damage occurring
upon the permitted area, resulting from the permit holder’s use of the permitted area under the terms
and conditions of this permit agreement, and shall supply the city with proof of such coverage at the
time of the issuance and subsequent renewals of this permit.
This permit agreement shall not be assigned without prior written consent of the city.
This permit agreement shall only apply to those establishments which are restaurants licensed to
sell alcoholic beverages.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have executed this permit agreement as of the first date
written above.
CITY OF LEBANON, KENTUCKY
BY:
NIKKI WHEATLEY , City Clerk
BY:
JOHN THOMPSON , City License Inspector
2008 S-9
38J Lebanon - Business Regulations
Certification that Alcoholic Beverage License has been approved locally:
Nature of License Approved:
BY:
SHELTON YOUNG , Chief, Lebanon Police Department
City ABC Administrator
PERMIT HOLDER
BY:
TITLE:
(Ord. 07-10, passed 6-18-07; Am. Ord. 07-13, passed 9-10-07)
2008 S-9
CHAPTER 117: AMUSEMENTS
Section
Pool and Billiards
117.01 Location requirements
117.02 Hours of operation
Marion County Country Ham Days Festival
117.15 Marion County Country Ham Days
117.16 Bicycles, roller skates, skateboards and the like prohibited
Carnivals
117.30 Operation unlawful
117.99 Penalty
POOL AND BILLIARDS
§ 117.01 LOCATION REQUIREMENTS.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, firm or corporation to maintain or operate for
profit any pool tables or hall or billiard tables or hall in the city except on premises which are on the
ground or street level.
(B) Before any person, persons, firm or corporation shall maintain or operate for profit, any pool
tables or halls or billiard tables or halls at any place in the city, said applicant, person, persons, firm or
corporation shall first obtain approval, initially and annually thereafter, of the applicant and the
location thereof from the City Council before said license shall issue.
(Ord. 430.1, passed 10-4-49) Penalty, see § 117.99
39
2018 S-17
40 Lebanon - Business Regulations
§ 117.02 HOURS OF OPERATION.
No place of business in which billiard or pool tables are operated shall be open during the hours
between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on any day nor at any time on Sunday.
(Ord. 430.2, passed 6-3-52) Penalty, see § 117.99
MARION COUNTY COUNTRY HAM DAYS FESTIVAL
§ 117.15 MARION COUNTY COUNTRY HAM DAYS.
(A) Establishment of dates, times and vendor rules for festival. The dates for the annual fall
festival known as Marion County Country Ham Days shall be the last full weekend in the month of
September each year, or such other consecutive days as are designated and advertised to the City
Council by the operating authority, the Marion County Chamber of Commerce, not later than August 1
of each year. The Marion County Chamber of Commerce shall also establish annually the hours of
operation, and schedule of events, for Marion County Country Ham Days as well as all rules and
regulations for vendors or exhibitors to observe during Marion County Country Ham Days.
(B) Advance approval required. All persons, corporate entities, or other individuals, groups or
associations of persons desiring to operate any business, including but not limited to any type of
concession, booth or trading stall within the barricaded festival area during the duration of the Marion
County Ham Days fall festival must first procure the approval of the Marion County Chamber of
Commerce Board of Directors, which operates the festival.
(C) Division (B) shall apply to those businesses or booths which are established to operate only
temporarily during the period of time designated as the Marion County Country Ham Days
week/weekend by the Marion County Chamber of Commerce Board of Directors and does not apply to
a business which operates during the Marion County Country Ham Days festival period according to
the business’ permanent schedule of operations throughout the calendar year.
(D) Cooperative efforts to enforce rules and regulations. The Lebanon Police Department is
hereby authorized to assist the Marion County Chamber of Commerce throughout the corporate limits
of the city as needed for enforcement of the rules and regulations established by the Marion County
Chamber of Commerce Board of Directors pertaining to Marion County Country Ham Days,
particularly with regard to traffic, parking, alcoholic beverage control, vendor sales and behavior, or
crowd safety, control and dispersion. The Marion County Chamber of Commerce Board of Directors
shall provide the Lebanon Police Department with an event schedule, map of event and vendor layouts,
and comprehensive set of rules and regulations governing the festival in advance of the festival dates to
properly prepare for enforcement needs during the festival.
(Ord. 430.3, passed 4-19-76; Am. Ord. 2017-03, passed 6-20-17)
Cross-reference:
Regulation of flea markets, see § 114.02
2018 S-17
Amusements 41
§ 117.16 BICYCLES, ROLLER SKATES, SKATEBOARDS AND THE LIKE PROHIBITED.
It shall be illegal for anyone, other than parade participants prior to, during and immediately after
the Festival Parades, to operate any bicycle, unicycle, roller skates or skateboard on the streets and
sidewalks of the city in the designated festival area during the duration of the Marion County Country
Ham Days Festival. Further, the Police Department shall confiscate any such device for the period of
the Marion County Country Ham Days Festival and return it to its rightful owner after the festival has
concluded.
(Ord. 81-14, passed 9-15-81; Am. Ord. 2017-03, passed 6-20-17)
CARNIVALS
§ 117.30 OPERATION UNLAWFUL.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate a carnival or other similar type
of exhibition within the city limits.
(Ord. 1020.1, passed 5-3-49) Penalty, see § 117.99
§ 117.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of § 117.01 shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than $20 nor more than $25 for each offense, and each day
during which a violation of § 117.01 exists or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 430.1,
passed 10-4-49)
(B) Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of § 117.02 shall be guilty of a
violation and shall be fined not less than $10 nor more than $100 for each offense. (Ord. 430.2, passed
6-3-52)
(C) Whoever violates §§ 117.15 or 117.16 shall be guilty of a violation and shall be fined not less
than $50 or not more than $100, upon conviction of violation. (Ord. 430.3, passed 4-19-76)
(D) Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of § 117.30 shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500, and each day during which the
provisions of § 117.30 are violated shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 1020.1, passed 5-3-49)
2018 S-17
42 Lebanon - Business Regulations
CHAPTER 118: ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
Section
118.01 Definitions
118.02 Adult entertainment establishments
118.03 Licenses
118.04 Premises to furnish clear view
118.05 Restrictions on advertisement
§ 118.01 DEFINITIONS.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter shall have the meaning
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning;
ADULT DANCING. Includes but not be limited to any dancing which exposes to view by patrons
or spectators on the premises at any time the specified anatomical areas and/or consists of specified
sexual activities, both as set forth above.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT. An adult motion picture theater, massage
parlor or establishment, an adult book store, an adult escort service, or any other business establishment
whose principal business use or regular business use, is to offer adult oriented entertainment or matter
as characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities and/or exposure of specified anatomical
areas. Adult oriented entertainment shall mean any exhibition, live performance, display or dance of
any type which has as a significant or substantial portion of such performance any specified sexual
activities as defined herein, or the exhibition of any specified anatomical area.
ENTERTAINMENT AREA. An area in an adult entertainment establishment consisting of a
platform or other structure raised not less than 18 inches above the immediately surrounding main floor
area and encompassing an area of at least 100 square feet.
PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, independent contractor,
corporation (domestic or foreign), trust, estate, assignee, receiver or any other group or combination
acting as a unit.
PREMISES. The entire property, interior and exterior, including parking lots and other outside
areas.
43
1998 S-2
44 Lebanon - Business Regulations
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Includes, but not be limited to the following;
(1) Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, the cleavage
of the human buttock, any portion of the human female breast below a horizontal line across the top of
the areola at its highest point. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female
breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by a
dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in
whole or in part.
(2) The human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely
covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Includes, but not be limited to, bestiality, erotic or sexual
stimulation with objects or mechanical devices, human genitalia in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal
or tumescence, fondling, touching of human genitalia, pubic region, buttock, anus or female breast, acts
of human anilingus, cunnilingus, fellatio, flagellation, masturbation, sadism, sadomasochism, sexual
intercourse, or sodomy, or any excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities
set forth above.
(Ord. 98-5, passed 8-10-98)
§ 118.02 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS.
(A) General requirements. In addition to the licensing and other general requirements contained
in this chapter relating to adult entertainment establishments, each adult entertainment establishment
shall comply with the following requirements;
(1) Prohibited activities. No person shall display or expose specified anatomical areas or
simulate specified sexual activities individually or with any patron, spectator, employee or other person
on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment.
(2) Entertainment area. No person in an adult entertainment establishment shall engage in
any form of entertainment or dancing except while said person is positioned in or occupying an
entertainment area, as defined above, and while the person so dancing, performing, displaying or
exhibiting is positioned not less than six feet from any patron or spectator.
(3) Entertainment area exclusion. No spectator, patron, or person who is not employed by
the adult entertainment establishment shall be present in an entertainment area, as defined above,
during the course of any adult entertainment, dancing or performance.
(4) Physical contact prohibition. While on the premises of an adult entertainment
establishment, no employee thereof shall be permitted to have any physical contact with any other
employee thereof, patron, spectator or other person while that employee is entertaining, dancing or
performing, and all such performances shall occur only in an entertainment area. No employee of the
1998 S-2
Adult Entertainment 45
adult entertainment establishment shall touch the breast, buttock, or genitals of any patron, spectator,
person, or other employee of the adult entertainment establishment, and no patron, spectator, or other
person, shall touch the breast, buttock, or genitals of any employee of the adult entertainment
establishment, patron, spectator, or other person, while on the premises of the adult entertainment
establishment. No person on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment shall be permitted to
use or be present in areas partitioned or screened from public view and which are designed to be
occupied, together or alone, by any person or persons for the display of or exhibition of specified
anatomical areas.
(5) Age restriction. No person under 18 years of age shall be permitted in an adult
entertainment establishment.
(6) Business hours. No adult entertainment establishment shall be open for business between
the hours of 12;00 a.m. and 6;00 a.m. each day or at any time dung the 24 hours of a Sunday.
(B) Penalty. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of § 118.02 shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned for a period of not more than 12 months,
or both so fined and imprisoned, and each day of violation shall be considered to be a separate offense.
(Ord. 98-5, passed 8-10-98)
§ 118.03 LICENSES.
(A) General requirements. No person shall own an adult entertainment establishment as defined
in § 118.01 without first obtaining an adult entertainment establishment license. No person shall
operate an unlicensed adult entertainment establishment.
(B) Application process. The owner of an adult entertainment establishment shall apply for a
license with the City Clerk. The applicant shall complete an application on the form prescribed by the
city and shall submit the following information;
(1) The name and business address of the establishment, including any assumed or fictitious
names under which the establishment is or will be operated.
(2) The name, including any assumed or fictitious name or alias, business address, social
security or tax identification number of the owner and every officer, partner, director, or person
performing a similar function to an officer, partner or director and the names and addresses of all
individuals who own 10% or more of the partnership, corporation, limited liability corporation or
company, or limited liability partnership, which is the owner of the establishment.
(3) In the event the owner of the adult entertainment establishment is not the owner of record
of the real property on which the establishment is located or is to be located, the application shall
include a notarized statement from the owner(s) of record of the real property acknowledging that an
1998 S-2
46 Lebanon - Business Regulations
adult entertainment establishment is located or is to be located on the real property upon the issuance of
the license. The applicant also shall furnish the name and address of the owner(s) of record of the real
property and a copy of the lease or rental agreement or memorandum thereof.
(4) The name, including any assumed or fictitious name or alias, business address, date of
birth, social security number, and photograph of all persons engaged in the day to day management of
the adult entertainment establishment. All person who at any time shall be responsible for attending the
entrance of the establishment for the purpose of compliance with this chapter shall be included in this
subsection.
(5) The name, including any assumed or fictitious name or alias, business address, date of
birth, social security number, and photograph of the individual designed by the applicant to undertake
to keep the applicant, if licensed, at all times in compliance with the restrictions, requirements, and
conditions set forth in this chapter, together with the written statement of such individual stating that he
has received a copy of this chapter and that he willfully undertakes on behalf of the applicant to comply
therewith.
(6) The name, including any assumed or fictitious name or alias, business address, date of
birth, social security number, and photograph of the individual designed by the applicant to be
responsible for keeping current the information required hereunder at all times together with a written
statement from such individual stating that he has received a copy of this chapter and that he willfully
undertakes on behalf of the applicant to comply with the requirements herein pertaining to the
disclosure of information.
(7) The nature of the activity or activities to be engaged in at such location.
(8) A criminal record report for the applicants, owners, officers, directors, partners,
employees or other persons whose names are required pursuant to this section together with a list of all
criminal convictions of such persons within the last five years for the offenses listed below in this
chapter. Any of such persons who is on parole shall submit with the application the terms of the parole.
(9) The name and mailing address of the owner to whom notice will be given in case of
violations or other matters affecting the license hereunder.
(10) The applicant must submit to fingerprinting by the City Police Department.
(11) The applicant must be current on all fees or taxes of any kind or nature owed to the city.
(12) The premises to be licensed must meet all established zoning, fire, building, and/or
plumbing codes and cannot provide direct interior access to residential living quarters.
(13) The applicant shall file a floor plan exhibiting all entrances, exits, stairways, and all
rooms in the building and their intended uses, for purposes of enabling the city to provide emergency
services.
1998 S-2
Adult Entertainment 47
(C) Supplemental information. The information required by subsection (B) of this section shall be
kept current at all times even after the granting of the adult entertainment license. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner or other person designated in the license application to notify the City
Clerk, in writing, no later than 48 hours after the effective date of any change, alteration or
modification in any information contained in the application.
(D) Review process. The Building Inspector or his designee shall inspect the premises proposed to
be licensed within 15 days after the completed application and all information required by this chapter
has been submitted and the application fee has been paid. The Building Inspector shall report to the
City Clerk, who shall issue a license if all restrictions, requirements, conditions, and all applicable
requirements of this chapter and other applicable laws have been met. The City Clerk shall grant or
deny a license application within 20 days of the filing of such application.
(E) Prohibitions. No adult entertainment establishment license shall be issued if the applicant or
any operator, officer, director, partner or shareholder;
(1) Is less than 18 years of age;
(2) Has been convicted of any of the following offenses within five years of the date
of the application;
(a) Gambling, conspiracy to promote gambling, or possession of gambling records or
gambling devices;
(b) Prostitution promoting prostitution, permitting prostitution, or solicitation for the
purpose of prostitution;
(c) The sale, transfer, possession or use of any controlled substance;
(d) Any sexual offenses, including rape, sodomy, sexual abuse, sexual misconduct or
indecent exposure;
(e) Distribution of obscene material to a minor, use of a minor to produce, promote, or
distribute obscene material, advertising obscene materials, or promoting the sale of obscenity;
(f) Unlawful transaction with a minor (as defined in KRS Chapter 530 or other similar
laws), use of a minor in a sexual performance, promoting a sexual performance by a minor, or
possession of or advertising matter portraying a sexual performance by a minor; or
(g) Murder, manslaughter, or felony assault (as defined in KRS Chapters 507 or 508 or
similar laws);
(3) Has failed in the operation of an adult entertainment establishment to comply with any
health, zoning, fire or building code enacted or adopted by the city and has failed to correct such
violation as provided in this chapter.
1998 S-2
48 Lebanon - Business Regulations
(F) Notice. If the Building Inspector’s inspection reveals a failure to comply with any provisions
of this chapter or of any required code, regulation or law, the Building Inspector shall notify the
applicant in writing of that fact, stating what failures have been discovered, allowing a reasonable time
to correct such defects and informing the applicant of the appeal procedure if the applicant does not
agree with the Building Inspector’s decision or finding.
(G) No transfer of license. The adult entertainment establishment license issued under this chapter
does not authorize the operation of an adult entertainment establishment at any place other than the
address designated in the application and such license is not transferable. A transfer is deemed to occur
when the business is sold, leased or subleased, when securities which constitute a controlling interest in
the business are sold or otherwise exchanged, or a trust, gift or other similar legal device is established
which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for a transfer by bequest or other
operation of law upon the death of the natural person possessing the ownership or control of the
business.
(H) Access to licensed premises. The application for or the granting of an adult entertainment
establishment license is deemed to permit periodic inspections by law enforcement officers, or by other
persons designated or authorized by the Building Inspector, of all areas of any establishment requiring
a license under this chapter for the purpose of verifying compliance with the terms and conditions of
this chapter. It shall be unlawful for an applicant, licensee, owner, operator or employee of an adult
entertainment establishment to refuse to permit a law enforcement officer or authorized person to
inspect the entire premises or any part thereof at any time during the normal business hours of the
establishment, or at any time the establishment is open or occupied.
(I) Application and license fee. Concurrent with the submission of a license application, the
applicant shall pay to the city a nonrefundable fee of $100. Every adult entertainment establishment
shall pay to the city an annual license fee of $3,000, which fee is due and payable upon the issuance of
a license and on or before July 1 of each year thereafter. When a license is first issued, the annual fee
may be prorated at the rate of $250 per month for the remaining months of the current fiscal year,
which prorated fee is fully due and payable upon the issuance of the license. Provided, however, that
no license shall be issued for less than the sum of $1,500. No licensee shall be rebated any portion of
any license fee paid to the city.
(J) Expiration. Each license shall expire on June 30 of each calendar year, unless earlier
suspended or revoked. Application for a new license should be made at least 30 days prior to the
expiration date.
(K) Suspension. The Building Inspector may suspend an adult entertainment establishment
license for a period of not to exceed 30 days if the Building Inspector determines that the applicant,
owner, operator or any employee thereof has violated any provision of this chapter, has been on the
adult entertainment establishment premises while intoxicated or in a disorderly condition (consistent
with the definition of disorderly conduct contained in KRS Chapter 525), has refused to allow an
inspection of the premises or any part thereof, or has knowingly permitted any violation of state law to
occur on the premises.
1998 S-2
Adult Entertainment 49
(L) Revocation. The Building Inspector shall revoke an adult entertainment license if he
determines that;
(1) Cause for suspension under division (K) above occurs and the license has been suspended
within the preceding 12 months;
(2) An applicant knowingly gave false or misleading information in the initial license
application or in any subsequent license application;
(3) An applicant, owner, operator or employee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale
of controlled substances on the premises;
(4) An applicant, owner, operator, or employee has knowingly allowed prostitution or
solicitation for prostitution on the premises;
(5) An applicant, owner, operator, or employee has knowingly operated an adult
entertainment establishment during a period of time when the establishment’s license was suspended;
or
(6) An applicant, owner, operator, or employee has knowingly allowed a violation specified
in division (E) above to occur on the premises.
(M) Hearing for denials suspension or revocation; appeal. If the Building Inspector determines
that grounds exist to deny, suspend or revoke an adult entertainment license, the Building Inspector
shall notify the applicant or licensee in writing of the Building Inspector’s intent to deny, suspend or
revoke, including the grounds therefor. The notice shall be sent to the applicant or licensee by certified
mail at the address specified in the application and a copy shall be sent to the City Clerk. Within five
business days of receipt of such notice, the applicant or licensee may provide to the Building Inspector,
in writing, a response which shall include a statement of reasons why the license should not be denied,
suspended or revoked and may include a request for a hearing. A copy shall be sent to the City Clerk. If
a response is not timely received by the Building Inspector, the notice shall be a final administrative act
of denial, suspension or revocation. If a timely response is received by the Building Inspector, he shall,
within three business days of his receipt of the response, either withdraw the written notice of intent to
deny, suspend or revoke by giving notice of such withdrawal to the applicant or licensee or schedule a
hearing before the City Council and shall give notice of such hearing to the applicant or licensee. A
copy thereof shall be provided to the City Clerk. The hearing shall be informal in nature and shall be
conducted within 20 business days of the Building Inspector’s receipt of the applicant’s or licensee’s
response. The City Council shall issue an oral decision at the conclusion of the hearing and shall render
a written decision within five business days after the completion of the hearing and shall serve the
applicant or licensee with a copy of the decision by certified mail. The applicant or licensee may appeal
a decision of the City Council to the Marion Circuit Court after receipt of the written notice of the
decision. If an applicant or licensee pursues a judicial appeal of a final decision of the City Council,
then that licensee or applicant may continue to operate the adult entertainment establishment pending
the completion of judicial review.
1998 S-2
50 Lebanon - Business Regulations
(N) Penalty. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of § 118.03 of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned for a period of not more than 12
months, or both so fined and imprisoned, and each day of violation shall be considered a separate
offense.
(Ord. 98-5, passed 8-10-98)
§ 118.04 PREMISES TO FURNISH CLEAR VIEW.
(A) General requirements. An adult entertainment establishment shall at all times provide a clear
view of the entire area open to the public, from the front entrance to the entertainment area. No
partition, box, stall, screen, curtain, plant or other object shall be installed or placed so as to obstruct
the view or the general observation from the front entrance of persons in any entertainment area,
however, partitions, subdivision, or panels that are not higher than 48 inches from the floor shall not be
construed as obstructing view or the general observation of persons from the front entrance.
(B) Prohibitions. The darkening of any portion of the adult entertainment establishment open to
the public in any manner as to prevent any person standing at the front entrance from observing the
conduct of patrons therein or of the entertainment areas shall be prohibited.
(C) Penalty. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall upon conviction
thereof, be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned for a period of 90 days or both so fined and
imprisoned and each day of violation shall be considered a separate offense.
(Ord. 98-5, passed 8-10-98)
§ 118.05 RESTRICTIONS ON ADVERTISEMENT.
Any adult entertainment establishment license holder shall be required to identify such business as
“adult” in any advertisement. No lettering, words, or representation of matter relating to sexual
activities as defined in this chapter shall be contained in any advertisement. Adult entertainment
activities or photographs of the same shall not be displayed about or within any adult entertainment
establishment in such a manner as to be open to the general public view from outside the adult
entertainment establishment. Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be
accompanied by a photograph or drawing of any signs to be displayed on or about the exterior of the
premises with an indication as to the dimensions of the same. Signage shall be posted in conspicuous
locations indicating that persons must be of appropriate age or older to enter.
(Ord. 98-5, passed 8-10-98)
1998 S-2
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter
10. RULES OF CONSTRUCTION;
GENERAL PENALTY
1
2 Lebanon - General Provisions
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
10.01 Short titles
10.02 Definitions
10.03 Rules of construction
10.04 Computation of time
10.05 Majority may act for all; authorized agent
10.06 Writings and signatures
10.07 Severability
10.08 Revivor
10.09 Rights and liabilities accruing before repeal of ordinance
10.10 Construction of section references
10.11 Ordinances repealed
10.12 Ordinances unaffected
10.13 Ordinances saved
10.14 Amendments to code; amendatory language
10.15 Conflicting provisions
10.16 Reference to offices
10.17 Errors and omissions
10.18 Historical and statutory references
10.99 Penalty
' 10.01 SHORT TITLES.
(A) All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city as revised, codified, rearranged,
renumbered, and consolidated into component codes, titles, chapters, and sections shall be known and
designated as the Lebanon Code, for which designation Acodified ordinances@ or Acode@ may be
substituted. Code, title, chapter, and section headings do not constitute any part of the law as contained in
the code. (KRS 446.140)
(B) All references to codes, titles, chapters, and sections are to such components of the code unless
otherwise specified. Any component code may be referred to and cited by its name, such as the Atraffic
code.@ Sections may be referred to and cited by the designation A'@ followed by the number, such as
A' 10.01.@ Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, and section numbers, are
employed for reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.
3
4 Lebanon - General Provisions
' 10.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this code the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
ACTION. Includes all proceedings in any court of this state.
(KRS 446.010(1))
AND. May be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the sense requires it.
ANIMAL. Includes every warm-blooded living creature except a human being. (KRS 446.010(2))
AVIS. The Automated Vehicle Information System established and maintained by the Transportation
Cabinet to collect tilting and registration information on vehicles and boats and information on holders of
motor vehicle operator=s licenses and personal identification cards. (KRS 446.010(55))
CATTLE. Includes horse, mule, ass, cow, ox, sheep, hog, or goat of any age or sex. (KRS 446.010(8))
CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, or MUNICIPALITY. When used in this code shall denote the
City of Lebanon irrespective of its population or legal classification.
COMPANY. May extend and be applied to any corporation, company, partnership, joint stock
company, or association. (KRS 446.010(10))
CORPORATION. May extend and be applied to any corporation, company, partnership, joint stock
company, or association. (KRS 446.010(11))
COUNCIL. The city legislative body. (KRS 83A.010(5))
COUNTY. Marion County, Kentucky.
CRUELTY. As applied to animals, includes every act or omission whereby unjustifiable physical pain,
suffering, or death is caused or permitted. (KRS 446.010(13))
DIRECTORS. When applied to corporations, includes managers or trustees. (KRS 446.010(14))
DOMESTIC. When applied to a corporation, partnership, business trust, or limited liability company,
means all those incorporated or formed by authority of this state. (KRS 446.010(15))
DOMESTIC ANIMAL. Any animal converted to domestic habitat. (KRS 446.010(16))
EXECUTIVE AUTHORITY. The Mayor. (KRS 83A.010(6))
2013 S-13
Rules of Construction; General Penalty 5
FEDERAL. Refers to the United States. (KRS 446.010(18))
FOREIGN. When applied to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, business trust, statutory
trust, or limited liability company, includes all those incorporated or formed by authority of any other state.
(KRS 446.010(19))
KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes all persons, whether acting by themselves or as a servant,
agent, or employee.
KRS. Kentucky Revised Statutes.
LAND or REAL ESTATE. Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments and all rights thereto and
interest therein, other than a chattel interest. (KRS 446.010(24))
LEGISLATIVE BODY. The City Council. (KRS 91A.010(8))
LEGISLATIVE BODY MEMBER. A City Councilman. (KRS 83A.010(8))
MAY. The act referred to is permissive. (KRS 446.010(26))
MONTH. Calendar month. (KRS 446.010(27))
MUNICIPALITY. The City of Lebanon, Kentucky.
OATH. Includes AFFIRMATION in all cases in which an affirmation may be substituted for an oath.
(KRS 446.010(28))
PEACE OFFICER. Includes sheriffs, constables, coroners, jailers, metropolitan and urban-county
government correctional officers, marshals, policemen, and other persons with similar authority to make
arrests. (KRS 446.010(31))
PERSON. May extend and be applied to bodies-politic and corporate, societies, communities, the
public generally, individuals, partnerships, joint stock companies, and limited liability companies.
(KRS 446.010(33))
PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes all property except real.
PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land and buildings.
PROPERTY. Includes real, personal, mixed estates and interests.
PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Includes boards of education; the municipal, county, state, or federal
government, its officers or an agency thereof; or any duly authorized public official.
2013 S-13
6 Lebanon - General Provisions
PUBLIC PLACE. Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard, body of water or
watercourse, public conveyance, or any other place for the sale of merchandise, public accommodation, or
amusement.
REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.
REGULAR ELECTION. The election in even numbered years at which members of Congress are
elected and the election in odd numbered years at which state officers are elected.
(KRS 446.010(37))
SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory. (KRS 446.010(39))
SWORN. Includes AFFIRMED in all cases in which an affirmation may be substituted for an oath.
(KRS 446.010(43))
SIDEWALK. That portion of the street between the curb line and the adjacent property line intended
for the use of pedestrians.
STATE. The State of Kentucky.
STREET. Includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, highways, viaducts, and all other public
thoroughfares within the city.
SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in the chapter analysis
and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject
matter of the heading. Not all chapters have subchapters.
TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person holding a written or oral
lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of such premises, alone or with others.
VACANCY IN OFFICE. Such as exists when there is an unexpired part of a term of office without a
lawful incumbent therein, or when the person elected or appointed to an office fails to qualify according to
law, or when there has been no election to fill the office at the time appointed by law; it applies whether the
vacancy is occasioned by death, resignation, removal from the state, county, city, or district, or otherwise.
(KRS 446.010(46))
VIOLATE. Includes failure to comply with. (KRS 446.010(47))
YEAR. Calendar year. (KRS 446.010(49))
2013 S-13
Rules of Construction; General Penalty 6A
' 10.03 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
(A) Singular includes plural. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied
to several persons or things, as well as to one person or thing, and a word importing the plural number only
may extend and be applied to one person or thing as well as to several persons or things. (KRS 446.020(1))
2013 S-13
6B Lebanon - General Provisions
Rules of Construction; General Penalty 7
(B) Masculine includes feminine. A word importing the masculine gender only may extend and be
applied to females as well as males. (KRS 446.020(2))
(C) Liberal construction. All sections of this code shall be liberally construed with a view to promote
their objects and carry out the intent of Council. (KRS 446.080(1))
(D) Retroactivity. No ordinance shall be construed to be retroactive, unless expressly so declared.
(KRS 446.080(3))
(E) Technical terms. All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and
approved usage of language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law, shall be construed according to such meaning.
(KRS 446.080(4))
' 10.04 COMPUTATION OF TIME.
(A) In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by order of court, or by any applicable
ordinance or regulation, the day of the act, event, or default after which the designated period of time begins
to run is not to be included. The last day of the period so computed is to be included, unless it is a
Saturday, a Sunday, a legal holiday, or a day on which the public office in which a document is required to
be filed is actually and legally closed, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day which is
not one of the days just mentioned. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven days,
intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation.
(B) When an ordinance, regulation, or order of court requires an act to be done either a certain time
before an event or a certain time before the day on which an event occurs, the day of the event shall be
excluded in computing the time. If the day thereby computed on which or by which the act is required to be
done falls on a Saturday, Sunday, legal holiday, or a day on which the public office in which the act is
required to be completed is actually and legally closed, the act may be done on the next day which is none
of the days just mentioned.
(C) If any proceeding is directed by law to take place, or any act is directed to be done, on a particular
day of a month and that day is Sunday, the proceeding shall take place, or the act shall be done, on the next
day that is not a legal holiday.
(KRS 446.030)
(D) In all cases where the law requires any act to be done in a reasonable time or reasonable notice to
be given, such reasonable time or notice shall mean the time only as may be necessary for the prompt
performance of such duty or compliance with such notice.
2011 S-11
8 Lebanon - General Provisions
' 10.05 MAJORITY MAY ACT FOR ALL; AUTHORIZED AGENT.
(A) Words giving authority to three or more public officers or other persons shall be construed as
giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons. (KRS 446.050)
(B) When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as well be done by an agent as by the
principal, such requirement shall be construed to include such acts when done by an authorized agent.
' 10.06 WRITINGS AND SIGNATURES.
(A) When this code requires any writing to be signed by a party thereto, it shall not be deemed to be
signed unless the signature is subscribed at the end or close of the writing.
(B) Every writing contemplated by this code shall be in the English language.
(KRS 446.060)
' 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
It shall be considered that it is the intent of Council in enacting any ordinance, that if any part of the
ordinance be held unconstitutional the remaining parts shall remain in force, unless the ordinance provides
otherwise, or unless the remaining parts are so essentially and inseparably connected with and dependent
upon the unconstitutional part that it is apparent that Council would not have enacted the remaining parts
without the unconstitutional part, or unless the remaining parts, standing alone, are incomplete and
incapable of being executed in accordance with the intent of Council.
(KRS 446.090)
' 10.08 REVIVOR.
(A) A repealed ordinance without a delayed effective date is revived when the ordinance that repealed
it is repealed by another ordinance enacted at the same meeting of Council.
(B) A repealed ordinance with a delayed effective date is revived by the enactment of a repealer of the
ordinance that repealed it at the same or any subsequent meeting of Council as long as it takes effect prior
to the effective date of the original repealer.
(C) An amended ordinance without a delayed effective date remains unchanged with respect to an
amendment which is repealed at the same meeting of Council which enacted the amendment.
(D) An amended ordinance with a delayed effective date remains unchanged with respect to that
amendment if the ordinance making the amendment is repealed at the same or at a subsequent meeting of
Council as long as the repealing ordinance takes effect prior to the effective date of the original amendment.
2011 S-11
Rules of Construction; General Penalty 9
(E) No other action of Council repealing a repealer or an amendment shall have the effect of reviving
the original language of the repealer or amendment as the case may be.
(KRS 446.100)
' 10.09 RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES ACCRUING BEFORE REPEAL OF ORDINANCE.
No new ordinance shall be construed to repeal a former ordinance as to any offense committed against
a former ordinance, nor as to any act done, or penalty, forfeiture, or punishment incurred, or any right
accrued or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or
act so committed or done, or any penalty, forfeiture, or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or
claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, except that the proceedings thereafter had shall
conform, so far as practicable, to the laws in force at the time of such proceedings. If any penalty,
forfeiture, or punishment is mitigated by any provision of the new ordinance, such provision may, by the
consent of the party affected, be applied to any judgment pronounced after the new ordinance takes effect.
(KRS 446.110)
' 10.10 CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION REFERENCES.
(A) Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a section or an inclusive group of
sections, such reference shall be construed to mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections
included in the reference.
(B) References in the code to action taken or authorized under designated sections of the code include,
in every case, action taken or authorized under the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by
this code.
(C) Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, the reference shall extend
and apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered, unless the
subject matter be changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
' 10.11 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the provisions of a general nature
pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects
treated by this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code of ordinances.
2011 S-11
10 Lebanon - General Provisions
' 10.12 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances pertaining to subjects not
enumerated and embraced in this code of ordinances, shall remain in full force and effect unless herein
repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
' 10.13 ORDINANCES SAVED.
Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the Council, or a certain city officer
or employee, to make additional ordinances or regulations for the purpose of carrying out the intent of the
ordinance, all ordinances and regulations of a similar nature serving such purpose effected prior to the
codification and not inconsistent thereto, shall remain in effect and are saved.
' 10.14 AMENDMENTS TO CODE; AMENDATORY LANGUAGE.
(A) Any chapter, section, or division amended or added to this code by ordinances passed subsequent
to this code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this code and printed for
inclusion herein. Any chapter, section, or division repealed by subsequent ordinances may be excluded
from this code by omission from reprinted pages. Subsequent ordinances as printed or omitted shall be
prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until Council shall adopt a new code of ordinances.
(B) The method of amendment set forth in ' 32.37 should be used by the city to amend, add, or repeal
a chapter, section, or division of this code of ordinances.
' 10.15 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
If the provisions of different codes, chapters, or sections of the codified ordinances conflict with or
contravene each other, the provisions bearing the latest passage date shall prevail. If the conflicting
provisions bear the same passage date, the conflict shall be so construed as to be consistent with the
meaning or legal effect of the questions of the subject matter taken as a whole.
' 10.16 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer, or employee of
the city exercising the powers, duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
2011 S-11
Rules of Construction; General Penalty 11
' 10.17 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
If a manifest error be discovered consisting of the misspelling of any word or words, the omission of
any word or words necessary to express the intention of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words
to which no meaning can be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intention, the spelling shall be corrected, and the word or words supplied,
omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and the provision shall have the same
effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall be
made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of such error.
' 10.18 HISTORICAL AND STATUTORY REFERENCES.
(A) As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage date of the original ordinance,
and the most recent three amending ordinances, if any, are listed following the text of the code section.
Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-80; Am. Ord.
25, passed 1-1-85)
(B) (1) If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates that the text of the section reads
substantially the same as the statute.
Example: (KRS 61.870 et seq.) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-80; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-85).
(2) If a statutory cite is set forth as a Astatutory reference@ following the text of the section, this
indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for further information.
Example:
' 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
This city shall make available to any person for inspection or copying all public records, unless otherwise
exempted by state law.
Statutory reference:
For provisions concerning the inspection of public records, see KRS 61.870 et seq.
' 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
Where an act or omission is prohibited or declared unlawful in this code of ordinances, and no penalty
is otherwise provided, the offense shall be deemed a violation and the offender shall be fined not more than
$250 for each offense.
2011 S-11
12 Lebanon - General Provisions
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
Chapter
150. BUILDING REGULATIONS
151. FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
152. UNFIT DWELLINGS
153. SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
154. ZONING REGULATIONS
APPENDIX A: PERMITTED USES
155. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ENFORCEMENT
1
2010 S-10
2 Lebanon - Land Usage
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
Standard Codes
150.01 Adoption of Kentucky Building Code and Standards of Safety; enforcement agents
150.02 Application
150.03 Appeals
Electrical Inspector
150.15 Creation of office
Fees
150.25 Building permit fee
150.26 Inspection fees
Underground Utilities
150.40 Installation of cable television facilities
Fire Hydrants and Access Roads
150.50 Definitions
150.51 Construction, alteration or addition
150.52 Building plans
150.53 Fire hydrant and water main specifications
150.54 Location of hydrants and water supply requirements
150.99 Penalty
' 150.01 ADOPTION OF KENTUCKY BUILDING CODE AND STANDARDS OF SAFETY;
ENFORCEMENT AGENTS.
(A) The Kentucky Building Code, as contained in Chapter 7, Title 815 of the Kentucky Administrative
Regulations; the Kentucky Plumbing Code, as contained in Chapter 20, Title 815 of the Kentucky
Administrative Regulations; the Kentucky Standards of Safety, as contained in Chapter 10,
3
2005 S-6
4 Lebanon - Land Usage
Title 815 of the Kentucky Administrative Regulations, together with any amendments, are hereby adopted
by reference as if fully set forth in this code of ordinances. Copies of the above codes and any amendments
thereto shall be placed on file in the office of the City Clerk where they shall be available for public
inspection during normal business hours. (Ord. 81-15, passed 11-9-81)
(B) The Building Inspector shall be designated as the local enforcement agent for the Kentucky
Building Code.
(C) The Building Inspector and all other designated officers, agents, and employees of the city are
hereby charged with the enforcement of the provisions of the Standards of Safety.
Penalty, see ' 150.99
' 150.02 APPLICATION.
The application of the State Building Code shall be extended to all single-family dwellings in the city
which are to be constructed or remodeled, and an electrical inspection in accordance therewith shall
hereafter be required in any instance where construction involves installation of a new electrical hook-up
and for all electrical entrance changes, except those specifically reserved to the Department of Housing,
Buildings and Construction of the Commonwealth of Kentucky.
(Ord. 81-15, passed 11-9-81)
' 150.03 APPEALS.
Appeals from decisions made by the Building Inspector under this chapter may be taken to the State
Board of Housing, Buildings and Construction unless and/or until a local board of housing appeals, as set
forth in KRS Chapter 198B, is established to hear such appeals.
Statutory reference:
Appeals procedure, see KRS 198B.070
ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR
' 150.15 CREATION OF OFFICE.
The office of City Electrical Inspector is hereby created, said Inspector and any deputy inspectors to be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council.
(Ord. 81-15, passed 11-9-81)
2005 S-6
Building Regulations 5
FEES
' 150.25 BUILDING PERMIT FEE.
A building permit fee is hereby authorized, with a schedule of such building permit fees to be adopted
by the City Council by ordinance, and with the permit fee to be paid in full to the City Clerk at the time
such application for a building permit is made.
(Ord. 81-15, passed 11-9-81)
' 150.26 INSPECTION FEES.
A schedule of inspection fees hereunder shall be established by the City Council by ordinance, which
inspection fees shall be paid to the City Electrical Inspector at the time such inspection is made.
(Ord. 81-15, passed 11-9-81)
UNDERGROUND UTILITIES
' 150.40 INSTALLATION OF CABLE TELEVISION FACILITIES.
(A) For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
(1) CABLE OPERATOR. Any person or legal entity providing cable television service pursuant
to a franchise granted by the city.
(2) DEVELOPER. The owner and any developer of any residential subdivision or multi-unit
dwelling in the city.
(B) Whenever any construction or development of any residential subdivision or multi-unit dwelling
shall include the digging or opening of any trench in which utilities are to be placed or are already located,
the developer shall make such open trenches available to each cable operator for the installation of cable
television facilities. The developer shall give each cable operator reasonable notice, not less than ten days
prior to the digging or opening of any such trenches, of the specific dates on which such open trenches will
be made available for the cable operator=s installation of cable, conduit, pedestals, vaults, laterals and/or
any other applicable equipment all of which facilities shall be provided and installed by the respective cable
operator at such cable operator=s expense. Such cable operator shall thereupon promptly provide to the
developer any requisite specifications for such trenching.
(C) The cost of the trenching and the procurement of any easements required to bring cable television
and other utility services to the respective construction or property development shall be the
2005 S-6
6 Lebanon - Land Usage
responsibility of the developer, and the developer shall not impose any charge or fee upon the cable
operator for the cable operator=s installation in or use of such trenches.
(Ord. 90-5, passed 4-9-90)
FIRE HYDRANTS AND ACCESS ROADS
' 150.50 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning.
ASSEMBLY OCCUPANCY, BUSINESS OCCUPANCY, EDUCATIONAL OCCUPANCY,
INDUSTRIAL OCCUPANCY, HIGH HAZARD OCCUPANCY, INSTITUTIONAL OCCUPANCY,
MERCANTILE OCCUPANCY, RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCY, STORAGE OCCUPANCY, UTILITY
OCCUPANCY, and MISCELLANEOUS OCCUPANCY have the same meanings as defined in the current
edition of the Kentucky Building Code.
BUILDING INSPECTOR. The Building Inspector of the City of Lebanon.
COMPLETE INDEPENDENT LIVING FACILITY. A facility for one or more persons including
permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
FIRE CHIEF. The Chief of the Lebanon Fire Department.
MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING. Buildings containing more than two complete independent living
facilities.
SIAMESE CONNECTION. Two female connections joined to one male connection.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING. A building containing one unit providing a complete independent
living facility and not connected to any other building or unit.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING. A building containing two complete independent living facilities.
(Ord. 05-06, passed 8-8-05)
' 150.51 CONSTRUCTION, ALTERATION OR ADDITION.
All new building construction, alteration or additions to structures of assembly, business, educational,
factory, industrial, high hazard, institutional, mercantile, residential, storage, utility and
2005 S-6
Building Regulations 6A
miscellaneous occupancies, as well as single, two-family, and multi-family dwellings, residential
subdivisions and/or mobile home park occupancies, shall comply with the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 05-06, passed 8-8-05)
' 150.52 BUILDING PLANS.
Building plans shall show the location and placement of any existing fire hydrants and access roads on
both public and private property as approved by the Fire Chief and the Building Inspector of the city before
any actual construction has begun.
(Ord. 05-06, passed 8-8-05)
' 150.53 FIRE HYDRANT AND WATER MAIN SPECIFI2ATIONS.
(A) FIRE HYDRANTS or HYDRANTS as used herein shall mean pumper-type hydrants which are
equipped with not less than two 2-1/2 inch and one 5 inch pumper outlets placed for the purpose of and
intended for supplying water to Fire Department pumpers. YARD HYDRANTS as used herein shall mean
hydrants which are equipped with not less than two 2-1/2 inch outlets and are supplied with water from a
Siamese Connection. YARD HYDRANTS may have larger outlets as designated by the local Fire
Department. YARD HYDRANTS with larger outlets should be marked as a yard hydrant as designated by
the local Fire Department.
(B) All fire hydrants shall meet the minimum specifications and be installed in conformity with the
standards and requirements of the local water utility for hydrant type and thread specifications, and shall be
constructed and maintained so as to have adequate water flow according to the standards of the local water
utility.
(C) Fire hydrants shall be able to deliver 750 gallons per minute with a friction loss of not more than
five pounds per square inch between the street main and the outlet.
(D) A gate valve must be installed at the hydrant between the hydrant and the street main.
(E) Hydrants may be tested periodically for proper functioning in accordance with the policy of the
local Fire Department. The local water utility shall be contacted prior to testing.
(F) Water mains which have hydrants installed on them shall not be less than six inches in diameter,
including fire hydrants branch connections installed in conformity with the minimum requirements of the
local water utility.
(G) The distribution system shall be equipped with the sufficient number of valves so located that
breakage or other interruption will not cause shutdown of any substantial portion of a main. Whenever
service is installed in conjunction with fire hydrants, said service shall be of the fire protection type and at
least six inches in size.
2005 S-6
6B Lebanon - Land Usage
(H) All piping and materials installed as a fire protection service shall have UL and/or FM listing with
a minimum rating of 150 pounds per square inch in order to comply with the provisions herein.
(Ord. 05-06, passed 8-8-05)
' 150.54 LOCATION OF HYDRANTS AND WATER SUPPLY REQUIREMENTS.
(A) In single-family residential areas and two-family residential areas, fire hydrants shall be spaced not
farther than 1,000 feet apart, measured over hard surfaces, easily accessible to fire protection apparatus.
Any single-family residential property must be within 500 feet, measured over hard surfaces, easily
accessible to fire protection apparatus.
(B) In all other areas outside of one- and two-family or multi-family dwelling, which other areas
include commercial, industrial, educational, institutional, assembly, hotel, motel, and multi-family areas,
fire hydrants shall be located so that there will be at least within 500 feet of the building, and one additional
fire hydrant within 1,000 feet of the building, the distances measured over hard surfaces, easily accessible
to fire protection apparatus. No exterior portion of a building shall be farther than 500 feet from a fire
hydrant measured over hard surfaces, easily accessible to fire protection apparatus. Closer spacing may be
required by the enforcing agencies set out hereinafter where special circumstances require such closer
spacing. There shall be a fire hydrant within 200 feet of each Fire Department Siamese connection. All
hydrants must be located at least 25 feet from any exterior wall of a frame building or a building of
equivalent construction, including brick or stone or veneer.
(C) All hydrants shall be located as to be easily accessible to fire protection apparatus from an
approved hard surface. Hydrants shall be located not more than 40 feet from the edge of an approved hard
surface easily accessible to fire apparatus and the center of the hydrant nozzle shall be not less than 20
inches nor more than 30 inches above ground level (final grade).
(D) All hydrants shall be kept clear of weeds, rubbish and any and all other obstructions by the
abutting property owner. Landscaping or decorations shall not be used to obstruct or hide the fire hydrant
from clear view, nor prohibit access to the hydrant for use or maintenance. Damage caused to landscaping
due to periodic maintenance, use or testing of a fire hydrant shall be the responsibility of the owner.
(E) Where fire hydrants are installed along a roadway, parking within ten feet from a fire hydrant is
prohibited. When fire hydrants are installed in parking areas, parking shall be designed and maintained to
allow ten feet clear access to the hose connection side of the hydrant, and a four-foot minimum clear radius
around the hydrant.
(F) The owner of any private water system or fire protection system shall notify the Fire Department
when the system is out of service and when service has been restored. The owner of the system is
responsible for prompt repair of the water supply system.
(G) The city Building Inspector and Fire Chief, having jurisdiction, are hereby authorized and directed
to enforce this subchapter, and the final determination concerning compliance herewith shall be
2005 S-6
Building Regulations 6C
the sole discretion of the city Building Inspector and the Fire Chief. Upon presentation of their credentials,
the enforcement officers may enter any premises covered by these regulations to perform the duties
imposed upon them by these regulations.
(Ord. 05-06, passed 8-8-05)
' 150.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person who violates any provision of the state codes adopted in ' 150.01 shall be subject to
the following penalties:
(1) Violators of the State Building Code shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less
than $10 nor more than $1000 for each offense. (KRS 198B.990(1))
(2) Violators of the State Standards of Safety shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not
less than $25 nor more than $1000, imprisonment for not more than 60 days, or both, for each offense.
(KRS 227.990(1))
(3) Violators of the State Plumbing Code shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less
than $10 nor more than $100, imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both, for each offense. (KRS
318.990)
(B) Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of '' 150.40 through 150.43 shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $10 nor more than
$100 or imprisoned for a period of not more than 90 days, or both so fined and imprisoned, in the discretion
of the court or jury. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. A-20.1, passed 7-8-63)
2005 S-6
6D Lebanon - Land Usage
CHAPTER 151: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
151.01 Statutory authorization
151.02 Findings of fact
151.03 Statement of purpose
151.04 Objectives
151.05 Definitions
151.06 Lands to which this chapter applies
151.07 Basis for establishing the special flood hazard areas
151.08 Establishment of development permit
151.09 Compliance
151.10 Abrogation and greater restrictions
151.11 Interpretation
151.12 Warning and disclaimer of liability
Administration
151.25 Designation of Local Administrator
151.26 Establishment of development permit
151.27 Duties and responsibilities of the Local Administrator
151.28 Appeals and variance procedures
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
151.35 General construction standards
151.36 Specific standards
151.37 Standards for streams without established base flood elevation (unnumbered A Zones)
and/or floodways
151.38 Standards for shallow flooding zones
151.39 Standards for subdivision proposals
151.40 Standards for accessory structures in all zones beginning with the letter >A=
151.41 Critical facilities
151.99 Penalty
7
2010 S-10
8 Lebanon - Land Usage
GENERAL PROVISIONS
' 151.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Kentucky has in KRS 82.082 delegated to local government
units the authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of
its citizenry. Therefore, the City Council of Lebanon, Kentucky, hereby adopts the following floodplain
management chapter, as follows.
(Ord. 09-09, passed 11-9-09)
' 151.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
(A) The flood hazard areas of Lebanon are subject to periodic inundations which result in loss of life
and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all which adversely
affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
(B) These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing
increased flood height and velocity, and by the location in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods or
hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise protected from flood
damage.
(Ord. 09-09, passed 11-9-09)
' 151.03 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to
minimize public and private loss due to flooding by provisions designed to:
(A) Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water erosion
hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood height or velocity;
(B) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(C) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which
accommodate or channel flood waters;
(D) Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase erosion or flood
damage; and
2010 S-10
Flood Damage Prevention 9
(E) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or
which may increase flood hazards to other areas.
(Ord. 09-09, passed 11-9-09)
' 151.04 OBJECTIVES.
The objectives of this chapter are to:
(A) Protect human life and health;
(B) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(C) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken
at the expense of the general public;
(D) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(E) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone
and sewer lines; streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;
(F) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special
flood hazard or other flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blighted areas caused
by flooding;
(G) Ensure that potential home buyers are on notice that property is in a special flood hazard area; and
(H) Ensure that those who occupy a special flood hazard area assume responsibility for their actions.
(Ord. 09-09, passed 11-9-09)
' 151.05 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning.
A ZONE. Portions of the special flood hazard area (SFHA) in which the principle source of flooding
is runoff from rainfall, snowmelt, or a combination of both. In A ZONES, floodwaters may move slowly or
rapidly, but waves are usually not a significant threat to structures. Areas of 100-year flood, base flood
elevations and flood hazard factors are not determined.
2010 S-10
10 Lebanon - Land Usage
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE). A structure located on the same
parcel of property as the principle structure, the use of which is incidental to the use of the principle
structure. ACCESSORY STRUCTURES should constitute a minimal initial investment, may not be used
for human habitation, and should be designed to have minimal flood damage potential. Examples of
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES are detached garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, and hay sheds.
ACCESSORY USE. A use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of
land on which it is located.
ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING STRUCTURE). Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter
of a structure in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any
walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter
load-bearing walls, is new construction.
A1-30 and AE ZONES. Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 1% annual chance flood
(100-year flood). Base flood elevations (BFEs) are determined.
AH ZONE. An area of 100-year shallow flooding where depths are between one and three feet
(usually shallow ponding). Base flood elevations are shown.
AO ZONE. An area of 100-year shallow flooding where water depth is between one and three feet
(usually sheet flow on sloping terrain). Flood depths are shown.
APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator=s interpretation of any provision of
this chapter or from the Floodplain Administrator=s ruling on a request for a variance.
AR/A1 - A30, AR/AE, AR/AH, AR/AO, and AR/A ZONES. Special flood hazard areas (SFHAs) that
result from the de-certification of a previously accredited flood protection system that is in the process of
being restored to provide a 100-year or greater level of flood protection. After restoration is complete these
areas will still experience residual flooding from other flooding sources.
A99 ZONE. That part of the SFHA inundated by the 100-year flood which is to be protected from the
100-year flood by a federal flood protection system under construction. No base flood elevations are
determined.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or AH Zone on a community=s flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) where the base flood depths range from one to three feet, there is no clearly
defined channel, the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident.
Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
B and X ZONES (SHADED). Areas of the 0.2% annual chance (500-year) flood, areas subject to the
100-year flood with average depths of less than one foot or with contributing drainage area less than one
square mile, and areas protected by levees from the base flood.
2010 S-10
Flood Damage Prevention 11
BASE FLOOD. A flood which has a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also
called the A100-year flood@). Base flood is the term used throughout this chapter.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM)
for Zones AE, AH, A1-30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, and AR/AO that indicates the water
surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a 1% or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
BASEMENT. That portion of a structure having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all four
sides.
BUILDING. A walled and roofed structure that is principally aboveground; including a manufactured
home, gas or liquid storage tank, or other man-made facility or infrastructure. See definition for
STRUCTURE.
C AND X (UNSHADED) ZONES. Areas determined to be outside the 500-year floodplain.
COMMUNITY. A political entity having the authority to adopt and enforce floodplain ordinances for
the area under its jurisdiction.
COMMUNITY FLOOD HAZARD AREA (CFHA). An area that has been determined by the
Floodplain Administrator (or other delegated, designated, or qualified community official) from available
technical studies, historical information, and other available and reliable sources, which may be subject to
periodic inundation by floodwaters that can adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
Included are areas downstream from dams.
COMMUNITY RATING SYSTEM (CRS). A program developed by the Federal Insurance
Administration to provide incentives to those communities in the regular program to go beyond the
minimum floodplain management requirements to develop extra measures for protection from flooding.
CRITICAL FACILITY. Any property that, if flooded, would result in severe consequences to public
health and safety or a facility which, if unusable or unreachable because of flooding, would seriously and
adversely affect the health and safety of the public. CRITICAL FACILITIES include, but are not limited
to: housing likely to contain occupants not sufficiently mobile to avoid injury or death unaided during a
flood; schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency response installations, vehicle and
equipment storage facilities, emergency operations centers likely to be called upon before, during and after
a flood, public and private utility facilities important to maintaining or restoring normal services before,
during and after a flood, and those facilities or installations which produce, use or store volatile, flammable,
explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials, hazardous materials or hazardous waste.
D ZONE. An area in which the flood hazard is undetermined.
2010 S-10
12 Lebanon - Land Usage
DEVELOPMENT. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not
limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling
operations, or storage of equipment or materials.
ELEVATED STRUCTURE. A non-basement structure built to have the lowest floor elevated above
ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, piling, columns (post and piers), shear
walls, or breakaway walls. (See freeboard requirements for residential and non-residential structures.)
ELEVATION CERTIFICATE. A statement certified by a registered professional engineer or
surveyor on the FEMA-approved form in effect at the time of certification that verifies a structure=s
elevation and other related information to verify compliance with this chapter.
EMERGENCY PROGRAM. The initial phase under which a community participates in the NFIP,
intended to provide a first layer amount of insurance at subsidized rates on all insurable structures in that
community before the effective date of the initial FIRM.
ENCLOSURE. That portion of a structure below the base flood elevation (BFE) used solely for
parking of vehicles, limited storage, or access to the structure.
ENCROACHMENT. The physical advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation,
structures, permanent structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow
capacity of a floodplain.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. Any structure for which the Astart of construction@ commenced
before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION may also be referred to as EXISTING STRUCTURES.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes
are to be affixed (including, at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the first
floodplain management ordinance adopted by the city based on specific technical base flood elevation data
which established the area of special flood hazards.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the
manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FIVE-HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD. The flood that has a 0.2% chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any year. Areas subject to the 500-YEAR FLOOD have a moderate to low risk of flooding.
2010 S-10
Flood Damage Prevention 13
FLOOD, FLOODING, or FLOOD WATER.
(1) A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land
areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source; and/or mudslides (i.e. mudflows). See MUDSLIDES.
(2) The condition resulting from flood-related erosion. See flood-related erosion.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM). A map on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) has delineated the areas of flood
hazards and the regulatory floodway.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). A map on which the boundaries of the flood,
mudslide (i.e. mudflow), and flood-related erosion areas having special hazards have been designated as
Zones A, M, and/or E by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance
Administration (FIA).
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). A map on which the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) has delineated special flood hazard areas and
risk premium zones.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) containing flood profiles, the flood insurance rate map
(FIRM), and/or the flood boundary floodway map (FBFM), and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by
flood waters from any source.
FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The individual appointed by a NFIP-participating community to
administer and enforce the floodplain management ordinances.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive
measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing natural resources in the floodplain,
including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management
ordinances, and open space plans.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. This chapter and other zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and
erosion control), and other applications of police power, which control development in flood-prone areas.
This term describes federal, state and/or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide
standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
2010 S-10
14 Lebanon - Land Usage
FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or
adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property,
water and sanitation facilities, structures, and their contents.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE. A certification by a registered professional engineer or
architect, on a FEMA-approved form in effect at the time of certification stating that a non-residential
structure, together with attendant utilities and sanitary facilities is watertight to a specified design elevation
with walls that are substantially impermeable to the passage of water and all structural components are
capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic flood forces, including the effects of buoyancy and
anticipated debris impact forces.
FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than one foot. Also referred to as the REGULATORY FLOODWAY.
FLOODWAY FRINGE. That area of the floodplain on either side of the regulatory floodway where
encroachment may be permitted without additional hydraulic and/or hydrologic analysis.
FREEBOARD. A factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above the BFE, which is applied for the
purposes of floodplain management. It is used to compensate for the many unknown factors that could
contribute to flood heights greater than those calculated for the base flood. FREEBOARD must be applied
not just to the elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofing level, but also to the level of protection
provided to all components of the structure, such as building utilities, HVAC components, and the like.
FRAUD AND VICTIMIZATION. As related in ' 151.28, Appeals and Variance Procedures, means
that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this
requirement, the City Council will consider the fact that every newly constructed structure adds to
government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for 50 to 100 years. Structures that are
permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased
risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject
to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages may incur. In
addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and
can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE FACILITY. A facility, structure, or other development,
which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water.
The term includes only a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or
passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair, or seafood processing facilities. The term does not include long-term
storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities.
2010 S-10
Flood Damage Prevention 15
GOVERNING BODY. The local governing unit, i.e. county or municipality that is empowered to
adopt and implement ordinances to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.
HAZARD POTENTIAL. The possible adverse incremental consequences that result from the release
of water or stored contents due to failure of a dam or misoperation of a dam or appurtenances. The hazard
potential classification of a dam does not reflect in any way the current condition of a dam and its
appurtenant structures (e.g., safety, structural integrity, flood routing capacity).
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to
construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary
to qualify as a registered historic district;
(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either:
(a) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(b) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
INCREASED COST OF COMPLIANCE (ICC).
(1) Increased cost of compliance coverage provides for the payment of a claim for the cost to
comply with state or community floodplain management laws or ordinances after a direct physical loss by
flood. When a building covered by a standard flood insurance policy under the NFIP sustains a loss and the
state or community declares the building to be substantially or repetitively damaged, ICC will help pay up
to $30,000 for the cost to elevate, floodproof, demolish, or remove the building.
(2) ICC coverage is available on residential and non-residential buildings (this category includes
public or government buildings, such as schools, libraries, and municipal buildings) insured under the
NFIP.
2010 S-10
16 Lebanon - Land Usage
KENTUCKY REVISED STATUTE 151.250 - PLANS FOR DAMS, LEVEES, ETC. TO BE
APPROVED AND PERMIT ISSUED BY CABINET - (ENVIRONMENTAL AND PUBLIC
PROTECTION CABINET).
(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person and no city, county or other political
subdivision of the state, including levee districts, drainage districts, flood control districts or systems, or
similar bodies, shall commence the construction, reconstruction, relocation or improvement of any dam,
embankment, levee, dike, bridge, fill or other obstruction (except those constructed by the Department of
Highways) across or along any stream, or in the floodway of any stream, unless the plans and specifications
for such work have been submitted by the person or political subdivision responsible for the construction,
reconstruction or improvement and such plans and specifications have been approved in writing by the
cabinet and a permit issued. However, the cabinet by regulation may exempt those dams, embankments or
other obstructions, which are not of such size or type as to require approval by the cabinet in the interest of
safety or retention of water supply.
(2) No person, city, county, or other political subdivision of the state shall commence the filing of
any area with earth, debris, or any other material, or raise the level of any area in any manner, or place a
building, barrier or obstruction of any sort on any area located adjacent to a river or stream or in the
floodway of the stream so that such filling, raising, or obstruction will in any way affect the flow of water
in the channel or in the floodway of the stream unless plans and specifications for such work have been
submitted to and approved by the cabinet and a permit issued as required in division (1) above.
(3) Nothing in this section is intended to give the cabinet any jurisdiction or control over the
construction, reconstruction, improvement, enlargement, maintenance or operation of any drainage district,
ditch or system established for agricultural purposes, or to require approval of the same except where such
obstruction of the stream or floodway is determined by the cabinet to be a detriment or hindrance to the
beneficial use of water resources in the area, and the person or political subdivision in control thereof so
notified. The Department for Natural Resources through KRS Chapter 350 shall have exclusive
jurisdiction over KRS Chapter 151 concerning the regulation of dams, levees, embankments, dikes, bridges,
fills, or other obstructions across or along any stream or in the floodway of any stream which structures are
permitted under KRS Chapter 350 for surface coal mining operations.
LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC). An official FEMA determination, by letter, to amend or
revise effective flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary and floodway maps, and flood insurance studies.
LOMCs include the following categories:
(1) Letter of map amendment (LOMA). A revision based on technical data showing that a
property was incorrectly included in a designated SFHA. A LOMA amends the current effective FIRM and
establishes that a specific property is not located in a SFHA.
(2) Letter of map revision (LOMR). A revision based on technical data that, usually due to
manmade changes, shows changes to flood zones, flood elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations,
and planimetric features.
2010 S-10
Flood Damage Prevention 17
(3) Letter of map revision - fill (LOMR_F). A determination that a structure or parcel has been
elevated by properly placed engineered fill above the BFE and is, therefore, excluded from the SHFA.
LEVEE. A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in
accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide
protection from temporary flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM.
(1) A flood protection system that consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as
closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering
practices.
(2) For a levee system to be recognized, the following criteria must be met:
(a) All closure devices or mechanical systems for internal drainage, whether manual or
automatic, must be operated in accordance with an officially adopted operation manual (a copy of which
must be provided to FEMA by the operator when levee or drainage system recognition is being sought or
revised); and
(b) All operations must be under the jurisdiction of a federal or state agency, an agency
created by Federal or State law, or an agency of a community participating in the NFIP.
LIMITED STORAGE. An area used for storage and intended to be limited to incidental items which
can withstand exposure to the elements and have low flood damage potential. Such an area must be of flood
resistant material, void of utilities except for essential lighting, and cannot be temperature controlled.
LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE. The elevation of the sidewalk, patio, deck support, or basement
entryway immediately next to the structure and after the completion of construction. It does not include
earth that is emplaced for aesthetic or landscape reasons around a foundation wall. It does include natural
ground or properly compacted fill that comprises a component of a structure=s foundation system.
LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area including basement. An unfinished
or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, structure access, or storage in an area
other than a basement area is not considered a structure=s LOWEST FLOOR, provided that such enclosure
is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of
this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected
2010 S-10
18 Lebanon - Land Usage
or attached to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar
transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved
property. The term MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a Arecreational vehicle@ (see
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE).
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MAP. The flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) or the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) for a
community issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
MAP PANEL NUMBER. The four-digit number on a flood map, followed by a letter suffix, assigned
by FEMA. The first four digits represent the map panel. The letter suffix represents the number of times
the map panel has been revised. (The letter AA@ is not used by FEMA, the letter AB@ is the first revision.)
MARKET VALUE. The structure value, excluding the land (as agreed between a willing buyer and
seller), as established by what the local real estate market will bear. MARKET VALUE can be established
by independent certified appraisal, replacement cost depreciated by age of structure (actual cash value) or
adjusted assessed values.
MEAN SEA LEVEL (MSL). The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. For the purposes
of the National Flood Insurance Program, the MSL is used as a reference for establishing various elevations
within the floodplain as shown on a community=s FIRM. For purposes of this chapter, the term is
synonymous with either National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) 1929 or North American Vertical
Datum (NAVD) 1988.
MITIGATION. Sustained actions taken to reduce or eliminate long-term risk to people and property
from hazards and their effects. The purpose of MITIGATION is twofold: to protect people and structures,
and to minimize the costs of disaster response and recovery.
MUDSLIDE (i.e. MUDFLOW). A condition where there is a river, flow, or inundation of liquid mud
down a hillside, usually as a result of a dual condition of loss of brush cover and the subsequent
accumulation of water on the ground, preceded by a period of unusually heavy or sustained rain. A
MUDSLIDE (i.e. MUDFLOW) may occur as a distinct phenomenon while a landslide is in progress, and
will be recognized as such by the Floodplain Administrator only if the mudflow, and not the landslide, is
the proximate cause of damage that occurs.
MUDSLIDE (I.E. MUDFLOW) AREA MANAGEMENT. The operation of and overall program of
corrective and preventative measures for reducing mudslide (i.e. mudflow) damage, including but not
limited to emergency preparedness plans, mudslide control works, and floodplain management regulations.
2010 S-10
Flood Damage Prevention 19
MUDSLIDE (I.E. MUDFLOW) PRONE AREA. An area with land surfaces and slopes of
unconsolidated material where the history, geology, and climate indicate a potential for mudflow.
NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP). The federal program that makes flood
insurance available to owners of property in participating communities nationwide through the cooperative
efforts of the federal government and the private insurance industry.
NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD). As corrected in 1929, a vertical control
used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. (Generally used as the vertical
datum on the older FIRM=s. Refer to FIRM legend panel for correct datum.)
NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the
effective date of the city=s floodplain management regulations and includes any subsequent improvements
to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes
are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the city=s
adopted floodplain management ordinances.
NON-RESIDENTIAL. Structures that are not designed for human habitation, including but is not
limited to: small business concerns, churches, schools, farm structures (including grain bins and silos), pool
houses, clubhouses, recreational structures, mercantile structures, agricultural and industrial structures,
warehouses, and hotels or motels with normal room rentals for less than six months duration.
NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM (NAVD). As corrected in 1988, a vertical control used as
a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. (Generally used on the newer FIRM=s
and digitally referenced FIRM=s (DFIRM=s). (Refer to FIRM or DFIRM legend panel for correct datum.)
OBSTRUCTION. Includes but is not limited to any dam, wall, embankment, levee, dike, pile,
abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, structure, wire, fence, rock,
gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any
watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water,
due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of
being carried downstream.
ONE-HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD (100-YEAR FLOOD) (see BASE FLOOD). The flood that has a
1% or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Any flood zone that begins with the
letter A is subject to the 100-year flood. Over the life of a 30-year loan, there is a 26% chance of
experiencing such a flood with the SFHA.
2010 S-10
20 Lebanon - Land Usage
PARTICIPATING COMMUNITY. A community that voluntarily elects to participate in the NFIP by
adopting and enforcing floodplain management regulations that are consistent with the standards of the
NFIP.
PRE-FIRM CONSTRUCTION. Construction or substantial improvement, which started on or before
December 31, 1974, or before the effective date of the initial FIRM of the community, whichever is later.
POST-FIRM CONSTRUCTION. Construction or substantial improvement that started on or after the
effective date of the initial FIRM of the community or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later.
PROBATION. A means of formally notifying participating NFIP communities of violations and
deficiencies in the administration and enforcement of the local floodplain management regulations. During
periods of probation, each insurance policy is subject to a $50 surcharge.
PROGRAM DEFICIENCY. A defect in a community=s floodplain management regulations or
administrative procedures that impairs effective implementation of those floodplain management standards
or of the standards of 44 CFR 60.3, 60.4, 60.5, and/or 60.6.
PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE. Anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire
community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free
passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle that is:
(1) Built on a single chassis;
(2) Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable to a light duty truck; and
(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REGULAR PROGRAM. The phase of a community=s participation in the NFIP where more
comprehensive floodplain management requirements are imposed and higher amounts of insurance are
available based upon risk zones and elevations determined in a FIS.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than one foot. See BASE FLOOD.
2010 S-10
Flood Damage Prevention 21
REMEDY A VIOLATION. The process by which a community brings a structure or other
development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not
possible, to reduce the impact of non-compliance. Reduced impact may include protecting the structure or
other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the ordinance
or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing state or federal financing exposure with regard
to the structure or other development.
REPAIR. The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing structure.
REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two or more separate
occasions during a ten-year period where the value of damages equals or exceeds an average of 50% of the
current value of the structure, beginning on the date when the damage first occurred, or, four or more flood
losses of $1,000 or more over the life of the structure, or, three or more flood losses over the life of the
structure that are equal to or greater than the current value of the structure.
RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, and
the like.
SECTION 1316. That section of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended, which states
that no new or renewal flood insurance coverage shall be provided for any property that the Administrator
finds has been declared by a duly constituted state or local zoning authority or other authorized public body
to be in violation of state or local laws, regulations, or ordinances that are intended to discourage or
otherwise restrict land development or occupancy in flood-prone areas.
SHEET FLOW AREA. See AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). That portion of the floodplain subject to inundation by
the base flood and/or flood-related erosion hazards as shown on a FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AE, A1 -
A30, AH, AO, or AR.
START OF CONSTRUCTION (includes substantial improvement and other proposed new
development). The date a building permit is issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or other improvement is within 180 days of the permit
date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (including
manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles, construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and
filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a
basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; the installation on the property
of accessory structures, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the structure.
2010 S-10
22 Lebanon - Land Usage
STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; including manufactured
homes, gas or liquid storage tanks, or other man-made facilities or infrastructures. See BUILDING.
SUBDIVISION. Any division, for the purposes of sale, lease, or development, either on the
installment plan or upon any and all other plans, terms and conditions, of any tract or parcel of land into
two or more lots or parcels.
SUBROGATION. An action brought by FEMA to recover insurance money paid out where all or part
of the damage can be attributed to acts or omissions by a community or other third party.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE.
(1) Any damage to a building for which the cost of repairs equals or exceeds 50% of the market
value of the building prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures that are categorized as
repetitive loss.
(2) For the purposes of this definition, Arepair@ is considered to occur when the first repair or
reconstruction of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences.
(3) The term does not apply to:
(a) Any project for improvement of a building required to comply with existing health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the Code Enforcement Official and
which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(b) Any alteration of a Ahistoric structure@ provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure=s continued designation as a Ahistoric structure@.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
(1) Any combination of reconstruction, alteration, or improvement to a building, taking place
during a one-year period in which the cumulative percentage of improvement equals or exceeds 50% of the
current market value of the building. For the purposes of this definition, an improvement occurs when the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
(2) The term does not apply to:
(a) Any project for improvement of a building required to comply with existing health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the Code Enforcement Official and
which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions;
2010 S-10
Flood Damage Prevention 23
(b) Any alteration of a Ahistoric structure@ provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure=s continued designation as a Ahistoric structure@; or
(c) Any building that has been damaged from any source or is categorized as repetitive loss.
SUBSTANTIALLY IMPROVED EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS OR
SUBDIVISIONS. Repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or improvement of the streets, utilities, and pads
equaling or exceeding 50% of the value of the streets, utilities, and pads before the repair, reconstruction, or
improvement commenced.
SUSPENSION. Removal of a participating community from the NFIP for failure to enact and/or
enforce floodplain management regulations required for participation in the NFIP. New or renewal flood
insurance policies are no longer available in suspended communities.
UTILITIES. Includes electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment.
VARIANCE. Relief from some or all of the requirements of this chapter.
VIOLATION. Failure of a structure or other development to fully comply with this chapter. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of
compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is
provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
(NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the
floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other topographic feature on or over
which water flows at least periodically.
WATERSHED. All the area within a geographic boundary from which water, sediments, dissolved
materials, and other transportable materials drain or are carried by water to a common outlet, such as a
point on a larger stream, lake, or underlying aquifer.
X ZONE. The area where the flood hazard is less than that in the SFHA. Shaded X ZONES shown on
recent FIRMs (B zones on older FIRMs) designate areas subject to inundation by the flood with a 0.2%
probability of being equaled or exceeded (the 500-year flood) in any year. Unshaded X ZONES (C zones
on older FIRMS) designate areas where the annual exceedance probability of flooding is less than 0.2%.
ZONE. A geographical area shown on a flood hazard noundary map or a flood insurance rate map that
reflects the severity or type of flooding in the area.
(Ord. 09-09, passed 11-9-09)
2010 S-10
24 Lebanon - Land Usage
' 151.06 LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
This chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas (SFHA), areas applicable to KRS 151.250
and, as determined by the Floodplain Administrator or other delegated, designated, or qualified community
official as determined by the City Council from available technical studies, historical information, and other
available and reliable sources, areas within the jurisdiction of the City Council which may be subject to
periodic inundation by floodwaters that can adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare of
the citizens of Lebanon.
(Ord. 09-09, passed 11-9-09)
' 151.07 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
in the flood insurance study (FIS) for Marion County, dated January 6, 2010, with the accompanying flood
insurance rate maps (FIRMs), other supporting data and any subsequent amendments thereto, are hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of these regulations by the city, and for those land areas
acquired by the city through annexation. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of
applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow
implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the City Council by the Floodplain
Administrator and are enacted by City Council pursuant to statutes governing land use management
regulations. The FIS and/or FIRM are permanent records of the city and are on file and available for review
by the public during regular business hours at Lebanon City Hall.
(Ord. 09-09, passed 11-9-09)
' 151.08 ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
(A) A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provision of this chapter prior to
the commencement of any development activities in the special flood hazard areas (SFHA). See ' 151.26
for instructions and explanation.
(B) Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Floodplain
Administrator.
(Ord. 09-09, passed 11-9-09)
' 151.09 COMPLIANCE.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or structurally altered
without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable state regulations.
2010 S-10
Flood Damage Prevention 24A
Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection
with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the City Council from taking
such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. 09-09, passed 11-9-09)
' 151.10 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction
conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. 09-09, passed 11-9-09)
' 151.11 INTERPRETATION.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
(A) Considered minimum requirements;
(B) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(C) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(Ord. 09-09, passed 11-9-09)
' 151.12 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on
rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free
from flooding or flood damage. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City Council, any
officer or employee, the Commonwealth of Kentucky, the Federal Insurance Administration, or the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or
any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Ord. 09-09, passed 11-9-09)
2010 S-10
24B Lebanon - Land Usage
ADMINISTRATION
' 151.25 DESIGNATION OF LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR.
The City Council of Lebanon hereby appoints the Building Inspector to administer, implement, and
enforce the provisions of this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accordance with its
provisions, and is herein referred to as the Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. 09-09, passed 11-9-09)
' 151.26 ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development begins within
any special flood hazard area established in ' 151.07. Application for a development permit shall be made
on forms furnished by Floodplain Administrator prior to any development activities, and may include, but
not be limited to, the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions,
and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage
facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Endorsement of local administrator is required before a state
floodplain construction permit can be processed. Specifically, the following information is required.
(A) Application stage.
(1) Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level (MSL) of the proposed lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures in Zone A and elevation of highest adjacent grade; or
(2) Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be
flood-proofed;
(3) All appropriate certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect that the
non-residential flood-proofed structure will meet the flood-proofing criteria in '' 151.36(B) and
151.38(B);
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of
proposed development.
(B) Construction stage.
(1) Upon placement of the lowest floor, and before construction continues, or flood proofing by
whatever construction means, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain
Administrator and to the state a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor or flood-proofed
2010 S-10
Flood Damage Prevention 24C
elevation, as built, in relation to mean sea level. In AE, A1-30, AH, and A zones where the community has
adopted a regulatory base flood elevation, the certification shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same.
(2) When flood proofing is utilized for a particular structure, the certification shall be prepared by
or under the direct supervision of a certified professional engineer or architect. Any continued work
undertaken prior to the submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder=s risk. The Floodplain
Administrator shall review the lowest floor and flood proofing elevation survey data submitted.
Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to
further progressive work being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make the
corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.
(Ord. 09-09, passed 11-9-09)
' 151.27 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR.
(A) The Floodplain Administrator and/or staff is hereby appointed, authorized and directed to
administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. The Floodplain Administrator is further
authorized to render interpretations of this chapter, which are consistent with its spirit and purpose by
granting or denying development permits in accordance with its provisions.
(B) The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to
the following:
(1) Permit review. Review all development permits to ensure that:
(a) Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;
(b) All other required state and federal permits have been obtained: advise permittee that
additional federal or state permits may be required, and if specific federal or state permit requirements are
known, require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with the development
permit;
(c) Flood damages will be reduced in the best possible manner; and
(d) The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of affected
watercourses. For purposes of this chapter, Aadversely affects@ means that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase
the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.
(2) Review and use of any other base flood data. When base flood elevation data has not been
provided in accordance with ' 151.07, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably
2010 S-10
24D Lebanon - Land Usage
utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency, or other source,
in order to administer '' 151.35 through 151.41. Any such information shall be submitted to the City
Council for adoption.
(3) Notification of other agencies.
(a) Notify adjacent communities, the Kentucky Division of Water, and any other federal
and/or state agencies with statutory or regulatory authority prior to any alteration or relocation of the
watercourse;
(b) Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); and
(c) Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of the
watercourse is maintained.
(4) Documentation of floodplain development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and
make available as needed the following:
(a) Certification required by ' 151.36(A) (lowest floor elevations) as shown on a completed
and certified elevation certificate. Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of
the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, in accordance with
' 151.26(B);
(b) Certification required by ' 151.36(B) (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential
structures) as shown on a completed and certified floodprooofing certificate. Verify and record the actual
elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the new or substantially improved structures have been
flood-proofed, in accordance with ' 151.26(B);
(c) Certification required by ' 151.36(C) (elevated structures);
(d) Certification of elevation required by ' 151.39(A) (subdivision standards);
(e) Certification required by ' 151.36(E) (floodway encroachments);
(f) Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of the
watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished;
(g) Review certified plans and specifications for compliance;
(h) Remedial action. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in
' 151.99.
2010 S-10
Flood Damage Prevention 24E
(5) Map determinations. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the special flood hazard areas, for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a
mapped boundary and actual field conditions.
(a) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of
special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions) the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation
as provided in ' 151.28(C)(2).
(b) When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance
with ' 151.07, then the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonable utilize any base flood
elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the
provisions of ' ' 151.35 through 151.41.
(c) When flood-proofing is utilized for a particular structure, the Floodplain Administrator
shall obtain certification from a registered professional engineer or architect, in accordance with
' 151.36(B) a floodproofing certificate.
(d) All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of
the Floodplain Administrator and shall be open for public inspection.
(6) Right of entry.
(a) Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this
chapter, or whenever the Administrator has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any structure or
upon any premises any condition or ordinance violation which makes such building, structure or premises
unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the Administrator may enter such building, structure or premises at all
reasonable times to inspect the same or perform any duty imposed upon the Administrator by this chapter.
(b) If such structure or premises are occupied, he or she shall first present proper credentials
and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises are unoccupied, he or she shall first make a
reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such request entry.
(c) If entry is refused, the Administrator shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law
to secure entry.
(d) When the Administrator shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other
remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or
control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein
provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the Administrator for the purpose of inspection and
examination pursuant to this chapter.
2010 S-10
24F Lebanon - Land Usage
(7) Stop work orders. Upon notice from the Administrator, work on any building, structure or
premises that is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall immediately cease. Such notice
shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his or her agent, or to the person
doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed.
(8) Revocation of permits.
(a) The Administrator may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of this
chapter, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the
application or plans on which the permit or approval was based.
(b) The Administrator may revoke a permit upon determination by the Administrator that the
construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation, or replacement of the structure
for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this chapter.
(9) Liability. Any officer, employee, or member of the Floodplain Administrator=s staff, charged
with the enforcement of this chapter, acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his
duties, shall not thereby render himself or herself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal
liability, for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted
in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any officer, employee, or member because of such
act performed by him or her in the enforcement of any provision of this chapter shall be defended by the
department of law until the final termination of the proceedings.
(10) Expiration of floodplain construction permit. A floodplain construction permit, and all
provisions contained therein, shall expire if the holder of a floodplain construction permit has not
commenced construction within 180 calendar days from the date of its issuance by the Floodplain
Administrator.
(Ord. 09-09, passed 11-9-09)
' 151.28 APPEALS AND VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
(A) Nature of variances.
(1) The variance criteria set forth in this section are based on the general principle of zoning law
that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for
a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this
chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The
characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique
characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners.
2010 S-10
Flood Damage Prevention 24G
(2) It is the duty of the City Council to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so
compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level is so serious that
variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare. The
long-term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly
limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple
provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen
out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate.
(B) Designation of Variance and Appeal Board. The City Council shall establish an Appeal Board
consisting of the Board of Adjustments.
(C) Duties of Variance and Appeal Board.
(1) The Appeal Board shall hear and decide requests for variances from the requirements of this
chapter and appeals of decisions or determinations made by the Floodplain Administrator in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
(2) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board or any taxpayer may appeal such
decision to the local Circuit Court, as provided in Kentucky Revised Statutes.
(D) Appeals/variance procedures. In passing upon such applications, the Appeal Board shall consider
all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and
the:
(1) Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(2) Danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(3) Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such
damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property;
(4) Importance to the community of the services provided by the proposed facility;
(5) Necessity that the facility be located on a waterfront, in the case of functionally dependent
facility;
(6) Availability of alternative locations which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(7) Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(8) Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management
program for that area;
2010 S-10
24H Lebanon - Land Usage
(9) Safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(10) Expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters
and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(11) Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, water systems, streets,
and bridges.
(E) Conditions for variances. Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this
chapter, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purposes of this chapter.
(1) Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood
levels during the base flood discharge would result.
(2) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the Aminimum
necessary@ to afford relief considering the flood hazard. AMinimum necessary@ means to afford relief with
a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to an
elevation requirement, this means the City Council need not grant permission for the applicant to build at
grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the City
Council believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance.
(3) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the Aminimum
necessary@ to afford relief considering the flood hazard. In the instance of an historical structure, a
determination shall be made that the variance is the minimum necessary to afford relief and not destroy the
historic character and design of the structure.
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to
the applicant (as defined in this chapter); and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood height,
additional threats to public safety, cause extraordinary public expense, create nuisance (as defined
in' 151.05 under APublic safety and nuisance@), cause fraud or victimization of the public (as defined in '
151.05) or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
2010 S-10
Flood Damage Prevention 24I
(5) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the
difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and
stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the
reduced lowest floor elevation.
(6) The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any
variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and the Federal Insurance
Administration (FIA) upon request.
(7) Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed
new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of
division (D)(1) through (D)(11) of this section are satisfied and that the structure or other development is
protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional
threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance.
(F) Variance notification.
(1) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature
of a community official that:
(a) The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood elevation will
result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance
coverage; and
(b) Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. A copy
of the notice shall be recorded by the Floodplain Administrator in the Office of the Lebanon Recorder and
shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.
(2) The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all variance actions, including
justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in the community=s biennial report
submission to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(G) Historic structures. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of Ahistoric
structures@ (see definition) upon determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude
the structure=s continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
(H) No impact certification within the floodway. Variances shall not be issued within any mapped or
designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
(Ord. 09-09, passed 11-9-09)
2010 S-10
24J Lebanon - Land Usage
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
' 151.35 GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
In all special flood hazard areas the following provisions are required:
(A) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy;
(B) Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or fame ties to ground
anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting
wind forces;
(C) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility
equipment resistant to flood damage;
(D) New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that
minimize flood damage;
(E) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air condition equipment, and other service facilities shall
be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components
during conditions of flooding; and if
(F) Within Zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures;
(G) New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration
of flood waters into the system;
(H) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters;
(I) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding;
(J) Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a structure, which is not in compliance
with the provisions of this chapter shall meet the requirements of Anew construction@ as contained in this
chapter; and
2010 S-10
Flood Damage Prevention 24K
(K) Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a structure, which is not in compliance
with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered,
extended, or replaced.
(Ord. 09-09, passed 11-9-09)
' 151.36 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation data have been provided, as set forth in
' 151.07, the following provisions are required:
(A) Residential construction.
(1) New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure (or manufactured
home) shall have the lowest floor; including basement, mechanical equipment, and ductwork elevated no
lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to
elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be
provided in accordance with standards of division (C) of this section.
(a) In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height equal to or
exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least two feet above the highest
adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.
(b) In an A zone, where no technical data has been produced by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, elevated one foot above the base flood elevation, as determined by this community.
The Floodplain Administrator will determine the method by which base flood elevations are determined.
Methods include but are not limited to detailed hydrologic and hydraulic analyses, use of existing data
available from other sources, use of historical data, best supportable and reasonable judgement in the event
no data can be produced. Title 401 KAR (Kentucky Administrative Regulations) Chapter 4, Regulation
060, states as a part of the technical requirements for a state floodplain permit: the applicant shall provide
cross sections for determining floodway boundaries (and thereby base flood elevations) at any proposed
construction site where FEMA maps are not available. All cross sections shall be referenced to mean sea
level and shall have vertical error tolerances of no more than + 0.5 foot. Cross sections elevations shall be
taken at those points which represent significant breaks in slope and at points where hydraulic
characteristics of the base floodplain change. Each cross section shall extend across the entire base
floodplain and shall be in the number and at the locations specified by the cabinet. If necessary to ensure
that significant flood damage will not occur, the cabinet may require additional cross sections or specific
site elevations which extend beyond those needed for making routine regulatory floodway boundary
calculations.
(c) In all other zones, elevated one foot above the base flood elevation.
2010 S-10
24L Lebanon - Land Usage
(2) Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement
shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, and verified by the community building
inspection department to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the
Floodplain Administrator.
(B) Non-residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial, or non-residential structure (including manufactured homes used for non-residential purposes)
shall be elevated to conform with division (A) of this section or together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities:
(1) Be floodproofed below an elevation one foot above the level of the base flood elevation so
that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
(2) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and
effects of buoyancy;
(3) Have the lowest floor, including basement, mechanical equipment, and ductwork, elevated no
lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation;
(4) A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this
subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in ' 151.26(A)(3);
(5) Manufactured homes shall meet the standards in division (D) of this section;
(6) All new construction and substantial improvement with fully enclosed areas below the lowest
floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and
which are subject to flooding, shall be constructed of flood resistant materials below an elevation one foot
above the base flood elevation, and, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Opening sizes (FEMA Technical Bulletin
1-93) for meeting this requirement must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(a) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or
(b) Have a minimum of two openings with a total net area of not less than one square inch
for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher
than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or
devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater.
(C) Elevated structures. New construction or substantial improvements of elevated structures on
columns, posts, or pilings (e.g.) that include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other
2010 S-10
Flood Damage Prevention 24M
exterior walls below the base flood elevation shall be designed to preclude finished living space and
designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls.
(1) Opening sizes for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional
engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria:
(a) Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square
inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above foundation interior
grade (which must be equal to in elevation or higher than the exterior foundation grade); and
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices
provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions.
(2) Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles
(garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard
exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator); and
(3) The interior portion of such enclosed areas shall not be partitioned or finished into separate
rooms.
(D) Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
(1) All new or substantially improved manufactured homes placed on sites located within A,
A1-30, AO, AH, and AE on the community=s flood insurance rate map (FIRM) must meet all the
requirements for new construction, including elevation and anchoring. Locations include:
(a) On individual lots or parcels;
(b) In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions;
(c) In new manufactured home parks or subdivisions;
(d) In substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions;
(e) Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; and
(f) In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site upon which a
manufactured home has incurred Asubstantial damage@ as the result of a flood.
2010 S-10
24N Lebanon - Land Usage
(2) All manufactured homes must be:
(a) Elevated on a permanent foundation;
(b) Have its lowest floor elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood
elevation; and
(c) Be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse and lateral movement.
(3) Except manufactured homes that have incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood, all
manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision must be elevated so that the manufactured home is securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement, so that either the:
(a) The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the
level of the base flood elevation; or
(b) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation
elements of at least an equivalent strength, of no less than 36 inches in height above the highest adjacent
grade.
(4) All recreational vehicles placed on sites located within A, A1-30, AO, AH, and AE on the
community=s flood insurance rate map (FIRM) must either:
(a) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(c) Meet the permit requirements for new construction of this chapter, including anchoring
and elevation requirements for Amanufactured homes@.
(5) A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed and insured in accordance with
the State of Kentucky motor vehicle regulations, is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site
only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
(E) Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in ' 151.07 are areas
designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood
waters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and has erosion potential, the following provisions shall
apply.
2010 S-10
Flood Damage Prevention 24O
(1) Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other
developments unless certification (with supporting technical data) by a registered professional engineer is
provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in the base flood elevation
levels during occurrence of base flood discharge.
(2) If this division (E) is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements and other
proposed new development shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of
'' 151.35 through 151.41.
(Ord. 09-09, passed 11-9-09)
' 151.37 STANDARDS FOR STREAMS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD
ELEVATION (UNNUMBERED A ZONES) AND/OR FLOODWAYS.
Located within the special flood hazard areas established in ' 151.07, where streams exist but where
no base flood data has been provided or where base flood data has been provided without floodways, the
following provisions apply:
(A) No encroachments, including fill material or structures shall be located within special flood hazard
areas, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point
within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms
to standard hydraulic engineering principles.
(B) New construction or substantial improvements of structures shall be elevated or flood proofed to
elevations established in accordance with ' 151.07.
(Ord. 09-09, passed 11-9-09)
' 151.38 STANDARDS FOR SHALLOW FLOODING ZONES.
Located within the special flood hazard areas established in ' 151.07, are areas designated as shallow
flooding areas. These areas have flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet,
where a clearly defined channel does not exist and the water path of flooding is unpredictable and
indeterminate; therefore, the following provisions apply:
(A) All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated to or above either the base flood elevation or in Zone AO the flood
depth specified on the flood insurance rate map above the highest adjacent grade. In Zone AO, if no flood
depth is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated no less than two feet above the
highest adjacent grade.
2010 S-10
24P Lebanon - Land Usage
(B) All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures shall:
(1) Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above either the base flood elevation
or in Zone AO the flood depth specified on the flood insurance rate map, above the highest adjacent grade.
In Zone AO, if no flood depth is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated no less
than two feet above the highest adjacent grade.
(2) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be completely floodproofed either to the
base flood elevation or above or, in Zone AO, to or above the specified flood depth plus a minimum of one
foot so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads
and effects of buoyancy. Certification is required as stated in ' 151.36(B).
(Ord. 09-09, passed 11-9-09)
' 151.39 STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.
(A) All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard area and the elevation of the
base flood and be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
(B) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
(C) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
(D) In areas where base flood elevation and floodway data is not available (Zone A or unmapped
streams), base flood elevation and floodway data for subdivision proposals and other proposed
development (including manufactured home parks and subdivisions) greater than 50 lots or five acres,
whichever is the lesser, shall be provided.
(E) All subdivision plans will include the elevation of proposed structure(s) and lowest adjacent grade.
If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the lowest floor and lowest adjacent grade elevations
shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the Floodplain
Administrator.
(Ord. 09-09, passed 11-9-09)
' 151.40 STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY STRUCTURES IN ALL ZONES BEGINNING
WITH THE LETTER >A=.
For all accessory structures in special flood hazard areas designated >A= the following provisions shall
apply:
2010 S-10
Flood Damage Prevention 24Q
(A) Structure must be non-habitable;
(B) Must be anchored to resist floatation forces;
(C) Will require flood openings/vents no more than one foot above grade, total openings are to be one
square inch per one square foot of floor area, at least two openings required on opposite walls;
(D) Built of flood resistant materials below a level one foot above the base flood elevation;
(E) Must elevate utilities above the base flood elevation;
(F) Can only be used for storage or parking; and
(G) Cannot be modified for a different use after permitting.
(Ord. 09-09, passed 11-9-09)
' 151.41 CRITICAL FACILITIES.
Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible, located outside the limits of the
SFHA (100-year floodplain). Construction of new critical facilities shall not be permissible within the
floodway; however, they may be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is available.
Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the lowest floor elevated one foot or more above
the level of the base flood elevation at the site. Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to
ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to
or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible.
(Ord. 09-09, passed 11-9-09)
' 151.99 PENALTY.
(A) Civil offense. If, at any time, development occurs which is not in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter including obtaining or complying with the terms and conditions of a floodplain construction
permit and any approved modifications, such development shall constitute a civil offense.
(B) Notice of violation. If, at any time, a duly authorized employee or agent of the Floodplain
Administrator has reasonable cause to believe that a person has caused development to occur which is not
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter including obtaining or complying with the terms and
conditions of a floodplain construction permit and any approved modifications thereof, a duly authorized
employee of the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a notice to the person responsible for
2010 S-10
24R Lebanon - Land Usage
the violation and/or the property owner, stating the facts of the offense or violation, the section of this
chapter and/or of the permit violated, when it occurred, how the violation is to be remedied to bring the
development into conformity with this chapter or with the approved permit, and within what period of time
the remedy is to occur, which period of time shall be reasonable and shall be determined by the nature of
the violation and whether or not it creates a nuisance or hazard. The remedy may include an order to stop
work on the development. The notice shall also state that a citation may be forthcoming in the event that
the requested remedies and corrective actions are not taken, which citation will request a civil monetary
fine and shall state the maximum fine which could be imposed. See below.
(C) Notice of citation. If, at any time, a duly authorized employee or agent of the Floodplain
Administrator has reasonable cause to believe that a person has caused development to occur which is not
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter including obtaining or complying with the terms and
conditions of a floodplain construction permit and any approved modifications thereof, a duly authorized
employee of the Floodplain Administrator may issue a citation to the offender stating the violation, prior
notices of violation issued, how the violation is to be remedied to bring the development into conformity
with this chapter or with the approved permit, and within what period of time the remedy is to occur, and
what penalty or penalties are recommended. When a citation is issued, the person to whom the citation is
issued shall respond to the citation within seven days of the date the citation is issued by either carrying out
the remedies and corrections set forth in the citation, paying the civil fine set forth in the citation or
requesting a hearing before the governing body. If the person to whom the citation is issued does not
respond to the citation within seven days, that person shall be deemed to have waived the right to a hearing
and the determination that a violation occurred shall be considered final.
(D) Penalties. Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its
requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with granting of a
variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor civil offense. Any person who violates this
chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined no more than
$500, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Floodplain
Administrator from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. 09-09, passed 11-9-09)
2010 S-10
CHAPTER 152: UNFIT DWELLINGS
[This chapter is reserved for future legislation]
25
26 Lebanon - Land Usage
CHAPTER 153: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
153.01 Purpose
153.02 Authority and jurisdiction
153.03 Definitions
153.04 Advisory meeting with Planning Commission
General Requirements and Minimum Design Standards
153.10 General
153.11 Streets
153.12 Blocks
153.13 Lots
153.14 Off-street loading and parking facilities
153.15 Easements
153.16 Public sites and open spaces
Preliminary Plat Approval
153.20 Preliminary plat data
153.21 Procedure
Required Improvements Prerequisite to Final Approval
153.30 General
153.31 Monuments
153.32 Streets
153.33 Utilities
153.34 Street name signs
153.35 Completion of improvements prior to approval of final plat
Final Plat Approval
153.40 General
153.41 Final plat data
153.42 Procedure
27
28 Lebanon - Land Usage
Variances
153.50 Exceptional conditions
153.51 Group housing developments
153.52 Procedural variance
153.98 Enforcement
153.99 Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
' 153.01 PURPOSE.
(A) Once land has been divided into streets, blocks, lots and open spaces, a pattern has been developed
which may determine how well community needs for residence, business and industry are to be met. It will
also determine how the city can handle its traffic problems, its need for home sites, and how economically
it can provide the many services demanded of it. The guidance of this development in harmony with
community objectives is, therefore, a matter of serious public concern.
(B) The Major Street Plan, of which certified copies were filed in the office of the County Clerk of
Marion County, Kentucky on and the following regulations are designed to provide for the
proper arrangements of streets, for adequate and convenient open spaces for traffic, utilities, access of fire
fighting apparatus, recreation, light and air, for the avoidance of congestion of population, including
minimum width and area of lots, and for adequate provisions of water, drainage, sewer, and other sanitary
facilities.
(Ord. passed 1-21-97)
' 153.02 AUTHORITY AND JURISDICTION.
(A) These subdivision regulations are adopted under the authority granted by the KRS '' 100.720
through 100.780. The Planning Commission, established under the KRS '' 100.610 through 100.630, has
fulfilled the requirements set forth in these acts as a prerequisite to the adoption of such regulations.
(B) The regulations shall govern all subdivision of land within corporate limits of the city as now or
hereafter established, and within the unincorporated area for which a Major Street Plan has been adopted;
provided, however, that the jurisdiction of the Planning Commission shall not extend more than three miles
beyond the corporate limits of the City. Any owner of land within this area wishing to subdivide land shall
submit to the Lebanon Planning Commission a plat of the subdivision according to requirements outlined in
these regulations.
(Ord. passed 1-21-97)
Subdivision Regulations 29
' 153.03 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, which shall be known and may be cited as ASubdivision Regulations of
Lebanon, Kentucky,@ certain words used herein are defined as follows:
ALLEYS. Minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or the side of
properties otherwise abutting on a street.
PAVE. To cover or surface with bituminous base and asphalt or concrete to city specifications.
STREET. A way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway,
throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, or otherwise designated.
ARTERIAL STREETS AND HIGHWAYS. Those streets which will be used primarily for high
vehicular speeds or heavy volumes of traffic.
COLLECTOR STREETS. Those streets which will carry intermediate volumes of traffic from
minor to arterial streets.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS. Minor streets which are parallel to and adjacent to arterial
streets and highways, and which reduce the number of access points to the arterial street for the purpose of
increased traffic safety.
MINOR STREETS. Those streets which are used primarily for access to the abutting properties
and which will carry limited volumes of traffic.
SUBDIVISION. The division of a tract of land into two or more divisions for the purpose, whether
immediate of future, of sale or of building development, and includes resubdivision; provided that a
division of land for agricultural purposes into lots or parcels of five acres or more and not involving a new
street shall not be deemed a subdivision. The term when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the
process of subdividing or to the land subdivided.
(Ord. passed 1-21-97)
' 153.04 ADVISORY MEETING WITH PLANNING COMMISSION.
(A) Previous to the filing of an application for conditional approval of the preliminary plat, the
subdivider should meet with the Planning Commission for the purpose of ascertaining the location of
proposed major streets, parks, playgrounds, school sites, and other planned projects which may affect the
property being considered for subdivision.
(B) The subdivider may review with the Planning Commission the minimum standards of design for
the subdivision as specified in '' 153.10 through 153.16. Such informal review should prevent
unnecessary and costly revisions.
30 Lebanon - Land Usage
(C) This step does not require formal application, or filing of a plat with the Planning Commission.
(Ord. passed 1-21-97)
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS
' 153.10 GENERAL.
The subdivider shall comply with the principles of design contained in this subchapter in the layout of
the subdivision.
(Ord. passed 1-21-97)
' 153.11 STREETS.
(A) Conformity to the Major Street Plan. The location of all streets in a proposed subdivision shall
conform in general alignment to the Major Street Plan.
(B) Street extensions.
(1) The proposed street layout shall provide for the continuation or projection of existing streets
in the surrounding area unless the Planning Commission deems such extension undesirable for specific
reasons of topography or design.
(2) Where it is desirable in the opinion of the Planning Commission to provide street access to
adjoining property, proposed streets shall be extended by dedication to the boundary of such property.
(C) Dedication of right-of-way; new streets.
(1) For streets within the corporate limits of the city. the dedication of right-of-way, measured
from lot line to lot line, for new streets shall be as shown on the Major Street Plan, or if not shown thereon,
shall meet the following standards:
Street Type
Minimum Dedicated Right-of-Way Width
Arterial
80 feet*
Collector
60 feet
Minor
50 feet
Subdivision Regulations 31
Street Type
Minimum Dedicated Right-of-Way Width
Marginal Access
50 feet
Alley
20 feet
* The Major Street Plan may indicate greater right-of-way widths for certain arterial streets,
but in no case shall the subdivider be required to dedicate more than 80 feet for any one street.
(2) For streets outside the corporate limits of the city, the minimum dedication of right-of-way for
new streets, measured from lot line, shall be 30 feet wide.
(3) Alleys shall not be permitted in residential subdivisions.
(D) Dedication of right-of-way; existing streets. Subdivisions platted along existing streets shall
dedicate additional right-of-ways if necessary to meet the minimum width requirements as specified in
division (C) of this section.
(1) The entire minimum right-of-way shall be dedicated if the subdivision is on both sides of the
street.
(2) When the subdivision is located on only one side of an existing street, one-half of the required
right-of-way measured from the center line of the existing roadway shall be dedicated.
(E) Intersections.
(1) Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles.
(2) Street curb intersections shall be rounded by radii of at least 20 feet. When the smallest angle
of intersection is less than 60 degrees, the above minimum radii shall be increased.
(F) Curves in streets; horizontal and vertical.
(1) A tangent of at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves on arterial and
collector streets.
(2) Where a deflection angle is more than 10 degrees in the alignment of a street, a curve with a
radius adequate to insure adequate sight distance shall be made. The minimum radius of curves shall be:
Street Type
Minimum Curve Radius
Arterial and Collector
300 feet
Minor
100 feet
32 Lebanon - Land Usage
(3) All changes in grade for arterial and collector streets shall be connected by a vertical curve of
a minimum length equal to 20 times the algebraic difference in the rates of grade; the length of curve for all
other streets shall be 10 times the algebraic difference in the rates of grade.
(G) Street grades.
(1) Street grades shall not exceed the following:
Street Type
Percent Grade
Arterial
5
Collector
7
Minor
12
(2) For adequate drainage, the minimum street grade shall be not less than 0.5%.
(H) Marginal access streets. Where a subdivision adjoins or contains an existing or proposed arterial
highway on which traffic volumes and vehicular speeds warrant special safety considerations, the Planning
Commission may require marginal access streets.
(I) Street jogs. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall not be made. Street jogs
in arterial streets shall not be allowed.
(J) Dead-end streets. Dead-end streets, designed to be so permanently, shall not be longer than 500
feet and shall be provided at the closed end with a turn-around having a radius at the outside of the
pavement of at least 40 feet, and a radius at the outside of the right-of-way of at least 50 feet.
(K) Street names. When streets are not in alignment, no names shall be used that will duplicate or be
confused with the names of existing streets. Proposed streets in alignment with existing streets shall bear
the names of these streets.
(L) Private streets and reserve strips.
(1) There shall be no private streets platted within a subdivision.
(2) There shall be no reserve strips except where their control is definitely placed in the city or
county under conditions approved by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. passed 1-21-97)
Subdivision Regulations 33
' 153.12 BLOCKS.
(A) Length. Block lengths shall not exceed 1200 feet, or be less than 300 feet.
(B) Double-fronted lots. Double-fronted lots shall be prohibited unless the lots are more than 300 feet
in depth.
(Ord. passed 1-21-97)
' 153.13 LOTS.
(A) Relation to streets. All lots shall front upon a paved public street or paved public road, except lots
which front upon an officially maintained county gravel road, which is at the time of enactment of this
chapter, on the county road maintenance map.
(B) Arrangement. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to straight street lines or radial to
curved street lines.
(C) Dimensions. Lot dimensions shall conform to the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance (Chapter
154) or to the requirements of this chapter, whichever is most restrictive. The minimum area and yard
requirements are as follows:
(1) Residential lots not served by public sewer shall be at least 100 feet wide and 30,000 square
feet in area. Except in the county, lots on a cul-de-sac shall be at least 60 feet wide at the right-of-way and
be 100 feet wide at the minimum 30 feet building setback line.
(2) Residential lots served by public sewer shall be at least 50 feet wide and 7,500 square feet in
area. Except in the city, lots on a cul-de-sac shall be at least 30 feet wide at the right-of-way and comply
with the applicable zoning requirements for that zone at the building setback line.
(3) A greater area than specified above may be required for residential lots, if, in the opinion of
the city (or county) Health Officer, there are factors of drainage, soil condition, or other conditions to cause
potential health hazards.
(4) Principal buildings on all residential lots shall have a side yard on each side of not less than
eight feet. Accessory buildings on all residential lots shall have a side yard on each side of not less than five
feet.
(5) The ratio of lot width to depth shall not be greater than one to five.
(D) Building setback line. The minimum building setback line from the right-of-way shall be at least
2 of the total width of the street right-or-way on which the building fronts. In no case shall this distance be
less than 30 feet.
34 Lebanon - Land Usage
(E) Corner lots. Corner lots shall have sufficient extra width to meet the minimum building setback
line established on each street.
(F) Flood hazard.
(1) In areas subject to flooding conditions, subdivisions will be permitted only if flood-free
housing sites can be provided.
(2) The Planning Commission may require special provisions and controls to assure healthful,
safe housing sites in such areas.
(Ord. passed 1-21-97)
' 153.14 OFF-STREET LOADING AND PARKING FACILITIES.
In commercial and industrial subdivisions, space for adequate off-street loading and parking to meet
the needs of the proposed use shall be reserved and shall not be used for building purposes. Where deemed
necessary by the Planning Commission, alleys shall be provided for service access.
(Ord. passed 1-21-97)
' 153.15 EASEMENTS.
(A) Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided where necessary for
utilities and shall be at least 12 feet wide. Above ground utilities shall be located within such easements
where possible.
(B) A storm water easement or drainage right-of-way may be required by the Planning Commission
where necessary for proper drainage within or through a subdivision.
(Ord. passed 1-21-97)
' 153.16 PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES.
(A) Where a proposed park, playground, school site, or other public use is indicated on the city=s
master plan or any part thereof is located completely in a subdivision, the Planning Commission may
require the reservation of such area as may be deemed reasonable by the Planning Commission for a period
of one year, from the date of approval of final subdivision plat by the Planning Commission, during which
time the affected public agency may acquire the reserved area in a manner which is agreed upon between
the agency involved and the owner.
(B) After the one year period has elapsed, if the public agency affected has not acquired such land area
or arranged with the owner for an extension of such period, the owner may dispose of the property in
conformance with law.
(Ord. passed 1-21-97)
Subdivision Regulations 35
PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL
' 153.20 PRELIMINARY PLAT DATA.
(A) After meeting informally with the Planning Commission as recommended in ' 153.04, the
subdivider shall cause to be prepared a preliminary plat prior to the making of any street improvements or
installation if any utilities.
(B) The preliminary plat shall meet the standards of design as set forth in '' 153.10 through 153.16
and shall give the following information:
(1) Scale of 300 feet to one inch or larger if computer generated plat; otherwise, scale of 100 feet
to one inch if hand drawn plat. Paper size to be no larger than 24" x 36".
(2) Name of subdivision, names and addresses of the owner, the engineer or surveyor, and owners
of adjacent property.
(3) Date, approximate north point, and graphic scale.
(4) Acreage of land to be subdivided.
(5) Contours at an interval of not greater than five feet, or lesser interval if deemed necessary by
the Planning Commission.
(6) Boundary lines of area to be subdivided and their bearings and distances.
(7) Existing and proposed easements and their location, width, and distances.
(8) Streets on and adjacent to the tract and their names, widths, approximate grades, and other
dimensions as may be required.
(9) Utilities on and adjacent to the tract showing proposed connections to existing utility systems.
(10) Lot lines and lot numbers.
(11) Sites and their acreages, if any, to be reserved or dedicated for parks, playgrounds, or other
public uses. Sites, if any, for semipublic, commercial or multi-family uses.
(12) Minimum building setback lines.
(Ord. passed 1-21-97)
36 Lebanon - Land Usage
' 153.21 PROCEDURE.
(A) Fifteen copies of the preliminary plat and supplementary material specified shall be submitted to
the Chairman of the Planning Commission with a written application for conditional approval at least ten
days prior to the hearing at which it is to be considered.
(B) The Chairman or Secretary of the Planning Commission shall notify the subdivider by mail of the
time and place of the hearing, not less than five days before the date fixed for the hearing. Similar notice
shall be mailed to the owners of land immediately adjoining the area proposed to be platted as shown on the
proposed subdivision.
(C) Copies of the preliminary plat shall be forwarded by the Planning Commission prior to the hearing
to the following persons:
(1) City Engineer or Building Inspector;
(2) City (or County) Health Officer; and
(3) Such other municipal, county or state official as directed by the Planning Commission.
(D) Within 30 days after the hearing on the preliminary plat, the Planning Commission shall approve,
disapprove, or approve subject to modifications to the plat. Failure of the Planning Commission to act on
this preliminary plat within 30 days shall be deemed approval of the plat. If a plat is disapproved, reasons
for such disapproval will be stated in writing. If approved subject to modifications, the nature of the
required modifications shall be indicated in writing.
(E) The action of the Planning Commission shall be noted on two copies of the preliminary plat with
any notations made at the time of approval or disapproval of the specific changes required. One copy shall
be returned to the subdivider and the other retained by the Planning Commission.
(F) Approval of the preliminary plat shall not constitute acceptance of the final plat.
(G) The approval of the preliminary plat shall lapse unless a final plat based thereon is submitted
within one year from the date of such approval. An extension of time may be applied for and granted by the
Planning Commission. (Ord. passed 1-21-97)
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS PREREQUISITE TO FINAL APPROVAL
' 153.30 GENERAL.
The following improvements in this subchapter are required, as specified, before final approval may be
granted by the Planning Commission. The subdivider shall grade, provide a base and permanent hard
surface approved to the Planning Commission according to specifications approved by
Subdivision Regulations 37
the city for streets and alleys, install curbs, gutters, and sidewalks, monuments, sewers, storm drainage, and
water mains in accordance with any additional specifications of the City Engineer, City (or County) Health
Officer, or other city official having jurisdiction. Such specifications shall equal those that have been
adopted by the city.
(Ord. passed 1-21-97)
' 153.31 MONUMENTS.
(A) Steel pin monuments 12 inch or larger in diameter and 18 inches long or longer, with a suitable
registered land surveyors identifier, shall be placed at all points on boundary lines where there is a change
of direction and at all corners.
(B) Steel pin monuments 12 inch or larger in diameter and 18 inches long or longer located at all
street intersections shall be encased in concrete four inches or larger in diameter and 12 deep.
(C) Steel pins located at all street intersections shall be encased in concrete.
(Ord. passed 1-21-97)
' 153.32 STREETS.
(A) Minimum pavement widths. Widths shall be measured between curbs and shall be as follows:
(1) Within the corporate limits of the city:
Street Type
Minimum Pavement Width
Arterial streets (separated pavement each)
36 feet*
Collector streets
26 feet
Minor streets
22 feet
Marginal access streets
18 feet
Alleys, industrial or commercial
18 feet
* The subdivider will not be required to grade or provide a pavement base or surface in excess
of that required for collector streets since such additional construction is required for the
benefit of the general public. The Planning Commission will recommend that the city (or
county) bear the extra expense of constructing the street to meet arterial street standards.
(2) Outside the corporate limits of Lebanon, the minimum pavement width shall be 18 feet.
38 Lebanon - Land Usage
(B) Curbs and gutters. The Planning Commission may waive the requirements of curbs and gutters, if
they are not deemed necessary for the proper drainage of storm water and where all lots have a width of 80
feet or more.
(C) Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall have a minimum width of four feet and shall be required on both sides
of streets in all subdivisions. The Planning Commission may waive the requirements of sidewalks where all
lots have a width of 80 feet or more. In any case, sidewalks shall be constructed on all collector and arterial
streets.
(Ord. passed 1-21-97)
' 153.33 UTILITIES.
(A) Water supply system. Where public water supply, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, is
reasonably accessible, the subdivider shall construct a complete water distribution system, including a
connection for each lot and appropriately spaced fire hydrants - maximum distance of 500 feet in residential
areas and 300 feet in commercial areas; or with an alternate supply approved by the city (or county) Health
Officer where public water supply is not within a reasonable distance. The Planning Commission may
waive the requirements of a complete water distribution system when the system is placed in the rear or
side lot easement. Before each lot is sold, however, the water system must be made available to that
building including connection.
(B) Sanitary sewers.
(1) Where the public sanitary sewer system, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, is
reasonably accessible, sanitary sewers shall be installed by the subdivider to adequately serve all lots with
connections to the public system after approval of the size of the lines by the City Engineer. Where lots
cannot be served by the extension of an existing public sanitary sewer, the subdivider shall obtain approval
of lot sizes from the city (or county) Health Officer for individual septic tanks and disposal fields, or
approval of a neighborhood disposal system. The Planning Commission may waive the requirements of a
complete sanitary sewer system when the system is placed in the rear or side lot easement. Before each lot
is sold, however, the sanitary sewer system must be made available to that building, including connection.
All sanitary sewer extensions shall conform to the city Sewer Use Ordinance (Chapter 51).
(2) All lots five acres or less shall have an on-site evaluation performed before approval of final
plat, a copy of which shall be attached to plat.
(C) Storm drainage. Adequate provisions for storm water drainage shall be provided in accordance
with standards specified by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. passed 1-21-97)
Subdivision Regulations 39
' 153.34 STREET NAME SIGNS.
The Planning Commission shall require the installation of street signs at all intersections. In the case of
street signs in the county, the county street signs must conform to the specifications of street signs installed
in the city.
(Ord. passed 1-21-97)
' 153.35 COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS PRIOR TO APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT.
(A) Approval of improvements. No final plat shall be approved by the Planning Commission or
accepted for record by the County Clerk until the improvements listed are constructed and approved by the
appropriate city officials having jurisdiction.
(B) Security bond or certified check. In lieu of such prior construction, the Planning Commission may
accept a performance bond, certified check, first mortgage or other security acceptable to the Commission
for 22 times the amount needed to cover the estimated cost as shown on a firm bid for the required
improvements. The collateral shall be subject to the condition that the improvements will be completed
within one year after approval of the final plat and may be forfeited in the event of non-completion.
(Ord. passed 1-21-97)
FINAL PLAT APPROVAL
' 153.40 GENERAL.
The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved, and it may constitute
only a portion of the preliminary plat which the subdivider proposed to record and develop.
(Ord. passed 1-21-97)
' 153.41 FINAL PLAT DATA.
The final plat shall contain the following:
(A) The plat shall be at a scale of 300 feet to one inch or larger if computer generated plat; otherwise at
a scale of 100 feet to one inch if hand drawn plat. Paper size will be no larger than 24" X 36".
(B) Date, title, name and location of subdivision, graphic scale and true north line/magnetic north line.
40 Lebanon - Land Usage
(C) All dimensions, angles, bearings and similar data on the plat be tied to primary control points as
approved by the City Engineer. Location and description of said control points shall be given.
(D) Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, easements and other right-of-way, and property
lines of residential lots and other sides with accurate dimensions to the nearest one hundredth of a foot;
bearings or deflection angles, radii, arcs, and central angles of all curves with dimensions to the nearest
minute.
(E) Name and right-of-way width of each street, easement or other right-of-way.
(F) Lot numbers.
(G) Purpose for which sites, other than residential lots, are dedicated or reserved.
(H) Minimum building setback lines.
(I) Location and description of monuments.
(J) Names and locations of adjoining subdivisions and streets, and the names and addressed and
location of adjoining unplatted property.
(K) Certification on plat of title showing that applicant is the owner and a statement by such owner
dedicating streets, right-of-ways and other sites for public use (Form 1).
(L) Certification on plat by surveyor or engineer as to the accuracy of survey and plat (Form 2).
(M) Certification by the city (or county) Health Officer when individual sewage disposal or water
systems are to be installed (Form 3 attached to plat).
(N) Certification by City Engineer (Form 4 attached to plat) that the subdivider has complied with one
of the following alternatives:
(1) All the improvements have been installed in accord with the requirements of these
regulations; or
(2) A performance bond, certified check, first mortgage or other security approved by the
Planning Commission has been posted with the City legislative body for 22 times the amount of firm bid to
assure such completion of all required improvements.
(O) Cross-sections, profiles and grades of streets, curbs, gutters and sidewalks showing location of
in-street utilities or in-easement utilities, and drawn to city standard scales and elevations shall be attached
to the final plat.
(P) Protective covenants shall either be placed directly on the final plat or attached thereto in form for
recording.
Subdivision Regulations 41
(Q) Certification on plat by the Chairman of the Planning Commission that the plat has been approved
for recording in the office of the County Clerk (Form 5).
(Ord. passed 1-21-97)
' 153.42 PROCEDURE.
(A) Fifteen original copies together with any street profiles or other plans that may be required shall be
submitted to the Chairman of the Planning Commission by the subdivider at least 10 days prior to the
meeting at which it is to be reviewed.
(B) One copy of the final plat shall be transmitted to the City Engineer who will check said plat as to
computations, certification, monuments, etc., and that all the required improvements have been completed
to the satisfaction of the city officials having jurisdiction, or, in case a security bond or certified check has
been posted in lieu of completing said improvement, that the amount posted is sufficient to cover the cost
of the required improvements. If found satisfactory, he will return the copy of the final plat to the Planning
Commission with his approval certified thereon within 10 days of receipt thereof.
(C) One copy shall be transmitted to the city (or county) Health Officer when individual sewage
disposal or water supply systems are to be installed. If the plat meets the approval of the Health Officer, he
shall return the copy with his approval certified thereon within 10 days of receipt thereof.
(D) Within 30 days after the review of the final plat, the Planning Commission shall approve or
disapprove the said Plat. Failure of the Planning Commission to act on this final plat within 30 days shall
be deemed approval of the plat. If the plat is disapproved, the grounds for disapproval shall be stated in the
records of the Planning Commission.
(E) Approval of the Planning Commission shall not constitute the acceptance by the public of the
dedication of any streets or other public way or ground.
(F) When the final plat has been approved by the Planning Commission, one copy shall be returned to
the subdivider, with the approval of the Planning Commission certified thereon, for filing with the County
Clerk as an official plat of record; the original tracing with the certification of the Planning Commission
shall also be returned to the subdivider; another copy certified by the Planning Commission will be
transmitted to the city legislative body for necessary action on any proposed dedication.
(Ord. passed 1-21-97)
42 Lebanon - Land Usage
VARIANCES
' 153.50 EXCEPTIONAL CONDITIONS.
The Planning Commission may grant a variance to these regulations whereby reason of the exceptional
shape of a specified piece of property, or whereby reason of exceptional topographic conditions, the strict
application of these regulations would result in extreme practical difficulties and undue hardship upon the
owner of such property; provided, however, that such relief may be granted without detriment to the public
good and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of these regulations. In granting such
variances or modifications, the Planning Commission may require such conditions as will substantially
secure the objectives of the standards or requirements so varied or modified. Financial disadvantage to the
property owner is no proof of hardship within the purpose of these regulations.
(Ord. passed 1-21-97)
' 153.51 GROUP HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS.
A comprehensive group housing development, including the large scale construction of housing units
together with necessary drives and ways of access may be approved by the Planning Commission although
the design of the project does not include standard street, lot and subdivision arrangements; provided that
departure from the standards of these regulations can be made without destroying their intent.
(Ord. passed 1-21-97)
' 153.52 PROCEDURAL VARIANCE.
Where a proposed subdivision would contain five or less parcels or plots of land and no new streets,
the procedure of preparing a preliminary plat may be waived by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. passed 1-21-97)
' 153.98 ENFORCEMENT.
(A) No plat or plan of a subdivision of land located within the jurisdiction of the Planning
Commission shall be admitted to the records of Marion County or received or recorded by the County Clerk
until said plat has received final approval in writing by the Planning Commission as provided in KRS
100.730.
Subdivision Regulations 43
(B) No board, public officer, or authority shall accept, lay out, improve, or authorize utilities to be laid
in any street within the territory for which the Planning Commission has adopted a Major Street Plan unless
the street has received a legal status of a public street prior to the adoption of the Major Street Plan; or
unless a street corresponds with a street shown on the Major Street Plan; or unless a street on a subdivision
plat or a street plat has been approved by the Planning Commission as provided in KRS Chapter
100.760(1).
(C) After adoption of the Major Street Plan by the Planning Commission, no building shall be erected
or building permit issued within such territory unless the requirements as provided in KRS 100.760 have
been fulfilled. If any building is erected in violation of these regulations, the building inspector or other
appropriate official may cause the building to be vacated or removed as provided in KRS 100.770.
(Ord. passed 1-21-97)
' 153.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any County Clerk, who receives, files or records a plat in violation of the provisions of these
regulations shall be fined not less than $100 or more than $500 as provided in KRS 100.990(5).
(B) Any person who transfers or negotiates to transfer any lot in a subdivision before the plat of said
subdivision has been approved by the Planning Commission and recorded in the County Clerk=s office, or
attempts the description of land by metes and bounds in violation of these regulations, shall pay the city a
penalty of $100 for each parcel of land so transferred as provided in KRS 100.990(6). The city may, by
action in the Circuit Court, enjoin the transfer or agreement to transfer land as provided in KRS 100.980(4).
(Ord. passed 1-21-97)
44 Lebanon - Land Usage
CHAPTER 154: ZONING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
154.001 Title
154.002 Authority
154.003 Purpose
154.004 Jurisdiction
154.005 Zoning affects every structure or use
154.006 Interpretation
154.007 Coordination with subdivision regulations
154.008 Conflict with subdivision regulations and other laws, regulations and rules
154.009 Conflict with ordinance, private covenants, and deeds
154.010 Separability
154.011 Transitional provisions
Definitions
154.020 General provisions
154.021 Definitions
Review Bodies
154.035 Lebanon Planning Commission and Administrative Official
154.036 Lebanon Board of Adjustments
154.037 Building Inspector
154.038 Historic Preservation Board
154.039 Legislative body - Lebanon City Council
Zoning Districts
154.050 Establishment of districts
154.051 Official zoning map
General Use Regulations
154.065 Uses
154.066 General development requirements and standards
45
2006 S-7
46 Lebanon - Land Usage
154.067 Sinkholes
154.068 Flood plains
Agriculture District (A)
154.080 Purpose and intent
154.081 Uses
154.082 Permitted residential unit types
154.083 Property development standards
154.084 Signage
154.085 Off-street parking and loading/unloading
Single Family Residential District (R-1)
154.100 Purpose and intent
154.101 Uses
154.102 Permitted residential unit types
154.103 Permitted overlay districts
154.104 R-1 property development standards
154.105 Signage
154.106 Off-street parking and loading/unloading
Two- to Four-Family Residential District (R-2)
154.120 Purpose and intent
154.121 Uses
154.122 Permitted residential unit types
154.123 Permitted overlay districts
154.124 R-2 property development standards
154.125 Signage
154.126 Off-street parking and loading/unloading
Multi-Family Residential District (R-3)
154.140 Purpose and intent
154.141 Uses
154.142 Permitted residential unit types
154.143 Permitted overlay districts
154.144 R-3 Property development standards
154.145 Signage
154.146 Off-street parking and loading/unloading
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 47
Mobile Home Park District (MHP)
154.160 Purpose and intent
154.161 Uses
154.162 MHP property development standards
Central Business District (B-1)
154.175 Purpose and intent
154.176 Uses
154.177 Permitted residential unit types
154.178 B-1 property development standards
154.179 Signage
154.180 Off-street parking and loading/unloading
General Business District (B-2)
154.190 Purpose and intent
154.191 Uses
154.192 Permitted residential unit types
154.193 B-2 property development standards
154.194 Signage
154.195 Off-street parking and loading and unloading
154.196 Buffering
Highway Business District (B-3)
154.210 Purpose and intent
154.211 Uses
154.212 Permitted residential unit types
154.213 B-3 property development standards
154.214 Signage
154.215 Off-street parking and loading/unloading
154.216 Buffering
Office and Professional District (OP)
154.230 Purpose and intent
154.231 Uses
154.232 OP property development standards
154.233 Signage
154.234 Off-street parking and loading/unloading
154.235 Buffering
2006 S-7
48 Lebanon - Land Usage
Light Industrial District (I-1)
154.245 Purpose and intent
154.246 Uses
154.247 I-1 property development standards
154.248 Signage
154.249 Off-street parking and loading/unloading
154.250 Performance standards
Heavy Industrial District (I-2)
154.260 Purpose and intent
154.261 Uses
154.262 I-2 property development standards
154.263 Signage
154.264 Off-street parking and loading/unloading
154.265 Performance standards
Public District (P)
154.275 Purpose and intent
154.276 Uses
154.277 P property development standards
154.278 Signage
154.279 Off-street parking and loading/unloading
Planned Unit Development (PUD)
154.290 Purpose and intent
154.291 Applicability
154.292 Standards
154.293 Designation procedures
Residential Cluster Development (RCD) Overlay District
154.305 Purpose and intent
154.306 General
154.307 Application and processing
154.308 Residential uses and densities
154.309 Public and semi-public uses
154.310 Area requirements
154.311 Height, yard and setback requirements
154.312 Off-street parking and loading and/or unloading area
154.313 Fences, walls and signs
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 49
154.314 Common open safe/recreation areas
154.315 Utilities
154.316 Amendments
154.317 Expiration
Historic Overlay District (H)
154.330 Purpose and intent
154.331 Lebanon Historic Preservation Board
154.332 National register of historic places nominations
154.333 Designation of landmarks and historic districts
154.334 Certificates of appropriateness (COAs)
154.335 Emergency conditions and demolition by neglect
Manufactured and Mobile Home Standards
154.345 Purpose and intent
154.346 Standards
154.347 Permitted placement of mobile homes
154.348 Permits
Cellular Antenna Towers and Telecommunications Services Standards
154.360 Purpose and intent
154.361 General
154.362 Applicability
154.363 Application requirements
154.364 Application process
154.365 Design standards
154.366 Criteria
154.367 Amendments
154.368 Guarantee
Signage Standards
154.380 Purpose and intent
154.381 Definitions
154.382 Signs requiring permit
154.383 General signage regulation
154.384 Exempt signs
154.385 Prohibited permanent and temporary signs
154.386 Permitted permanent signs by zone
154.387 Sign maintenance
2006 S-7
50 Lebanon - Land Usage
154.388 Violations
154.389 Nonconforming signs and advertising structures
154.390 Nonconforming signs
Off-Street And On-Street Parking and Loading/Unloading Standards
154.400 Off-street parking requirements
154.401 Off-street loading/unloading requirements
154.402 On-street parking and loading/unloading
Zoning Ordinance Text and Zoning Map Amendments
154.415 Zoning ordinance and zoning map amendments
154.416 Zoning ordinance text amendment procedures
154.417 Zoning map amendment procedures
Conditional Use Permits, Variances, and Appeals
154.430 Conditional use permits, variances and appeals
154.431 Conditional use permits
154.432 Variances
154.433 Appeals
Noncomformities
154.445 Intent
154.446 Noncomforming structures
154.447 Noncomforming uses of land
154.448 Noncomforming use of structures or structures/premises
154.449 Noncomforming lots of record
154.450 Repairs and maintenance
Fees
154.460 Fee schedule
154.461 Fee payment
Enforcement
154.475 Enforcement officer
154.999 Penalty
Appendix A: Permitted uses
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 51
GENERAL PROVISIONS
' 154.001 TITLE.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the AZoning ordinance of the City of Lebanon,
Kentucky@ or Athis chapter.@ The map referred to herein shall be known as the AZoning Map of Lebanon,
Kentucky,@ or Athe Zoning Map.@
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.002 AUTHORITY.
Kentucky Revised Statutes 100.201 gives legislative bodies and fiscal courts the authority to enact
permanent land use regulations, including zoning and other growth management regulations, to promote
public health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the city. The Lebanon Planning Commission and
Lebanon City Council have fulfilled the regulations set forth as prerequisites to the adoption of this chapter.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.003 PURPOSE.
This chapter sets forth regulations and restrictions upon the erection, construction, alteration, repair or
use of buildings, structures, or land, including height, number of stories, and size of buildings and other
structures, size of yards, courts, and other open spaces, density of population, size and number of vehicular
parking and loading, and location and intensity of use of such buildings, structures, and land for trade,
industry, residence, or other uses in order to:
(A) Promote public health, safety, morals, and general welfare;
(B) Facilitate orderly and harmonious development and the visual or historical character;
(C) Facilitate fire and police protection;
(D) Prevent overcrowding of land, blight, danger, and congestion in the circulation of people and
commodities, and the loss of life, health, or property from fire, flood or other dangers;
(E) Protect airports, highways, and other transportation facilities, public facilities, schools, public
grounds, historical districts, central business districts, prime agricultural land and other natural resources;
(F) Regulate the use of water and wastewater treatment facilities;
(G) Improve soil quality; and,
2006 S-7
52 Lebanon - Land Usage
(H) Protect other specific areas of the city that need special protection by the Lebanon Planning
Commission.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.004 JURISDICTION.
This chapter shall apply to all land and structures within the corporate limits of the city.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.005 ZONING AFFECTS EVERY STRUCTURE OR USE.
No structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure or part thereof shall be erected, moved, or
altered, unless for a use expressly permitted by and in conformity with the regulations herein specified for
the zoning district in which it is located, except that any structure damaged or destroyed may be restored if
such structure does not involve a nonconforming use.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.006 INTERPRETATION.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum
requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.007 COORDINATION WITH SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS.
In all cases, the provisions of the Lebanon Subdivision Regulations and amendments thereto shall
apply in addition to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.008 CONFLICT WITH SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS AND OTHER LAWS,
REGULATIONS, AND RULES.
This chapter does not repeal, abrogate, annul, or in any way impair or interfere with any existing
provisions of law, ordinance, or resolution, or with any rules, regulations, or permits previously adopted or
issued, or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant or relating to the use of buildings, or premises, or with
any private restrictions placed upon property by covenant, deed, or recorded plat; provided, however, that
where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon the heights of
buildings, or requires greater lot areas, larger yards, courts, or other open spaces
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 53
than are imposed or required by such existing provisions of law, ordinance, or resolution, or by such rules,
regulations, or permits or by such private restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.009 CONFLICT WITH ORDINANCE, PRIVATE COVENANTS, AND DEEDS.
In case of conflict between this chapter or any part thereof, and the whole or part of any existing or
future ordinance of the city or the whole or part of any existing or future private covenant or deeds, the
most restrictive shall apply.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.010 SEPARABILITY.
If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this chapter shall be held to be invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect any other section,
clause, provision, or portion of this chapter, which is not in itself invalid, or unconstitutional.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.011 TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS.
(A) Plans filed, building permits. In any case where plans and specifications, including a recorded plat
or detailed development plan, have been filed with the Building Inspector or Planning Commission staff
and are complete prior to the effective date of this chapter, and the plans and specifications are for a
building or structure that would conform with the regulations effective at the date of such filing, but not
with this chapter, a building permit for such building or structure shall be issued.
(B) Expiration of development plans. Where no significant development activity, such as building
permit issuance, improvements construction, plat recordation, etc., has occurred for a period of two years
following final action on the project, development plans approved as part of a zoning map amendment,
conditional use permit, or other approval prior to the effective date of this chapter shall expire. Revision
based upon a failure to initiate significant development shall not occur without a subsequent public hearing.
The Planning Commission may, in their sole discretion, extend such development plans for an additional
period not to exceed two years, provided that the landowner intends to begin development within the two
year period. In the absence of such an extension, further development permits in reliance on the
development plan shall require the approval of a new development plan in accordance with this chapter.
(C) Platted lots. Lots which were recorded by plat prior to the adoption of this chapter, but which do
not meet the adopted standards, shall be considered nonconforming lots of record and shall be treated under
the provisions of '' 154.445 - 154.450.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
2006 S-7
54 Lebanon - Land Usage
DEFINITIONS
' 154.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
(A) Regulations, certain numbers, abbreviations, terms and words used herein shall be used,
interpreted, and defined as set forth in this section and in KRS Chapter 100.
(B) Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, words used in the present tense include the
future tense; words used in the plural number include the singular; the word Aherein@ means in these
regulations; and the word Aregulations@ means in this chapter.
(C) A Aperson@ includes a corporation, partnership, limited liability corporation (LLC), and an
unincorporated association such as a club; Ashall@ is always mandatory; a Abuilding@ includes a
Astructure;@ a Abuilding@ or Astructure@ includes any part thereof; Aused@ or Aoccupied@ as applied to
any land or building shall be construed to include the words intended, arranged, or designed to be used or
occupied.
(Ord. 5-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.021 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning.
ACCESS. A point at which provisions are made for vehicular entrance to or exit from a street, and to
or from a lot or other street.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE. Any structure other than the principal structure and
detached therefrom, directly incidental and related to that of the principal structure or use of the land, and
which is located on the same lot as that of the principal structure, and which is permanently affixed to the
ground. ACCESSORY STRUCTURE shall not include mobile home, bus, travel trailer, RV, trailer, cooler,
vehicle, or freight container.
ACCESSORY USE. Any use clearly incidental to and customarily found in connection with a
permitted principal use of any premise. Home occupation, as defined in the Zoning Ordinance, shall be
deemed an ACCESSORY USE.
ACRE. 43,560 square feet of land area.
ADDITION. As a construction term, an extension or increase in floor area or height of a building or
structure.
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 55
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL. A case where an applicant alleges that there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision, grant, or refusal made by an administrative official in the enforcement of the zoning
regulation.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL. Any department, employee, or advisory elected or appointed body,
which is authorized to administer the provisions of the zoning regulation, subdivision regulations, and if
delegated, any provision of any housing or building regulation or any other land use control regulation.
ADULT BATHHOUSE. An establishment or business which provides services of baths of all kinds,
including all forms and methods of hydrotherapy, that is not operated by a medical practitioner or a
professional physical therapist licensed by the Commonwealth of Kentucky and which establishment
provides to its patrons an opportunity for engaging in specified sexual activities as defined in this chapter.
ADULT BODY PAINTING STUDIO. An establishment or business wherein patrons are afforded an
opportunity to paint images on a body, which is wholly or partially nude. For purposes of this chapter, the
ADULT BODY-PAINTING STUDIO shall not be deemed to include a tattoo parlor.
ADULT BOOKSTORE. An establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock and
trade in books, magazines, and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis
on matter depicting, describing, or relating to Aspecified sexual activities@ or Aspecified anatomical areas@
as defined herein or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such
material.
ADULT CABARET. An establishment or business which features male and/or female topless and/or
bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, burlesque shows, male or female
impersonators, or similar entertainers.
ADULT DAY CARE CENTER. A facility which provides part-time care, day or night, but less than
24 hours, to at least four adults not related to the operator of the facility by blood, marriage, or adoption.
ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS. Establishments, including but not limited to bookstores, motion
picture theaters, mini motion picture theaters, bathhouses, massage parlors, modeling studios, body painting
studios, cabarets, and video stores as defined in this chapter and provided that the adult establishments
remain 750 feet from any school, church, park, day care facility, another adult establishment, or residential
zoned property.
ADULT MASSAGE PARLORS. An establishment or business with or without sleeping
accommodations which provides the services of massage and body manipulation, including exercises, heat
and light treatments of the body, and all forms and methods of physiotherapy, not operated by a medical
practitioner or professional massage or physical therapist licensed by the Commonwealth of Kentucky and
which establishment provides for its patrons the opportunity to engage in Aspecified sexual activity@ as
defined in this section.
2006 S-7
56 Lebanon - Land Usage
ADULT MODELING STUDIOS. An establishment or business which provides the services of
modeling for the purpose of reproducing the human body wholly or partially in the nude by means of
photography, painting, sketching, drawing, or otherwise.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER (INDOOR). An enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or
more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing, or relating to Aspecified sexual activities@ or Aspecified anatomical areas@ as defined
herein for observation by patrons thereon.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER (OUTDOOR). A parcel of land from which individuals
may view a motion picture presented outdoors which presents material distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to Aspecified sexual activities@ or Aspecified
anatomical areas@ as defined herein for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT NOVELTY SHOPS. An establishment or business having as a substantial or significant
portion of its stock and trade in novelty or other items which are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis on, or designed for, specified sexual activity as defined herein or stimulating such activity.
ADULT VIDEO STORE. An establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock
and trade in videotapes for sale or rent which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter
depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or anatomical areas as defined herein or an
establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale, display or rental of such material.
AGRICULTURAL USE. The use of a tract of land of at least five contiguous acres for the production
of agricultural or horticultural crops, including but not limited to livestock, livestock products, poultry,
poultry products, grain, hay, pastures, soybeans, tobacco, timber, orchard fruits, vegetables, flowers or
ornamental plants, including provision for dwellings for persons and their families who are engaged in the
above agricultural use on the tract, but not including residential building developments for sale or lease to
the public. See also Aconfined animal feeding operation.@
ALLEY. A local public street used primarily for vehicular service access to the backs or to the sides of
properties which otherwise abut on streets.
ALTERATION. As applied to a building or structure, a change or rearrangement in the structural parts
or in the means of egress; or as an enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height;
or the moving from one location or position to another. As applied to a building or structure in a historic
district, landmark, or landmark site, it shall also mean any construction on or change to the exterior of a
building, structure, or site, regardless of the requirement of permit from governmental agencies, including
but not limited to the changing of siding or roofing materials and changing, eliminating, or adding doors,
door frames, windows, window frames, shutters, steps, fences, railings, porches, balconies, signs, or other
ornamentation. As applied to a watercourse, it shall mean changing the carrying capacity or location of a
stream, channel, or waterway.
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 57
ANTENNA, HEIGHT ABOVE GRADE OR GROUND. The vertical distance between the highest
point of the antenna and the finished grade directly below this point.
APARTMENT BUILDING. A multi-family dwelling in a building containing five or more dwelling
units.
ARTERIAL. A public street that serves major centers of activity. ARTERIALS have the highest
traffic volumes, speed limits, and right-of-way widths, and are used for moving vehicles safely and
efficiently and providing direct connection between points of heavy traffic generation and neighborhoods at
moderate speeds. Typical average daily traffic counts on arterial streets are 3,000 plus vehicles.
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY. An apartment or home-style housing unit residence which provides
assisted living to two or more adult persons and which provides supportive services, such as cleaning,
shopping, meals, laundry, transportation, 24 hour supervision, and organized activities within the residence
or on the grounds of the residence.
B1 SEAL. A seal indicating that a dwelling unit has been inspected and found to be in compliance
with the applicable standards for human habitation.
B2 SEAL. A seal indicating that the dwelling unit has been inspected and found not to be in
compliance with the applicable codes, is a salvage unit unfit for human habitation, and shall be sold only
for use as a storage or utility building.
BANNER. Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is mounted to a pole, suspended
between poles, or affixed to a building at one or more edges. National, state, or municipal flags or the
official flag of any institution or business shall not be considered banners.
BASEMENT. Any portion of a building the average height of which is at least 1/2 below grade plane.
BED AND BREAKFAST OR TOURIST HOME. An establishment that supplies temporary
accommodations to overnight guests in a private dwelling for compensation.
BILLBOARD OR OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN. An off-premises sign which directs attention
to businesses, products, services, or establishments not usually conducted on the premises on which the
sign is located or other sign erected by a company or individual for the purpose of selling advertising
messages for lease or rent or otherwise for profit. The term outdoor advertising shall include billboard
signs.
BOARDING OR ROOMING HOUSE. A dwelling or part thereof, in which lodging is provided by
the owner or operator to more than three persons and where meals are regularly prepared and served for
compensation.
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS. Lebanon Board of Adjustments.
2006 S-7
58 Lebanon - Land Usage
BUFFER. An area within a property, generally adjacent to and parallel with the property line, either
consisting of natural existing vegetation or created by the use of trees, shrubs, fences, or berms, designed to
limit sight and sound from the site to adjacent properties.
BUILDING. Any structure, but not a mobile home or trailer, used or intended for supporting or
sheltering any use or occupancy. All buildings shall be required to be positioned within all building setback
lines. When measuring the distance required for the building setback lines, the outermost portion of the
structure shall be used.
BUILDING CODE. Rules and regulations adopted by local legislative bodies to regulate building and
construction standards. These include, but are not limited to, the Kentucky Building Code and the BOCA
one and two family Building Code, and the National Electrical Code.
BUILDING HEIGHT. A distance measured from the highest point of the roof for flat roofs; to the
deck line of mansard roofs; to the ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs (excludes chimney). Building
height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas, monuments, water
towers, observation towers, flagpoles, or, chimneys.
BUILDING INSPECTOR. A person appointed by the Mayor and whose responsibility it is to inspect
items required by the Building Codes and these Subdivision Regulations.
BUILDING PERMIT. A permit issued by the Building Inspector allowing a property owner or their
agent to construct, alter, or remove a building, structure, etc., or engage in similar activity which would
alter the character or the lot in question.
BUILDING OR WALL SIGN. A sign which is painted on the exterior wall of a building, or attached
to or placed flat against, or no more than 18 inches from, an exterior wall of a building, but not extending
above the roof line.
CELLULAR ANTENNA TOWER. A tower constructed for, or an existing facility that has been
adapted for, the location of transmission or related equipment to be used in the provision of cellular
telecommunications services or personal communication services.
CELLULAR TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES. A retail telecommunications services that
uses radio signals transmitted through cell sites and mobile switching stations.
CENTERLINE. The center of the street established by survey, or when not established, center of a
paved roadway.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS. Document issued by the Historic Preservation Board
that gives approval of work to be completed on a landmark or property in a historic district.
CERTIFIED LOCAL GOVERNMENT. A government meeting the requirements of the National
Historic Preservation Amendments Act of 1980 (P.L. 96-515) and the implementing regulations of the
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 59
U.S. Department of the Interior and the State Historic Preservation Office (Kentucky Heritage Council) of
the Commonwealth of Kentucky.
CHILD DAY CARE CENTER. A facility which provides full- or part-time care, day or night, to at
least seven children who are not the children, grandchildren, children in legal custody, nieces, or nephews
of the operator.
CITY LIMITS. The municipal or corporate limits of the city.
COLLECTOR. A public street that functions to conduct traffic between major arterial streets, minor
activity centers, and local streets and provides access to adjacent property. COLLECTOR streets may be
further divided into major and minor collectors.
CO-LOCATION. Locating two or more transmission antennas or related equipment on the same
cellular antenna tower.
COMMERCIAL ANIMAL KENNEL. An establishment where more than five dogs or other
domesticated animals are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained, or sold.
COMMISSION. Lebanon Planning Commission.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The adopted plan for the city that serves as a guide for public and
private actions and decisions to assure the development of public and private property in the most
appropriate relationships. Such plan shall include all elements whether expressed in words, graphics, or
other forms.
CONDITIONAL USE. A use which is essential to or would promote the public health, safety, or
welfare in one or more zoning districts, but which would impair the integrity and character of the zoning
district in which it is located, or in adjoining zoning districts, unless restrictions on location, size, extent,
and character of performance are imposed in addition to those imposed in this chapter.
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT. A legal authorization to undertake a conditional use, issued by the
administrative official pursuant to authorization by the board of adjustments, consisting of two parts: (a) a
statement of the factual determination by the board of adjustment which justifies the issuance of the permit
and (b) a statement of the specific conditions which must be met in order for the use to be permitted.
CONDOMINIUM. A form of ownership with the following characteristics: (a) the unit (the interior
and associated exterior areas designated for private use in the development plan) is owned or rented by the
occupant and (b) all or a portion of the exterior open space and any community interior spaces are owned
and maintained in accordance with KRS 381.805 et seq. and in accordance with the provisions for open
spaces, roads, or other development features as specified in this chapter and the Subdivision Regulations.
2006 S-7
60 Lebanon - Land Usage
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS LANDFILL. A one-acre site properly permitted
by the Commonwealth of Kentucky on which non-hazardous materials from construction and demolition
debris projects are disposed.
CORNER LOT. A lot that abuts on two intersecting streets at their intersection.
COUNTY CLERK. Marion County Court Clerk.
CUL-DE-SAC STREET. A local street with only one end open to vehicular traffic and the other end
terminated by a permanent vehicular turnaround.
DEDICATED STREET. A street designated by plat or written deed to be used for public purposes.
DEMOLITION. Any act that destroys in whole or in part a landmark, building, structure, building or
structure in an historic district, physical feature, or other site destruction.
DENSITY. A measure of the intensity of the use of a piece of land expressed or can be calculated in
dwelling units, families, or housing structures per acre.
DESIGN. The arrangement of land for lots, rights-of-way, easements, setback lines and improvements
to include alignment, grade, length, and width of those elements.
DESIGN STANDARDS. Standards that set forth specific improvement or rehabilitation requirements.
DEVELOPER. An individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability company (LLC) or other legal
entity or agent thereof, which undertakes the activities covered by these Subdivision Regulations. Inasmuch
as the subdivision plan drawings are merely a necessary means to the end of assuring development, the term
Adeveloper@ includes Asubdivider,@ Aowner,@ Abuilder,@ etc., although the persons and their precise
interests may vary at different project stages.
DEVELOPMENT. Land being subdivided by a developer in accordance with the Subdivision
Regulations; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement
of any structure; any use or change in use of any buildings or land; any extension, landfill, or land
disturbance, clearing, or other man-induced movement of land.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN. Written and/or graphic material for the provision of a development,
including any or all of the following: location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity of use,
density of development, streets, ways, parking facilities, signs, drainage of surface water, access points,
plan for screening or buffering, utilities, existing manmade and natural conditions, and all other conditions
agreed to by the applicant.
DIRECTIONAL OR MOTOR VEHICLE CONTROL SIGN. An on-premise sign that is erected,
constructed, and maintained for the purpose of directing traffic in off-street parking areas. See also AMotor
Vehicle Control Sign.@
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 61
DRIVE-IN OR DRIVE-THROUGH EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT. A building
or portion thereof where food and/or beverages are sold in a form ready for consumption and
where a significant portion of the consumption takes place or is designed to take place outside the confines
of the building. Such use often includes an intercom or speaker system, a menu board, and an outside
service window. The terms Adrive-in@ and Adrive-through@ shall be considered interchangeable.
DRIVEWAY. A paved or unpaved area used for ingress or egress of vehicles and allowing access from
a street to a building or other structure or facility.
DUPLEX. A building containing two dwelling units on a single lot with separate entrances.
DWELLING. A building or structure designed or used for permanent human habitation.
DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms connected together, constituting a separate independent
housekeeping establishment with separate toilets and containing independent cooking and sleeping
facilities for owner occupancy, rental, or lease on a weekly, monthly or longer basis.
EASEMENT. The right, not ownership of the land, to cross property with facilities, such as but not
limited to sewer, water, and transmission lines, or the right distinct from the ownership of the land to
reserve and hold an area for drainage, access or other specified purposes.
ELECTRIC SIGN. Any sign containing electric wiring. This does not include signs illuminated by an
exterior floodlight source.
ENGINEER. A qualified person registered and currently licensed to practice civil engineering by the
state Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors in the Commonwealth of
Kentucky.
ENTRANCE SIGN. A permanent on-premise sign identifying a vehicular entrance.
FACADE. That portion of an exterior elevation on the building extending from grade to top of the
parapet.
FAMILY. A person living alone, or any of the following groups living together as a single non-profit
housekeeping unit sharing common living, sleeping, cooking, and eating facilities: (a) any number of
people related by blood, marriage, adoption, guardianship, or other duly-authorized custodial relationship;
(b) four unrelated people; (c) four unrelated people and any children related to either of them; or (d) not
more than eight people living in a residential care facility.
FENCE. An artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials erected to
enclose or screen areas of land.
FINAL ACTION. Any final adjudication of the application for any zoning map amendment, variance,
conditional use permit, or appeal from any administrative official before the Planning
2006 S-7
62 Lebanon - Land Usage
Commission or Board of Adjustments, or appeal from the decision of the Planning Commission or Board of
Adjustments to the Lebanon City Council, or the highest state or federal court to which any appeals shall be
taken.
FINAL PLAT. The record plat of a subdivision prepared by a Registered Land Surveyor in accordance
with the Minimum Standards of Practice for Land Surveyors in Kentucky established by the Kentucky State
Board of Licensure for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors and meeting the minimum standards of
the Subdivision Regulations.
FLAG. Any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols used as a
symbol of a government, political subdivision, or other officially designated symbol of any institution or
business.
FLAG LOT. An irregularly shaped lot where access is provided from a public street frontage through
a narrow, unobstructed strip (or Apanhandle@), which is a part of the lot. The building site within a flag lot
does not immediately abut a public street, but is located at the terminus of the access strip described herein.
Building setback lines are to be shown the appropriate distance from the terminus of the access strip. No
building shall be placed in the access strip. Within the Lebanon corporate limits, FLAG LOTS shall only be
used in those locations where, due to geometric, topographic, and other physical features, it would be
impractical to extend a publicly dedicated street to serve lots located in said areas, as determined by the
Planning Commission. Outside the Lebanon corporate limits, one FLAG LOT shall be permitted every 500
feet between access strips or Apanhandles@, and shall have a minimum of a 50 foot access strip or
Apanhandle.@ Before any FLAG LOT can be further subdivided, the developer shall build and dedicate the
access strip into a public right-of-way pursuant to this chapter.
FLOOD OR FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland water, the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of
surface waters from any source, and mudslides, which are caused or precipitated by accumulations of water
on or underground.
FLOOD PLAIN. Any land designated as FLOOD PLAIN on the flood insurance maps of the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
FOURPLEX. A building containing four dwelling units.
FREESTANDING SIGN. Any on-premise sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on,
or anchored in, the ground and that are independent from any building or other structure.
FRONTAGE. That side of a lot abutting on a public street or otherwise approved street and ordinarily
regarded as the front of the lot, but it shall not be considered as the ordinary side of a corner lot.
FRONT YARD. A space extending the full width of the lot between any building and the front lot, and
measured perpendicular to the building at the closest point to the front lot line. In case of corner or through
lots, FRONT YARDS shall be provided on all frontages.
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 63
FRONT YARD SETBACK LINE. A line in the interior of a lot, parallel with and measured a specific
distance from the street right-of-way line. No buildings shall be placed in the space between the
front yard setback lines and the right-of-way. Lots that front on more than one street or right-of-way must
have a FRONT YARD SETBACK LINE and a principal FRONT YARD SETBACK LINE.
GRADE. The inclination with the horizontal of a road, unimproved land, etc., which is generally
expressed by stating the vertical rise or fall as a percentage of the horizontal distance.
GRADE PLANE. A reference plane representing the average of finished ground level adjoining the
building at all exterior walls.
GROSS FLOOR AREA. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building,
including interior balconies and mezzanines, but excluding exterior balconies. All horizontal dimensions
are to be measured by the exterior faces of walls, including the walls of the roofed porches having more
than one wall. The floor area of a building shall include the floor area of accessory buildings on the same
lot.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT. Marion County Health Department.
HISTORIC DISTRICT. An area meeting one or more criteria as set forth in this chapter, designated
by the City Council, and containing definable geographic boundaries, properties, or buildings, which may
or may not contain landmarks, which contribute to the overall historic character of the designated area.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION BOARD. The Lebanon Historic Preservation Board.
HOME OCCUPATION. Any use customarily conducted within a dwelling, carried on by a member
or members of a family residing on the premises, which is clearly incidental to the residential use and
which does not alter the character thereof by reason of noise, odor, traffic generation, or otherwise change
the character of the principal structure or the surrounding area.
HOUSEHOLD. A single housekeeping unit with common access to and use of all living and eating
areas within the dwelling unit.
HOUSING OR BUILDING REGULATION. Kentucky building code, plumbing code, and any other
building or structural code promulgated by the Commonwealth of Kentucky or by its political subdivisions.
HUD CODE. The Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards for construction,
design, and performance of manufactured housing as set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 24,
Part 3280, 3282, 3283, and 42 USC 5401, et seq. and as mandated in the United States of America and as
administered by the United States Department for Housing and Urban Development.
2006 S-7
64 Lebanon - Land Usage
HUD LABEL. A label affixed by a manufacturer to a newly manufactured home after a third-party
inspector, as required under the HUD Act, has approved it. Also referred to as an AA@ Seal.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN. Any sign that carries only the name of the firm, major enterprise, or
principal product offered for sale on the premises, or a combination of these.
IMPROVEMENTS. Physical changes made to raw land, and structures placed on or under the land
surface, to make the land more usable for man=s activities. Typical improvements in these regulations
would be grading, street pavement, curbs, gutters, drainage ditches, storm and sanitary sewers, utility lines
of all types, street name signs, property number signs, trees, etc.
IMPROVEMENTS PLAN. Engineering and land surveying drawings that indicate the proposed
manner or layout of specific design features and infrastructure improvements for a subdivision. Written and
graphic material for the provision of a development, including but not limited to the following: location and
bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity of use, density of development, streets, roadways, parking
facilities, signs, drainage of surface water, access points, plan for screening or buffering, utilities, existing
manmade and natural conditions, and all other conditions agreed to by the applicant.
LAND SURVEYOR. A person licensed as a LAND SURVEYOR by the Kentucky State Board of
Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors.
LANDMARK. A building, structure, or site having a special historical, architectural, cultural, or
aesthetic value, meeting one or more of the criteria set forth in this chapter and designed by the City
Council.
LANDMARK SITE. The land on which a landmark and related buildings and structures are located
and the land that provides the grounds, the premises or the setting for the landmark.
LANDOWNER. The legal or beneficial owner or owners of all the land to be included in a
development.
LEGISLATIVE BODY. Lebanon City Council.
LOADING/UNLOADING/AREA. An off-street space or berth used for the loading or unloading of
vehicles.
LOCAL STREET. Public streets providing vehicular access and services to abutting property. A
LOCAL STREET has a directional flow served by one lane in each direction and allows on-street parking.
The layout of a local street should discourage through traffic. Traffic volume should not exceed 300 ADT
count per day.
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 65
LOT. A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land occupied by or to be occupied by only one
principal building and its accessory buildings. LOTS are the basic unit of a subdivision plan or the smallest
division of land owned by a person. The term LOT is used interchangeably with the term Atract.@
LOT AREA. The size of a lot measured within the lot lines and expressed in terms of acres or square
feet.
LOT COVERAGE. That portion of the lot that is covered by buildings, structures, patios, walkways,
travel ways, sidewalks, and parking areas. LOT COVERAGE does not include uncovered, semi-pervious
decks or outdoor pools. The percent of LOT COVERAGE shall be determined by dividing the total covered
area by the gross area of the lot.
LOT DEPTH. The horizontal distance between front and rear lot lines measured along the median
between two side lot lines.
LOT FRONTAGE. The length of the front lot line measured at the street right-of-way line. A property
line which abuts a fully controlled access street and which permanently has no access to that street shall be
deemed not to have frontage.
LOT LINE. A line dividing one lot from another or from a street or public way.
LOT OF RECORD. A lot lawfully created which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which was
recorded in the office of the Marion County Court Clerk; or a parcel of land, the metes and bounds
description of which is contained in a recorded deed in the office of the Marion County Court Clerk prior to
the adoption of this chapter or which was recorded prior to the amendment of an article of this chapter
which rendered such lot or parcel a nonconforming lot.
LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between the side property lines measured at the front setback
line. LOT WIDTH is measured along the front setback line, except that the LOT WIDTH of curve or
cul-de-sac lots shall be measured along the chord distance at the front setback between side property lines.
MAJOR COLLECTOR. A public street that carries the majority of traffic entering arterial streets. For
major collectors, the concept of service to abutting land should be subordinate to the provision of travel for
major traffic movements. Generally, MAJOR COLLECTORS are state-maintained roads. The MAJOR
COLLECTOR street should carry an average daily traffic count between 1,000 to 3,000 trips per day.
MAJOR CONSTRUCTION OF SITE IMPROVEMENTS. Construction of the following
improvements, including but not limited to: new streets, including improvement or widening of existing
streets; storm water management facilities; water supply system installation; and fire hydrant installation.
MAJOR STREET PLAN. The official map of the city showing the existing and proposed public
streets.
2006 S-7
66 Lebanon - Land Usage
MAJOR SUBDIVISION. Division of land, not classified as a minor subdivision, into three lots or
more from the parent tract, and/or where there is a need for major construction of site improvements. A
Preliminary Plat, Improvements plan, and Final Plat are required for this type of subdivision.
MANUFACTURED HOME. A single-family residential dwelling unit fabricated as defined by KRS
227.550 and constructed in accordance with the federal act on or after June 15, 1976, in an off-site
manufacturing facility for installation and assembly at the building site as a permanent structure with
transport features removed, connected to all required utilities and including plumbing, heating, air
conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein, and bearing a seal certifying that it is built in
compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards, as defined in this
section.
MANUFACTURED HOME CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY STANDARDS. Standards for the
construction, design, and performance of a manufactured home as set forth in the Code of Federal
Regulations, Title 24, Part 3280, 3282, 3283, and 42 USC 5401, et seq. and as mandated in the United
States of America and as administered by the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development, commonly referred to as the HUD Code.
MAYOR. The chief elected official of the city.
MINIMUM LOT AREA OR SIZE. The smallest lot area established by the chapter on which a use or
structure may be located in a particular zoning district.
MINOR COLLECTOR. A public street that primarily serves residential or commercial development.
Roadways within this classification are intended to convey traffic to an adjoining major collector or arterial
street. Traffic volume should not exceed 1,000 average daily trips.
MINOR SUBDIVISION. Division of land into two lots or less from the parent tract for residential
use; provided that there is no need for major construction of site improvements, including any new street or
other public right-of-way or provision for a public area or public facility, and that the subdivision conforms
to the setback line requirements and other requirements of the applicable zoning district, and conveys the
right-of-way necessary for road widening and maintenance of city streets or county roads, where the
granting of such right-of-way can be given without undue hardship.
MOBILE HOME. A structure manufactured prior to June 15, 1976, which was not required to be
constructed in accordance with the federal act, which is transportable in one or more sections, which, in the
traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width and 40 body feet or more in length, or, when created on
site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used as a
dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes
the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. These homes bear a
numbered Class A or B seal issued by the Kentucky Department of Housing, Building, and Construction,
Office of the State Fire Marshal.
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 67
MOBILE HOME PARK. A tract of land prepared and approved by the Planning Commission for the
placement, either free of charge or for revenue purposes, of two or more spaces for mobile or manufactured
homes, according to applicable chapter regulations.
MOBILE HOME OR MANUFACTURED HOME SPACE. That part of a mobile home park which
is planned and improved for the placement of the stand, driveway, parking area, and related yard intended
for the exclusive use of the dwelling occupant.
MODIFICATION. See definition of Aalteration.@
MODULAR HOME. A dwelling unit constructed on-site in accordance with the state or municipal
code and composed of components substantially assembled in a manufacturing plant and transported to the
building site for final assembly on a permanent foundation.
MONUMENT. An object (concrete, iron pin, or pipe) set in the ground to mark the boundaries of real
estate or to mark a survey station.
MONUMENT SIGN. A freestanding sign supported primarily by solid structural features other than
support poles.
MOTOR VEHICLE CONTROL SIGN. An on-premise sign that is erected, constructed, and
maintained for the purpose of directing traffic in off-street parking areas. See also DIRECTIONAL SIGN.
MULCH OPERATION. Any use involving the grinding, shredding, storing, stockpiling, or recycling
of natural materials, such as trees, leaves, or bark, into a usable product for landscaping or other purposes.
MULTI-BUILDING DEVELOPMENT. Construction of two or more buildings on a single tract of
land that will not be divided into smaller parcels.
MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING. A dwelling unit within a building containing five or more dwelling
units.
NEW CONSTRUCTION. The act of making an addition to an existing building or structure or the
erection of a new principal or accessory building or structure.
NONCONFORMING LOT. A lot, the area, dimensions, or locations of which was lawful prior to the
adoption, revision, or amendment of this chapter and the Subdivision Regulations, but which fails by reason
of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the regulations.
2006 S-7
68 Lebanon - Land Usage
NONCONFORMING USE OR STRUCTURE. An activity or a building, sign, structure, or a portion
thereof which lawfully existed before the adoption or amendment of this chapter, but which does not
conform to all the regulations contained in this chapter which pertain to the zoning district in which it is
located.
OFF-PREMISE SIGN. Any sign that identifies, advertises, or promotes goods, services, individual
and firm products, a person, place, activity, event, idea, or facility which is not conducted, sold, or offered
upon the premises where such sign is located.
OFF-STREET PARKING. A temporary storage area for a motor vehicle that is directly accessible to
an access aisle and that is not located on a dedicated street right-of-way.
ON-PREMISE SIGN. A sign other than a temporary sign, which identifies, advertises, or promotes
goods, services, individual and firm products, a person, place, activity, event, idea, or facility which is
available on the premises where the sign is located. ON-PREMISE SIGNS do not include signs erected by
the outdoor or billboard advertising industry in the conduct of the outdoor business.
OPEN SPACE. Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved and set aside, dedicated,
designated, or reserved for the public or private use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners
and occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space.
ORDINARY REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE. Any work that corrects any deterioration or damage
to a building or structure in order to restore it to its condition prior to the deterioration or damage.
OUTDOOR OR BILLBOARD ADVERTISING SIGN. An off-premises sign which directs attention
to businesses, products, services, or establishments not usually conducted on the premises on which the
sign is located or other sign erected by a company or individual for the purpose of selling advertising
messages for lease or rent or otherwise for profit. The term outdoor advertising shall include billboard
signs.
OWNER. Any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or corporations, or any other legal
entity having legal title to or sufficient propriety interest in the land sought to be subdivided under these
regulations.
PARKING AREA. Any public or private unobstructed land area that has access to a street and which
is designed and used for parking motor vehicles. The term includes parking lots, structures, garages,
travelways, and private driveways.
PARKING LOT. An off-street, ground level area, usually surfaced and improved, for the temporary
storage of motor vehicles. This term does not include areas for demolished, wrecked, junked, or for-sale
motor vehicles or where motor vehicle parts are located.
PARKING SPACE. The area for the parking of a motor vehicle within a public or private parking
area. As used in this chapter, it is a numerical designation used to determine the size of parking areas.
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 69
PAVE(D). To cover or surface with asphalt, gravel, concrete, macadam, etc. as a road.
PAVEMENT. The actual road surface area from curbing to curbing, and where there are no curbs, the
pavement is that portion between the edges of the paved, or hard surface, width.
PERMANENT FOUNDATION. A permanent masonry, concrete, or other footing approved by the
Building Inspector to which a building, structure, or manufactured home may be affixed.
PERMITTED USE. Any use allowed in a zoning district and subject to the restrictions applicable to
the zoning district.
PERSONAL COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES. As defined in 47 U.S.C. sec. 332(c).
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD). An area of minimum contiguous size, as specified by
this chapter, to be planned, developed, operated, and maintained as a single entity containing multiple
principal buildings to accommodate residential or commercial uses, or both, and appurtenant common areas
and other uses incidental to the predominant uses, and of common ownership on one lot; commonly
referred to as cluster developments.
PLANNING COMMISSION. The Lebanon Planning and Zoning Commission.
PLAT. A map of subdivision showing the boundaries and location of individual properties, easements,
streets, and other required information and prepared by a licensed land surveyor.
POLE SIGN. Any freestanding sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole or other support so the
bottom edge of the sign face is six feet or more above grade.
PORTABLE SIGN. Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or
a sign designed to be transported.
PRELIMINARY PLAT. A map or plan of proposed land subdivision containing the information and
materials specified in the Lebanon Subdivision Regulations.
PREMISES. A general term meaning part or all of any lot or part or all of any building or structure or
group of buildings or structures located thereon.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING. A building, including covered porches or any part of a permitted structure
above the foundation, in which the principal use of the lot on which it is located or conducted. Any
dwelling shall be deemed the PRINCIPAL BUILDING on the lot on which it is situated.
PRINCIPAL FRONT YARD SETBACK LINE. A line in the interior of a lot, parallel with and
measured a specific distance from the street right-of-way line. A PRINCIPAL FRONT YARD SETBACK
LINE establishes the direction a principal structure must face on a lot with multiple road frontages. No
buildings shall be placed in the space between the principal front yard setback line and the right-of-way.
2006 S-7
70 Lebanon - Land Usage
PRINCIPAL USE. The primary or predominant use of any lot.
PRIVATE STREET. A means of access to a public street. A PRIVATE STREET is owned and
maintained by the property owners. No future re-subdivision can occur on a private street.
PROJECTING SIGN. A sign, other than a flat wall sign, which projects from, and is supported by, a
wall of a building or structure.
PROPERTY LINE. A line dividing one lot from another or from a street or public way.
PUBLIC FACILITY. Any use of land whether publicly or privately owned for transportation, utilities,
or communications, or for the benefit of the general public, including, but not limited to, libraries, streets,
schools, fire or police stations, county buildings, municipal buildings, or recreational centers, including
parks, and cemeteries.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. A publicly owned strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a
public street or road, and any associated utilities.
PUBLIC STREET. A roadway set aside for vehicular traffic regardless of size or designation but
excluding private easements, rights-of-ways and driveways. The word APUBLIC STREET@ is used
interchangeably with the term Aroad,@ Ahighway,@ Athoroughfare,@ Aavenue,@ Adrive,@ Acircle,@
Aparkway,@ Aplace,@ Acourt,@ or similar term.
REAR YARD. A space extending across the full width of the lot between the principal building and
the rear lot line, and measured perpendicular to the building to the closest point of the rear lot line.
REAR YARD SETBACK LINE. A line in the interior of a lot, parallel with and measured a specific
distance from the rear property line. No buildings shall be placed in the space between the REAR YARD
SETBACK LINES and the rear property line.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Any vehicle used for transient dwelling purposes, including but not
limited to a travel trailer, pick-up coach, motor home, or camping trailer.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK. A parcel of land available to the public in which two or more
recreational vehicle spaces are occupied or intended for occupancy by recreational vehicles for transient
dwelling purposes and includes any service building, structure, enclosure, or other facility used as a part of
the park.
RECYCLING CENTER OR PLANT. A lot or parcel of land, upon which used materials are separated
and processed for shipment for reuse in new products. A facility in which recyclables, such as newspapers,
magazines, books, and other paper products, glass, metal cans, and other products, are recycled,
reprocessed, and treated to return such products to a condition in which they again may be used in new
products. A recycling center or plant does not include junkyards.
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 71
RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY. A residence operated and maintained by a sponsoring private,
non-profit or governmental agency to provide services in a homelike setting for persons with disabilities, as
defined in KRS 100.982.
RESTAURANT. An establishment whose principal business is the serving of food and beverages
primarily to persons seated within the building.
RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad,
road, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary sewer main, shade trees, drainage
facilities, or for another special use. The usage of the term RIGHT-OF-WAY for land
platting purposes shall mean that every RIGHT-OF-WAY hereafter established and shown on a Final Plat
is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such RIGHT-OF-WAY and not included
within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. Rights-of-way intended for streets, crosswalks, water
mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains and drainage facilities, shade trees, or the owner of the property on
which such right-of-way is established shall dedicate any other use involving maintenance by a public
agency to public use.
ROADWAY OR TRAVELWAY. That portion of a street or parking lot intended for vehicular traffic.
ROOF LINE. The edge of the roof or the top of the parapet, whichever forms the top line of the
building silhouette.
ROOF SIGN. Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof of a building, supported
by the roof structure.
ROUTINE MAINTENANCE. To repair or refurbish a sign, structure, or building, or any part thereof
but not including expansion or total replacement.
SALE OR LEASE. Any immediate or future transfer of ownership or any possessory interest in land,
including contract of sale, lease, devise, intestate succession, or transfer, of an interest in a subdivision or
part thereof, whether by metes and bounds, deed, contract, plat, map, lease, devise, intestate succession, or
other written instrument.
SCREENING. A method of visually or audibly shielding or obscuring an adjacent or nearby structure
or use from another by fencing, walls, berms, or densely planted vegetation.
SEPTIC TANK. A watertight receptacle that receives the discharge of sewerage.
SETBACK LINE. The required distance between every structure and the lot lines of the lot on which
it is located, measured perpendicular to the building (at the eave overhang) and related front, side, or rear
property line, exclusive of uncovered first floor porch, steps, and HVAC equipment (HVAC equipment
must, however, be located a minimum of 30 inches from the property line), and in which no building may
be located.
2006 S-7
72 Lebanon - Land Usage
SIDEWALK. A paved path provided for pedestrian use and usually located at the side of a street
within the right-of-way.
SIDE YARD. A yard extending along the side lot from the front yard to the rear yard and lying
between the side lot line and the nearest portion of the principal building. In the case of through lots, SIDE
YARDS shall extend from the rear lot lines to the front lot line.
SIDE YARD SETBACK LINE. A line in the interior of a lot, parallel with and measured a specific
distance from the side property line. No buildings shall be placed in the space between the SIDE YARD
SETBACK LINES and the side property line.
SIGN. Any device, display, or structure, other than a building or landscaping, which is readily visible
from public property and is used primarily for visual communication for the purpose of, or having the effect
of, bringing the subject matter on the device, display or structure, to the attention of persons off the
premises on which the SIGN is displayed. The foregoing definition includes, but is not limited to numerals,
pictorial representations, emblems, trademarks, flags, banners, streamers, pennants, inscriptions, and
patterns and shall include a structure erected or used in connection with the display of any such device and
all lighting or other attachments used in connection therewith.
SIGN AREA. The area enclosed by one rectangle, the sides of which make contact with the extreme
points or edges of the sign, excluding the supporting structure does not form part of the sign proper or of
the display. The sign area composed of characters or words attached directly to a large, uniform building
wall surface shall be the smallest rectangle which encloses the whole group.
SIGN FACE. The total surface area of a sign facing in one direction and visible from the street such
sign is intended to face.
SIGN HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the top most part of the sign or sign structure to
the average grade level at the base of the sign.
SIGN PROJECTION. The distance by which a sign extends over public property or beyond the
building line.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING. A detached building designed for, or occupied exclusively by, one
family.
SINKHOLE. A pit in the ground caused by the dissolving or collapse of underlying rock layers,
generally limestone. Some SINKHOLES result from enlargement of joints or crevices, the overlaying soil
slumping into the hollow thus created. Others are formed by collapse of cave roofs.
SITE PLAN. A plan, to scale, showing uses and structures proposed for a parcel of land as required by
the regulations involved. Its purpose is to show how the intended use relates to the major landscape features
and surrounding area.
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 73
SOLID WASTE. Any garbage, refuse, sludge, or other discarded material, including solid, liquid,
semi-solid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, residential, agricultural
operations, or community uses.
SPECIAL WASTES. Wastes of high volume and low hazard which include, but are not limited to,
mining wastes, utility wastes (fly ash, bottom ash, scrubber sludge), sludge from water treatment facilities
and wastewater treatment facilities, cement kiln dust, gas and oil drillings, mud and oil production brines.
This definition includes the definition of SPECIAL WASTE in KRS 224.868, as amended.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Areas including less than completely and opaquely covered
human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anal region, or female breast below a point immediately above the
top of the areola or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely
covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Activities involving human genitals in a state of sexual
stimulation or arousal; acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy; fondling or other erotic
touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock, or female breast; flagellation or torture in the
context of sexual relationship; masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating, or infliction of pain;
erotic touching, fondling, or other such contact with an animal by a human being; or human excretion,
urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation as part of or in connection with any of the activities set
forth in this definition.
STORAGE BUILDING. Any building or structure used to provide storage area for a residential,
commercial, or industrial structure, and which meets the definition of accessory structure.
STREET. Any vehicular roadway.
STORY. That part of a building between the surface of one floor and the floor or roof immediately
above. For the purpose of measuring maximum building height in stories, a maximum of 20 feet of height
shall be considered a story.
STORY ABOVE GRADE. Any story having its finished floor surface entirely above grade except that
a basement shall be considered as a story above grade when the finished surface of the floor above the
basement is more than six feet above grade plan, more than six feet above the finished ground level for
more than 50% of the total building perimeter, or more than 12 feet above the finished grade level at any
point.
STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or made, the use of which requires permanent location in or on
the ground or attachment to something having a permanent location in or on the ground as may be required
for the purposes of carrying out this chapter. The term shall include poles and appurtenances thereto used
for the provision of public utilities. Structure includes any building or accessory building, mobile homes,
signs, towers, billboards, porches, swimming or other recreation or commercial pools, and retaining walls,
gas or liquid storage tanks, fences, and other manmade facilities or infrastructure.
2006 S-7
74 Lebanon - Land Usage
SUBDIVIDER. Any person who (a) having an interest in land causes it, directly or indirectly, to be
divided into a subdivision, or (b) directly or indirectly, sells, leases, or develops, or offers to sell, lease, or
develop, or advertises for sale, lease, or develops any interest, lot, parcel site, unit, or plat in a subdivision,
or (c) engages directly or through an agent in the business of selling, leasing, developing, or offering for
sale, lease, or develops a subdivision or any interest, lot, parcel site, unit, or plat in a subdivision, or (d)
directly or indirectly is controlled by, or under direct or indirect common control with any of the foregoing.
The term Asubdivider@ includes Adeveloper,@ Abuilder,@ etc., although the persons and their precise
interest may vary at different project stages.
SUBDIVISION. The division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two or more lots, for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of sale, lease, or building developments or if a new street is involved, any
division of a parcel of land; provided that a division of land for agricultural use and not involving a new
street shall not be deemed a subdivision. The term includes resubdivision and when appropriate to the
context, shall relate to the process of subdivision or to the land subdivided; any division or redivision of
land into parcels of less than one acre occurring within 12 months following a division of the same land
shall be deemed a subdivision within the meaning of this definition.
SUBDIVISION AGENT. Any person who represents or acts for or on behalf of a subdivider or
developer in selling, leasing, or developing, or offering to sell, lease, or develop any interest, lot, parcel,
unit, site, or plat in a subdivision, except any attorney-at-law whose representation of another person
consists solely of rendering legal services.
SURVEY. The process of precisely ascertaining the area, dimensions, and location of a tract of land.
TEMPORARY BUILDING. A TEMPORARY BUILDING used for the storage of construction
materials and equipment incidental to on-site permitted construction or for temporary storage incidental to
that of a principal building.
TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION UNIT. Any transportable facility built on its own chassis used for
offices or storage and which is located on a construction site. No TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION UNIT
shall be used for sleeping or residential purposes in whole or in part.
TEMPORARY SIGN. Any sign or advertising display intended to be displayed for a period of less
than 30 days per calendar year except that construction project signs may remain for the duration of the
construction.
TOTAL FLOOR AREA. The area of all floors of a building, including finished attics and basements.
TOWNHOUSE OR TOWNHOME. An attached or semi-detached single-family dwelling with one or
two side walls party to the adjacent dwelling. A TOWNHOUSE OR TOWNHOME building includes at
least three and no more than eight dwelling units, may be one or more stories, and may include a basement.
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 75
TRANSMISSION TOWER. A structure principally intended for the location of wireless transmission
and/or receiving antennas.
TRANSMISSION TOWER ACCESSORY FACILITY. A detached subordinate structure or building
that is incidental and related to the transmission tower function, but not including broadcast studios or
offices.
TRAVELWAY OR ROADWAY. That portion of a street or parking lot intended for vehicular traffic.
TRIPLEX. A building containing three individual dwelling units.
TWINHOME. A building containing two individual dwelling units.
UNIFORM APPLICATION. An application for a certificate of convenience and necessity issued
under KRS 278.020 submitted by a utility to the Public Service Commission to construct an antenna tower
for cellular telecommunication services or personal communications service in a jurisdiction, that has
adopted planning and zoning regulations in accordance with KRS Chapter 100.
USABLE FLOOR SPACE. The area of all floors that may be used as living, working, or storage
areas.
USE. The purpose or activity for which land, building, or structure, or combination thereof, is
designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
UTILITY. Any company, except a city, who owns, controls, or operates, or manages any facility used
or to be used for or in connection with: (a) the generation, production, transmission, or distribution of
electricity to or for the public, for compensation, for lights, heat, power, or other uses; (b) the production,
manufacturing, storage, distribution, sale, or furnishing of natural or manufactured gas or a mixture of the
same, to or for the public, for compensation, for lights, heat, power, or other uses; (c) the transporting or
conveying of gas, crude oil, or other fluid substance by pipeline to or for the public, for compensation; (d)
the diverting, developing, pumping, impounding, distributing, or furnishing of water to or for the public, for
compensation; (e) the transmission or conveyance over wire, in air, or otherwise, of any message by
telephone or telegraph for the public, for compensation; or (f) the treatment of sewerage for the public, for
compensation.
VARIANCE. A departure from the dimensional terms of these regulations pertaining to height, width,
or location of structures, and the size of yards and open spaces.
VEHICLE USE AREA. Any area occupied in whole or in part by motorized vehicles, including, but
not limited to, parking lots, parking stalls, driveways, service areas, and roadways.
WALL OR BUILDING SIGN. An on-premise sign which is painted on the exterior wall of a building,
or attached to or placed flat against, or no more than 18 inches from, an exterior wall of a building, but not
extending above the roof line.
2006 S-7
76 Lebanon - Land Usage
WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY. Any place where solid waste is managed, processed, or disposed of
by incineration, landfilling, or any other method. A waste disposal facility does not include a container
located on property where solid waste is generated and which is used solely for the purpose of collection
and temporary storage of that solid waste prior to off-site disposal.
WASTE TRANSFER STATION. Any facility including loading docks, parking areas, and other
similar areas, where shipments of solid waste are held, stored, or transferred during the normal course of
transportation
YARD. That portion of a lot that is unobstructed by buildings or structures, from the ground to the sky.
ZERO LOT LINE. The location of a building on a lot in such a manner that one side of the building
rests directly on a property line.
ZONING DISTRICT. A classification of areas or parcels of land to which specific land use
regulations apply.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
REVIEW BODIES
' 154.035 LEBANON PLANNING COMMISSION AND ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL.
(A) Lebanon Planning Commission.
(1) Duties and responsibilities. The duties of the Lebanon Planning Commission in regard to this
chapter are established by KRS Chapter 100 and include, but are not limited to:
(a) Hold public hearing in accordance with KRS and make a recommendation to the Lebanon
City Council in regard to zoning text or map amendments, including the designation of planned unit
developments (PUDs);
(b) Review and take final action on detailed development plans; and,
(c) Review and make a recommendation to the Lebanon City Council in regard to the
designation of local historic districts and landmarks.
(2) Membership. The Lebanon Planning Commission shall consist of nine citizen members
appointed by the Mayor of the city, subject to the approval of the Lebanon City Council.
(3) Term of office. The term of office shall be four years ending on June 30 of the designated
year. The term of all present members shall be staggered as existed at the time of the original adoption
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 77
of this chapter. The Planning Commission shall otherwise be organized and operated in accordance with
KRS 100.133 through 100.182.
(4) Jurisdiction. The area of jurisdiction of the Lebanon Planning Commission shall include all
land within the corporate boundaries of the city.
(B) Administrative Official.
(1) Duties and responsibilities. The duties of the Administrative Official, or designee, in regard
to this chapter, shall include the following:
(a) Make written interpretations of this chapter;
(b) Serve as the Administrative Official pursuant to KRS 100.271;
(c) Approve minor amendments to a PUD District;
(d) Approve minor amendments to Detailed Development Plans; and
(e) Review building permits and certificates of occupancy for conformance with this chapter.
(f) Any other duties as assigned by the Planning Commission or City Council as allowed by
law.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.036 LEBANON BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS.
(A) Duties and responsibilities. The Board of Adjustments shall have powers, duties, and
responsibilities as set forth in KRS Chapter 100 and including, but not limited to, the following:
(1) Hear and decide administrative appeals where it is alleged by the appellants that there is an
error in any order, requirement, permit, decision, determination, or refusal made by any administrative
official in carrying out or enforcing any provision of this chapter;
(2) To make interpretations of the official zoning map;
(3) To make final action on conditional uses;
(4) To take final action on variances; and,
(5) To administer the non-conforming use regulations per KRS 100.253.
2006 S-7
78 Lebanon - Land Usage
(B) Membership. The Lebanon Board of Adjustments shall consist of five citizen members appointed
by the Mayor of the city, subject to the approval of the Lebanon City Council. The Board of Adjustments
membership shall include not more than two members of the Planning Commission.
(C) Term of office. The term of office shall be four years ending on June 30 of the designated year. The
term of all present members shall be staggered so that no more than two members terms shall expire within
one year. The Board of Adjustments shall otherwise be organized and operated in accordance with KRS
100.217 through 100.271.
(D) Jurisdiction. The area of jurisdiction of the Lebanon Board of Adjustments shall include all land
within the corporate boundaries of the city.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.037 BUILDING INSPECTOR.
Duties and responsibilities. The duties of the Building Inspector in regard to this chapter shall include
the following:
(A) To enforce any applicable Building Code adopted by the Lebanon City Council;
(B) To ensure building permit compliance with this chapter; and
(C) To take final action on all building permits and certificates of occupancy.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.038 HISTORIC PRESERVATION BOARD.
(A) Duties and responsibilities. In addition to the powers, duties, and responsibilities stated elsewhere
in this chapter, the Lebanon Historic Preservation Board shall take action necessary and appropriate to
accomplish the purpose of this chapter. These actions may include, but are not limited to:
(1) Conduct and maintain a survey of historic buildings, structures, and areas and prepare a plan
for their preservation;
(2) Draft and update the historic preservation element of the Lebanon Comprehensive Plan;
(3) Recommend the designation of historic districts and landmarks to the Lebanon City Council;
(4) Adopt written guidelines for making exterior changes to designated property and undertaking
new construction on designated property;
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 79
(5) Regulate alterations visible to the public that are proposed for designated property and
regulating demolitions, relocations, and new construction involving designated property;
(6) Work with and advise the federal, state, city, and county governments and other city
government agencies on historic preservation issues;
(7) Advise and assist owners of historic property and other persons and groups, including
neighborhood groups, who are interested in historic preservation;
(8) Report on the present condition of historic buildings in the city and identify problems that
may, at a later time, threaten the preservation of these buildings;
(9) Attend informational and educational programs covering the duties of the Board and current
developments in historic preservation;
(10) Initiate and review all local nominations to the National Register of Historic Places;
(11) Conduct educational programs, including the preparation of publications and placing of
historical and architectural markers;
(12) Recommend that the city apply for, receive, or use public and private grants or gifts to help
historic preservation activities;
(13) Assess fees on applications for Certificates of Appropriateness (COAs); and
(14) Perform other responsibilities and duties that may be delegated to the city under the National
Historic Preservation Act.
(B) Membership. The Lebanon Historic Preservation Board shall consist of five citizen members who
shall be appointed by the Mayor of the city, subject to the approval of the Lebanon City Council. The
members shall have demonstrated an interest in historic preservation, and at least two members shall have
training and experience in a preservation-related profession, such as architecture, history, archaeology,
architectural history, construction, planning, or related fields. When one or two professional members are
not available, the Mayor may appoint persons with a demonstrated interest in historic preservation. When
the Historic Preservation Board reviews an issue that is normally evaluated by a professional member and
that field is not represented on the Board, the Board shall seek expert advice before rendering its decision.
In making appointments, the Mayor may include a person who is active in real estate
(C) Term of office. The term of office of the Historic Preservation Board members shall be three years,
except for the terms of two members of the original Board that shall end after two years and the terms of
two other members of the original Board that will end after one year. Each member shall serve until the
appointment and qualification of a successor. Vacancies on the Board shall be filled within 60
2006 S-7
80 Lebanon - Land Usage
days. When a vacancy occurs during a term of office, the person selected shall be appointed for the
unexpired portion of the term.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.039 LEGISLATIVE BODY - LEBANON CITY COUNCIL.
Duties and responsibilities. The powers, duties, and responsibilities of the Lebanon City Council in
regard to this chapter shall include, but not limited to, the following:
(A) To take final action on text amendment of this chapter or the Official Zoning Map, including
designation of planned unit developments (PUDs);
(B) To make final action on the designation of local historic districts or individual historic landmarks;
and,
(C) To concur in the appointment of board membership as defined in this subchapter.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
ZONING DISTRICTS
' 154.050 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.
For purposes of this chapter, the area of jurisdiction of this chapter is hereby divided into zoning
districts which shall be designated as set forth below, and the district names in effect immediately prior to
the effective date of this chapter, if any, are hereby converted as follows:
Zoning district
Old designation
New designation
Section(s)
Agriculture District
A
A
154.080 - 154.085
Single-Family
Residential District
R-1
R-1
154.100 - 154.106
Two- to Four-Family
Residential District
R-2
R-2
154.120 - 154.126
Multi-Family
Residential District
R-3
R-3
154.140 - 154.146
Mobile Home Park
District
MHP
MHP
154.160 - 154.162
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 81
Zoning district
Old designation
New designation
Page(s)
Central Business
District
B-1
B-1
154.175 - 154.180
General Business
District
B-2
B-2
154.190 - 154.196
Highway Business
District
--
B-3
154.210 - 154.216
Health District
H
--
--
Office and
Professional District
--
OP
154.230 - 154.235
Light Industrial
District
I-1
I-1
154.245 - 154.250
Heavy Industrial
District
I-2
I-2
154.260 - 154.265
Conservation District
C
--
--
Public District
C
P
154.275 - 154.279
Planned Unit
Development District
--
PUD
154.290 - 154.293
Historic District,
Landmark or
Landmark Site
--
H
154.330 - 154.335
Residential Cluster
Development
--
RCD
154.305 - 154.317
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.051 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
(A) Official zoning map establishment. The boundaries of any and all zoning districts are hereby
established on Official Zoning Map entitled AZoning Map of the City of Lebanon,@ dated___________, as
amended, which shall be permanently located in the offices of the Lebanon City Clerk and/or the Planning
Commission. These official zoning maps together with all explanatory matter thereon, are hereby adopted
by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. Any territory hereafter annexed to the city shall
remain in the same district as legally existed before annexation unless the district is
2006 S-7
82 Lebanon - Land Usage
specifically changed by ordinance according to the requirements of the relevant provisions of KRS or this
chapter pertaining to amendments.
(B) Official zoning map replacement. In the event that either the Official Zoning Map becomes
damaged, destroyed, lost, or is deemed necessary to be replaced due to age of the map, the Lebanon
Planning Commission may by authorization through resolution adopted by the city, adopt a new Official
Zoning Map which shall supersede the prior Official Zoning Map. The new Official Zoning Map may
correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior Official Zoning Map, but no such correction shall
have the effect of amending the original Official Zoning Map or any subsequent amendment thereof. Unless
the prior Official Zoning Map has been lost, or has been totally destroyed, the prior map
or any significant parts thereof of the remaining shall be preserved, together with all available records
pertaining to its adoption or amendment. Nothing herein shall be deemed to limit the power of the Planning
Commission or City Council to amend and/or readopt as provided in KRS Chapter 100.
(C) Zoning district boundary interpretation. The zoning district boundary lines of the Official Zoning
Map are intended to follow lot or tract lines or farm boundaries, the centerlines of streets or the
corporate limit lines, all as they existed at the time of enactment of this chapter. Where uncertainty exists as
to the boundaries of zoning districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules for
interpretation shall apply:
(1) Where the lot in question is divided into two or more districts, the entire area may be used in
conformity with and is subject to the regulations established for the district in which is located 51% of the
area of the entire lot.
(2) Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, or alleys
shall be construed to follow such centerlines; vacated rights-of-ways shall not affect the original zoning.
(3) Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as
following such lot lines.
(4) Boundaries indicated as approximately political boundaries shall be construed as following
such boundaries.
(5) Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such shorelines, and
in the event of change in the shoreline shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline; boundaries
indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, lakes, or other bodies of water shall
be construed to follow such centerlines.
(6) Boundaries indicated as approximately parallel to features indicated in the paragraphs above
shall so be construed; distances not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined
by the scale of the map, if an accurate legal description cannot be determined.
(7) Where boundary lines are established by zoning map amendment, the legal description used
for that zoning map amendment shall control.
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 83
(8) Where the above stated rules do not indicate the exact locations of the zoning district
boundaries, then said boundaries shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator and may be subject to
appeal to the Lebanon Board of Adjustments.
GENERAL USE REGULATIONS
' 154.065 USES.
Appendix A lists the uses allowed within zoning districts.
(A) Permitted uses (P). A AP@ indicates that a use category is allowed by right in the respective
zoning district. These permitted uses are subject to all other applicable regulations of this chapter.
(B) Conditional uses (C). A AC@ indicates that a use category is allowed only if reviewed and
approved as a conditional use in accordance with the conditional use permit procedures of
'' 154.430 - 154.433, Conditional Use Permit. Conditional uses are subject to all other applicable
regulations of this chapter and may have specific conditions set forth by the Board of Adjustment.
(C) Prohibited uses. A blank or empty cell indicates that a use type is not allowed in the respective
zoning district, unless it is otherwise expressly allowed by other regulations of this chapter. Any use not
allowed or not listed is deemed prohibited and detrimental to the development of the district.
(D) New or unlisted uses. If an application is submitted for a use type that is not listed in the use table,
the Zoning Administrator shall be authorized to make a similar use interpretation based on the criteria set
forth below. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the proposed use does not fit any of the use
descriptions of Appendix A, no similar use interpretation shall be made. The Zoning Administrator shall
make a determination as to the use for the application that has been made.
(1) The actual or projected characteristics of the activity in relationship to the stated
characteristics of each use category;
(2) The relative amount of the area of floor space and equipment devoted to the activity;
(3) Relative amounts of sales from each activity;
(4) The customer type for each activity, retail or wholesale;
(5) The relative number of employees in each activity;
(6) Hours of operation;
(7) Building and site arrangement;
2006 S-7
84 Lebanon - Land Usage
(8) Vehicles used with the activity;
(9) The relative number of vehicle trips generated by the use; How the use advertises itself;
(10) Parking needs;
(11) Noise level, odor, dust, vibrations, or smoke generated; and
(12) Utility use.
(E) Developments with multiple permitted uses. When all principal uses of a development fall within
one use category, the entire development is assigned to that use category. When the principal uses of a
development fall within different use categories, then each use is subject to all applicable regulations for
that category.
(F) Accessory uses. Accessory uses are customarily incidental and necessary to any permitted use and
are allowed by right in conjunction with a principal use unless otherwise stated in the regulations.
Accessory structures shall not include any business, trade, or industry or any access driveway or walkway
thereto, unless clearly incidental to the permitted use. Also, unless otherwise stated, accessory uses are
subject to the same regulations as the principal uses.
(G) Home occupations. Home occupations shall be permitted on a limited basis in the residential and
agricultural districts. Permitted home occupations in these districts are set forth in the Use Table in
Appendix A and may include academic tutoring, music lessons, catering, child care, sewing/alterations, hair
salon/cosmetologist, lawn care service (only in the Agricultural District), and limited art/photography
studio. Permitted home occupations shall meet the standards of the zoning district in which it is located.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.066 GENERAL DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS.
(A) Development plan. A development plan is intended to demonstrate the character and objectives of
the proposed development in adequate detail for the Planning Commission to evaluate the effect of the
proposed development on the community and to determine what provisions, if any, shall be altered for the
protection and promotion of the general public health, safety, and welfare. As a condition to the granting of
any zoning map amendment, the Planning Commission is authorized to require the submission of a
development plan. The Development Plan shall be filed in accordance with the provisions and requirements
of '' 154.415 - 154.417. Where agreed upon, this Development Plan shall be followed and shall be
binding on all parties.
(B) Sanitary sewage systems. All uses within the corporate limits of the city shall be served by the
public sanitary sewage system, unless otherwise specified by the city.
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 85
(C) Principal and accessory buildings and structures. Unless a plat and/or development plan has been
approved for multi-building development, only one principal building and accessory structures customarily
incidental to any permitted use shall be allowed per permitted lot. No accessory building shall be used for
residential purposes, except for necessary tenant dwellings required for agricultural production.
(D) Lot area.
(1) Minimum lot area. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, lots served by sanitary sewer
shall have a minimum lot area of 7,500 square feet, and lots not served by sanitary sewer shall have a
minimum lot area of 30,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot area above 100-year flood level required. No lot shall be created or developed
which does not have at least 5,000 square feet of lot area above the 100-year frequency flood level.
(E) Lot width. Unless otherwise specified in this Zoning Ordinance, lots served by sanitary sewer
shall have a minimum lot width of 50 feet, and lots not served by sanitary sewer shall have a minimum lot
width of 100 feet.
(F) Yards.
(1) Application of yards to one building only. No part of a yard required for any building may be
included as fulfilling the yard requirements for an adjacent building.
(2) Use of yards for accessory buildings. No accessory buildings are permitted in front or side
yards. They are permitted only in the rear yards according to the dimensions and area regulations set forth
in the specific zoning district regulations of this chapter.
(3) Rear dwelling prohibited. No building in the rear of a main building on the same lot may be
erected for residential purposes, except as approved or in a multifamily residential district.
(G) Building line setbacks.
(1) Distance greater than minimum required. Building setback lines as established by this
section may be greater than the minimums set forth.
(2) Front yard setback line. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, the minimum front yard
setback line shall be 1/2 the width of the street right-of-way, and in no case shall this distance be less than
30 feet. Lots fronting on a cul-de-sac shall have a minimum 100 foot front yard setback line. A waiver from
strict enforcement of this front yard setback may be granted by the Zoning Administrator where the
majority of existing development on the same block face is set back less than the required setback. In such
case, the front yard setback may be the average setback line for that block face.
(3) Rear yard setback line. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, the minimum rear yard
setback line shall be no less than 25 feet.
2006 S-7
86 Lebanon - Land Usage
(4) Side yard setback line. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, the minimum side yard
setback line shall be no less than eight feet.
(5) Additional setbacks for corner lots. Corner lots shall be required to provide a front yard along
any lot line abutting a street. Unless the plat is expressly marked as to the street the dwelling will front, a
rear yard shall be substituted for any side yard not abutting a street. Corner lots shall be required to provide
a side yard abutting a street of at least 30 feet.
(6) Additional setbacks adjacent to parkways or other highways. Lots that abut or are adjacent to
a parkway or other fully controlled access highways which allow no direct access shall have a minimum
building setback line from the right-of-way of said highway of 25 feet. This building line shall be the same
whether considered as front, side, or rear setback.
(H) Building height.
(1) Maximum building height. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, no building shall
exceed 45 feet in height.
(2) Height exceptions. Building height regulations apply to buildings occupied regularly by
persons or their activities. They do not apply to structures or portions of buildings, such as church spires,
belfries, cupolas, and domes not intended for human occupancy; monuments; water towers; observation
towers; flagpoles; or, chimneys. The Board of Adjustment shall interpret whether or not height regulations
apply upon application by the Administrative Official in doubtful cases. The Kentucky Airport Zoning and
Federal Aviation Agency height regulations in the vicinity of an airport shall take precedence over all other
height regulations.
(I) Access and visibility. All lots shall have access to a public street and shall comply with the access
and visibility requirements set forth in the Subdivision Regulations. The Planning Commission shall
approve access to buildings in a Planned Unit Development.
(J) Accessory buildings and structures.
(1) General. Accessory buildings and structures, except as otherwise permitted by this chapter,
shall be subject to the following regulations. Accessory buildings and structures shall be permanently
affixed to the ground and shall not include mobile homes, buses, travel trailers, recreational vehicles,
trailers, coolers, vehicles, or freight containers. No accessory structure that is not designated to breakaway
on impact shall be permitted in the right-of-way. Such structures include, but are not limited to, rock or
brick mailbox structures. Any accessory structure may be connected to the principal building by a
breezeway or other similar structure but shall not be considered as an attached accessory building, carport,
or similar structure. Said breezeway shall not project nearer to the side lot line than the minimum side yard
required for the principal building.
(2) Setbacks. Accessory structures shall not be located in the front yard and side yard and shall
not extend beyond the principal structure. Accessory structures shall be located behind the principal
structure. Accessory structures on corner lots adjoining residential uses or districts shall not extend
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 87
beyond the front of the principal structure or be nearer to the side street than the depth of the required front
setback for the principal structure along such street.
(3) Height. The height of accessory structures shall not exceed the height of the principal
structure.
(4) Size. The maximum size of accessory structures shall be 50% of gross floor area of principal
structure.
(5) Fencing.
(a) Height. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, fencing shall be permitted and shall
conform to height restrictions. Fencing less than four feet in height shall be permitted along all property
lines. Fencing that is four to six feet in height shall be permitted along rear and side property lines and from
the rear property line to the rear of the principal building. Fencing greater than six feet in height shall be
permitted with the prior approval of the Planning Commission.
(b) Materials. Fencing or screening constructed in front or side yards abutting a public street
must be constructed of materials not eliminating or impeding view of the principal building from the public
street and requires Planning Commission approval for location, height, material, and construction.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.067 SINKHOLES.
Sinkholes and other similar depressions and the area within 50 feet horizontally from the rim of said
sinkhole or that area subject to periodic flooding, whichever is greater, shall be preserved in its natural state
for the purpose of providing drainage of the surrounding area. No building, street or any other improvement
shall be made within the given area around a sinkhole. The Planning Commission shall have the power to
increase the area around the sinkhole if drainage conditions warrant such action. The sinkhole may be
Apunched@ or otherwise altered to improve drainage. The Planning Commission or its Administrative
Official is hereby empowered to require appropriate survey work to identify such features, of any applicant
seeking approval to divide, develop, or rezone property in Marion County where it is reasonably anticipated
that such problems occur.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.068 FLOOD PLAINS.
The Administrative Officer may approve but shall advise the applicant of a zoning permit when the site
on which the applicant wants to build is within the 100-year flood plain, as determined by the United States
Army Corps of Engineers. All applicable flood plain regulations and requirements must be completed. All
buildings or structures in a designated flood-way or floodplain which tend to increase
2006 S-7
88 Lebanon - Land Usage
flood heights or obstruct the flow of flood waters shall be regulated by the Planning Commission, and
therefore, require the review and approval of the Marion County Planning Commission.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
AGRICULTURE DISTRICT (A)
' 154.080 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
The Agriculture District is intended to provide for the location of land situated on the fringe of the
urban area of Lebanon and for agricultural and related open space purposes, but that may become an urban
area in the future. Generally these areas will be located near urban development. Therefore, the
agricultural uses and activities conducted in this District should not be detrimental to urban land uses. The
types of uses the area and intensity of use permitted in this District shall encourage and protect agricultural
uses until urbanization is warranted. The Agriculture District shall be served by public sanitary sewer.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.081 USES.
General use regulations are set forth in '' 154.065 - 154.068, and a listing of permitted, accessory, and
conditional uses and structures in this District are set forth in the Use Table in Appendix A of this chapter.
Any use and structure not listed in the Use Table shall be prohibited, unless otherwise determined by the
Administrative Official.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.082 PERMITTED RESIDENTIAL UNIT TYPES.
The following residential unit types shall be permitted in the Agriculture District:
(A) Single-family detached dwelling;
(B) Modular or manufactured home; and,
(C) Class A and Class B mobile homes as tenant dwellings with the issuance of Conditional Use
Permit by the Board of Adjustments and in accordance with '' 154.345 - 154.348.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 89
' 154.083 PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
Development in the Agriculture District shall comply with the property development standards set
forth in this chapter. Sections 154.065 - 154.068 sets forth general use regulations for all zoning districts.
Residential development in the Agricultural District shall comply with the standards of the Single-Family
Residential District (R-1).
Lot area (minimum)
12,000 square feet
Lot width (minimum)
100 feet
Lot coverage (maximum)
50%
Setbacks and yards (minimum)
Front yard setback
Side yard setback
Rear yard setback
30 feet
12 feet; two side yards required
25 feet
Building height (maximum)
45 feet
Accessory structure
rear and side yard setbacks (minimum)
8 feet
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.084 SIGNAGE.
All signage shall comply with the provisions of '' 154.380 - 154.390.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.085 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING/UNLOADING.
All off-street parking and loading/unloading areas shall comply with the provisions of
'' 154.400 - 154.402.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-1)
' 154.100 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
The Single-Family Residential District (R-1) is intended to provide opportunities for single-family
residential development, including zero lot line homes. Occupancy in these districts is limited to one
2006 S-7
90 Lebanon - Land Usage
family per residential unit. No accessory apartments shall be allowed in these districts. The R-1 District
shall be served by public sanitary sewer.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.101 USES.
General use regulations are set forth in '' 154.065 - 154.068, and a listing of permitted, accessory, and
conditional uses and structures in this District are set forth in the Use Table in Appendix A of this chapter.
Any use and structure not listed in the Use Table shall be prohibited, unless otherwise determined by the
Administrative Official.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.102 PERMITTED RESIDENTIAL UNIT TYPES.
The following residential unit types shall be permitted in the R-1 District:
(A) Single-family detached,
(B) Modular or manufactured home in compliance with '' 154.345 - 154.348.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.103 PERMITTED OVERLAY DISTRICTS.
The following overlay districts may be permitted in the R-1 District:
(A) Planned Unit Development (PUD) Overlay District as set forth in '' 154.290 - 154.292, and
(B) Residential Cluster Development (RCD) Overlay District as set forth in '' 154.305 - 154.316.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.104 R-1 PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
Development in the R-1 District shall comply with the property development standards set forth in this
chapter. Sections 154.065 - 154.068 sets forth general use regulations for all zoning districts.
Lot area (minimum)
12,000 square feet
Lot width (minimum)
80 feet
Lot coverage (maximum)
50%
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 91
Setbacks and yards (minimum)
Front yard setback
Side yard setback
Rear yard setback
30 feet
12 feet; two side yards required
25 feet
Building height (maximum)
45 feet
Accessory structure
Rear and side yard setbacks (minimum)
8 feet
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.105 SIGNAGE.
All signage shall comply with the provisions of '' 154.380 - 154.390.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.106 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING/UNLOADING.
All off-street parking and loading/unloading areas shall comply with the provisions of
'' 154.400 - 154.402.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
TWO- TO FOUR-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-2)
' 154.120 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
The Two- to Four-Family Residential District (R-2) is intended to provide opportunities for two-,
three-, and four-family residential development, including duplexes or twinhomes, triplexes, fourplexes and
townhouse and multi-family developments of up to four-units in a single building. The R-2 District shall be
served by public sanitary sewer.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.121 USES.
General use regulations are set forth in '' 154.065 - 154.068, and a listing of permitted, accessory, and
conditional uses and structures in this District are set forth in the Use Table in Appendix A of this
2006 S-7
92 Lebanon - Land Usage
chapter. Any use and structure not listed in the Use Table shall be prohibited, unless otherwise determined
by the Administrative Official.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.122 PERMITTED RESIDENTIAL UNIT TYPES.
The following residential unit types shall be permitted in the R-2 district:
(A) Duplexes or twinhomes,
(B) Triplexes,
(C) Fourplexes,
(D) Townhomes or condominiums containing two to four units per building;
(E) Single-family detached dwellings; and,
(F) Manufactured or modular homes in compliance with '' 154.345 - 154.348.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.123 PERMITTED OVERLAY DISTRICTS.
The following overlay districts may be permitted in the R-2 district:
Planned Unit Development (PUD) Overlay District as set forth in '' 154.290 - 154.292.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.124 R-2 PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
Development in the R-2 District shall comply with the property development standards set forth in this
chapter. Sections 154.065 - 154.068 sets forth general use regulations for all zoning districts.
Lot area (minimum)
Single-family residential
Two-family residential
Three-family residential
Four-family residential
9,750 square feet
12,000 square feet
14,250 square feet
16,500 square feet
Lot width (minimum)
65 feet
Lot coverage (maximum)
65%
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 93
Setbacks and yards (minimum)
Front yard setback
Side yard setback
Rear yard setback
30 feet
10 feet; two side yards required
25 feet
Building height (maximum)
45 feet
Accessory structure
Rear and side yard setbacks (minimum)
5 feet
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.125 SIGNAGE.
All signage shall comply with the provisions of '' 154.380 - 154.390.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.126 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING/UNLOADING.
All off-street parking and loading/unloading areas shall comply with the provisions of
'' 154.400 - 154.402.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-3)
' 154.140 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
The Multi-Family Residential District (R-3) is intended to provide opportunities for townhouse and
multi-family developments with greater than five units in a single building. The R-3 District shall be served
by public sanitary sewer.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.141 USES.
General use regulations are set forth in '' 154.065 - 154.068, and a listing of permitted, accessory, and
conditional uses and structures in this District are set forth in the Use Table in Appendix A of this chapter.
Any use and structure not listed in the Use Table shall be prohibited, unless otherwise determined by the
Administrative Official.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
2006 S-7
94 Lebanon - Land Usage
' 154.142 PERMITTED RESIDENTIAL UNIT TYPES.
The following residential unit types shall be permitted in the R-3 district:
(A) Townhomes or condominiums;
(B) Apartments containing greater than three units per building;
(C) Residential unit types permitted in R-2 district utilizing the R-2 standards; and
(D) Residential unit types permitted in R-1 district utilizing the R-1 standards.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.143 PERMITTED OVERLAY DISTRICTS.
The following overlay districts may be permitted in the R-3 district:
Planned Unit Development (PUD) Overlay District as set forth in '' 154.290 - 154.292.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.144 R-3 PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
Development in the R-3 District shall comply with the property development standards set forth in this
chapter. Sections 154.065 - 154.068 set forth general use regulations for all zoning districts.
Lot area (minimum)
Single-family residential
Two-family residential
Three-family residential
Four-family residential
Multi-family residential (5+ units)
7,500 square feet
9,000 square feet
10,500 square feet
12,000 square feet
13,500 square feet for first five units plus an
additional 1,500 square feet for each additional
unit
Lot width (minimum)
50 feet
Lot coverage (maximum)
75%
Setbacks and yards (minimum)
Front yard setback
Side yard setback
Rear yard setback
30 feet
8 feet; two side yards required
25 feet
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 95
Building height (maximum)
45 feet
Accessory structure
Rear and side yard setbacks (minimum)
5 feet
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.145 SIGNAGE.
All signage shall comply with the provisions of '' 154.380 - 154.390.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.146 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING/UNLOADING.
All off-street parking and loading/unloading areas shall comply with the provisions of
'' 154.400 - 154.402.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
MOBILE HOME PARK DISTRICT (MHP)
' 154.160 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
The purpose of the Mobile Home Park District is to allow for the placement of mobile homes in the
city in designated parks. All mobile home parks shall conform to all applicable local, state, and federal
rules, regulations, and laws. The Mobile Home Park District shall be served by public sanitary sewer.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.161 USES.
General use regulations are set forth in '' 154.065 - 154.068, and a listing of permitted, accessory,
and conditional uses and structures in this District are set forth in the Use Table in Appendix A of this
chapter. Any use and structure not listed in the Use Table shall be prohibited, unless otherwise determined
by the Administrative Official.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
2006 S-7
96 Lebanon - Land Usage
' 154.162 MHP PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
(A) General. Development in the MHP District shall comply with the property development standards
set forth in this chapter. Sections 154.065 - 154.068 sets forth general use regulations for all zoning
districts. Only one individual mobile home unit and accessory buildings customarily incidental to the
individual mobile home unit shall be allowed per individual lot within the mobile home park.
Mobile home park standards
Park Area (minimum)
1 acre (43,560 square feet)
Park Density (minimum)
10 mobile home lots per acre
Individual mobile home lot standards
Lot area (minimum)
4,000 square feet
Lot width (minimum)
1-way street
1-way street with parking on 1 side
1-way street with parking on both sides
2-way street
2-way street with parking on 1 side
2-way street with parking on both sides
14 feet
23 feet
32 feet
18 feet
27 feet
36 feet
Lot coverage (maximum)
50%
Setbacks and yards (minimum)
Front yard setback
Side yard setback
Rear yard setback
20 feet
10 feet; two side yards required
10 feet
Mobile home spacing
25 feet minimum
Accessory structure standards
Rear and side yard setbacks (minimum)
Note: If an accessory structure is less than
25 square feet in area or within 15 feet of the
individual mobile home unit, the structure shall
be considered to be a part of the unit.
5 feet
(B) Multi-phase park development. A mobile home park may be developed in phases or stages as
long as the developer complies with the overall approved plan for the entire park development and the
initial phase or stage has a minimum of two mobile home lots developed for use.
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 97
(C) Foundation requirements. Individual mobile home lots shall have a concrete pad or other
foundation satisfactory to the Planning Commission. Each pad shall be sufficient size to accommodate the
mobile home unit to be situated thereon. Individual lot pads or foundations shall be a minimum of 10 feet
from lot lines.
(D) Internal street system. All mobile home parks shall be provided with convenient and safe internal
vehicular access. Entrances shall be adequate to accommodate traffic and parking and shall meet
all specifications and requirements of this chapter and the Subdivision Regulations. Entrances shall be
approved by the city. All internal streets shall have a right-of-way of not less than 50 feet and pavement
width of not less than 22 feet. Each park shall have at least one street which gives access to a public street.
Such access streets in either a single mobile home park or adjoining parks shall not be less than 100 feet
apart and no less than 125 feet from an intersection of two or more public streets. All streets within the park
shall be paved and well lighted as specified in the Subdivision Regulations. No street within the mobile
home park shall be closer than five feet from any property line.
(E) Utilities.
(1) Water system. All mobile home parks and individual mobile home lots shall be served by
water system meeting the standards specified by local and state regulations, and each mobile home lot shall
be properly connected to the water system. The mobile home park and lots shall be served by a completely
looped water distribution system adequate to serve the park, and each individual mobile home lots shall be
connected. The mobile home park shall be served by fire hydrants spaced a maximum of 600 feet apart.
(2) Sanitary sewer system. All mobile home parks and individual mobile home lots shall be
served by a public sanitary sewer system. The mobile home park and lots shall be served by a complete
collection system, including lateral collection for each individual mobile home lot and if necessary, lift or
pumping stations. Where a public sanitary system is not readily accessible, mobile home parks and
individual mobile home lots shall be served by an individual sanitary sewer system approved by the
appropriate agency. Septic systems are prohibited.
(3) Electric and telephone. All mobile home parks and individual mobile home lots shall be
served by underground electrical and telephone utilities, unless waived by the Planning Commission
through a public hearing process and demonstration of extreme hardship by the developer.
(F) Off-street parking requirements.
(1) General requirements. Off-street parking shall be provided with vehicular access to the
public right-of-way in the MHP District and shall conform to the regulations set forth in this subchapter.
Off-street parking shall be located on the same property as the permitted use, unless the Planning
Commission authorizes the use of other properties. The off-street parking requirements and ingress/egress
shall not, except for single-family residences, be used in the computation of parking spaces. The required
parking area for the permitted use shall not be reduced or encroached upon in any manner. Combined uses
shall provide parking equal to the sum of the individual uses. All off-street parking shall be paved.
2006 S-7
98 Lebanon - Land Usage
(2) Minimum parking area. The minimum dimensions of off-street parking shall be 10 by 20
feet, or 200 square feet
(3) Minimum parking spaces. The minimum number of off-street parking spaces for individual
mobile home lots shall be two spaces.
(G) On-street parking and loading/unloading. The on-street parking of vehicles 20 feet or longer in
length on public streets shall be prohibited in a residential district, except for delivery, maintenance,
construction, or other loading/unloading purposes.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (B-1)
' 154.175 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
The Central Business District is intended to provide for the continued vitality of downtown Lebanon
and the maintenance and re-use of existing historic structures. There shall be only one contiguous B-1
District within the corporate limits of the city. This district shall be served by public sanitary sewer.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.176 USES.
General use regulations are set forth in '' 154.065 - 154.068, and a listing of permitted, accessory, and
conditional uses and structures in this District are set forth in the Use Table in Appendix A of this chapter.
Any use and structure not listed in the Use Table shall be prohibited, unless otherwise determined by the
Administrative Official.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.177 PERMITTED RESIDENTIAL UNIT TYPES.
Residential unit types permitted in R-3 district shall be permitted in the B-1 District. In mixed use
buildings, ground floor residential uses are prohibited, and residential and nonresidential uses shall not be
permitted on the same floor unless served by separate entrances.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 99
' 154.178 B-1 PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
Development in the B-1 District shall comply with the property development standards set forth in this
chapter. Sections 154.065 - 154.068 set forth general use regulations for all zoning districts.
Lot area (minimum)
7,500 square feet
Lot width (minimum)
25 feet
Lot coverage (maximum)
100%
Setbacks and yards (minimum)
Front yard setback
Side yard setback
Rear yard setback
None
None
None
Building height (maximum)
75 feet
Accessory structure
Rear and side yard setbacks (minimum)
5 feet
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.179 SIGNAGE.
All signage shall comply with the provisions of '' 154.380 - 154.390.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.180 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING/UNLOADING.
All off-street parking and loading/unloading areas shall comply with the provisions of
'' 154.400 - 154.402.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (B-2)
' 154.190 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
The General Business District is intended to provide retail and service uses, not exceeding 15,000
square feet in building area, to serve the adjoining neighboring residential areas. The General Business
2006 S-7
100 Lebanon - Land Usage
also may provide selected retail and service uses serving the entire community, but it is not intended to
serve the regional retail service area of Lebanon. These districts are located adjacent to the B-1 Zoning
District and on selected residential neighborhoods, on highways leading from the B-1 District and near or
adjacent to the B-1 District. This district shall be served by public sanitary sewer.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.191 USES.
General use regulations are set forth in '' 154.065 - 154.068, and a listing of permitted, accessory, and
conditional uses and structures in this District are set forth in the Use Table in Appendix A of this chapter.
Permitted and conditional uses shall not exceed 5,000 square feet in building area. Any use and structure
not listed in the Use Table shall be prohibited, unless otherwise determined by the Administrative Official.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.192 PERMITTED RESIDENTIAL UNIT TYPES.
Multi-family residential unit types permitted in R-3 District and utilizing the R-3 property development
standards shall be permitted in the B-2 District.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.193 B-2 PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
Development in the B-2 District shall comply with the property development standards set forth in this
chapter. Sections 154.065 - 054.068 set forth general use regulations for all zoning districts.
Lot area (minimum)
7,500 square feet
Lot width (minimum)
50 feet
Lot coverage (maximum)
75%
Setbacks and yards (minimum)
Front yard setback
Side yard setback
Rear yard setback
25 feet
5 feet and 12 feet; two side yards required
25 feet
Building height (maximum)
45 feet
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 101
Building gross floor area (maximum)
15,000 square feet
Accessory structure
Rear and side yard setbacks (minimum)
5 feet
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.194 SIGNAGE.
All signage shall comply with the provisions of '' 154.380 - 154.390.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.195 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING/UNLOADING.
All off-street parking and loading/unloading areas shall comply with the provisions of
'' 154.400 - 154.402.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.196 BUFFERING.
(A) General. All B-2 development abutting a residential district or use shall be required to provide a
buffer as deemed appropriate and approved by the Planning Commission in order to protect the residential
area from unreasonable disturbance by movement of people or vehicles, light, noises, or views
incompatible with residential areas.
(B) Height. All buffers shall be a minimum of eight feet in height and shall not exceed 20 feet.
(C) Design. The design and materials of buffering shall be compatible with adjacent residential areas
and sufficient to minimize adverse impacts of the commercial development. The Planning Commission
shall review and approve the design and materials of buffering.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
HIGHWAY BUSINESS DISTRICT (B-3)
' 154.210 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
The Highway Business District is intended to encourage the establishment of intensive commercial use
areas designed to meet the needs of a community or regional market area and typically oriented to
2006 S-7
102 Lebanon - Land Usage
customers who travel by motor vehicles. This district primarily provides retail and wholesale trade
dependent upon vehicular traffic to supply both merchandise and customers and has large space uses, such
as department stores, fast food restaurants, service stations, and specialty stores. This district shall have
direct access to arterial or collector roads, and areas adjacent to residential districts shall be adequately
buffered. The B-3 District shall be served by public sanitary sewer.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.211 USES.
General use regulations are set forth in '' 154.065 - 154.068, and a listing of permitted, accessory, and
conditional uses and structures in this District are set forth in the Use Table in Appendix A of this chapter.
Any use and structure not listed in the Use Table shall be prohibited, unless otherwise determined by the
Administrative Official.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.212 PERMITTED RESIDENTIAL UNIT TYPES.
Multi-family residential unit types permitted in R-3 district and utilizing the R-3 property development
standards shall be permitted in the B-3 District.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.213 B-3 PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
Development in the B-3 District shall comply with the property development standards set forth in this
chapter. Sections 154.065 - 154.068 set forth general use regulations for all zoning districts.
Lot area (minimum)
21,780 square feet
Lot width (minimum)
100 feet
Lot coverage (maximum)
90%
Setbacks and yards (minimum)
Front yard setback
Side yard setback
Rear yard setback
25 feet
25 feet; two side yards required
25 feet
Building height (maximum)
45 feet
Accessory structure
Rear and side yard setbacks (minimum)
5 feet
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 103
' 154.214 SIGNAGE.
All signage shall comply with the provisions of '' 154.380 - 154.390.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.215 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING/UNLOADING.
All off-street parking and loading/unloading areas shall comply with the provisions of
'' 154.400 - 154.402.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.216 BUFFERING.
(A) General. All B-3 development abutting a residential district or use shall be required to provide a
buffer as deemed appropriate and approved by the Planning Commission in order to protect the residential
area from unreasonable disturbance by movement of people or vehicles, light, noises, or views
incompatible with residential areas.
(B) Height. All buffers shall be a minimum of eight feet in height and shall not exceed 20 feet.
(C) Design. The design and materials of buffering shall be compatible with adjacent residential areas
and sufficient to minimize adverse impacts of the commercial development. The Planning Commission
shall review and approve the design and materials of buffering.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
OFFICE AND PROFESSIONAL DISTRICT (OP)
' 154.230 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
The purpose of the Office and Professional District is to provide opportunities for professional offices
in appropriate locations to accommodate the needs of the community. The OP district is designed to serve
as a transitional district between business and residential districts and should be adjacent or near to R-2 and
R-3, B-1, B-2, and B-3 districts. The OP District shall be served by public sanitary sewer.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.231 USES.
General use regulations are set forth in '' 154.065 - 154.068, and a listing of permitted, accessory, and
conditional uses and structures in this District are set forth in the Use Table in Appendix
2006 S-7
104 Lebanon - Land Usage
A of this chapter. Any use and structure not listed in the Use Table shall be prohibited, unless otherwise
determined by the Administrative Official.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.232 OP PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
Development in the OP District shall comply with the property development standards set forth in this
chapter. Sections 154.065 - 154.068 set forth general use regulations for all zoning districts.
Lot area (minimum)
7,500 square feet
Lot width (minimum)
50 feet
Lot coverage (maximum)
50%
Setbacks and yards (minimum)
Front yard setback
Side yard setback
Rear yard setback
25 feet
8 feet; two side yards required
25 feet
Building height (maximum)
45 feet
Accessory structure
Rear and side yard setbacks (minimum)
5 feet
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.233 SIGNAGE.
All signage shall comply with the provisions of '' 154.380 - 154.390.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.234 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING/UNLOADING.
All off-street parking and loading/unloading areas shall comply with the provisions of
'' 154.400 - 154.402.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.235 BUFFERING.
(A) General. All OP development abutting a residential district or use shall be required to provide a
buffer as deemed appropriate and approved by the Planning Commission in order to protect the
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 105
residential area from unreasonable disturbance by movement of people or vehicles, light, noises, or views
incompatible with residential areas.
(B) Height. All buffers shall be a minimum of eight feet in height and shall not exceed 20 feet.
(C) Design. The design and materials of buffering shall be compatible with adjacent residential areas
and sufficient to minimize adverse impacts of the commercial development. The Planning Commission
shall review and approve the design and materials of buffering.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (I-1)
' 154.245 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
The purpose of the Light Industrial District (I-1) is to provide locations for warehouse, distribution, and
service operations and those industrial uses that are primarily assembling or light fabricating operations
where there is no outside storage or activity other than loading or unloading. The I-1 District is designed to
upgrade industrial development standards, prevent industrial blight, and protect light industrial
development from incompatible residential, commercial, or heavy industrial uses. This I-1 District may
function as a buffer or transition between commercial and heavy industrial development and should be
located near or adjacent to B-2 or B-3 Districts. The I-1 District shall be served by public sanitary sewer.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.246 USES.
General use regulations are set forth in '' 154.065 - 154.068, and a listing of permitted, accessory, and
conditional uses and structures in this District are set forth in the Use Table in Appendix A. Any use and
structure not listed in the Use Table shall be prohibited, unless otherwise determined by the Administrative
Official.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.247 I-1 PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
Development in the I-1 District shall comply with the property development standards set forth in this
chapter. Sections 154.065 - 154.068 sets forth general use regulations for all zoning districts.
2006 S-7
106 Lebanon - Land Usage
Lot area (minimum)
21,780 square feet
Lot width (minimum)
100 feet
Lot coverage (maximum)
90%
Setbacks and yards (minimum)
Front yard setback
Side yard setback
Rear yard setback
50 feet
30 feet; two side yards required
30 feet
Building height (maximum)
Not applicable
Accessory structure
Rear and side yard setbacks (minimum)
5 feet
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.248 SIGNAGE.
All signage shall comply with the provisions of '' 154.380 - 154.390.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.249 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING/UNLOADING.
All off-street parking and loading/unloading areas shall comply with the provisions of
'' 154.400 - 154.402.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.250 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
(A) Building enclosures. Every use permitted in the I-1 District shall be operated in its entirety within
a completely enclosed building. The Planning Commission may exempt uses from total enclosure and
require an area screened from view at the nearest district boundary.
(B) Landscaping. All I-1 lots shall have a ten foot wide landscaping strip along all property lines
abutting public streets, and all required yards shall be graded to ensure proper drainage and shall either be
open landscaped and grassed areas or be left in a natural state, if acceptable to the Planning Commission. If
said area is to be landscaped, it shall be landscaped attractively with lawn, trees, shrubs, or other plantings,
according to the initial submitted plans which were first approved. Landscaping shall not interfere with or
block views of buildings or the identification of such buildings.
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 107
(C) Buffering. All I-1 development abutting a residential or business district or use shall be required
to provide a buffer as deemed appropriate and approved by the Planning Commission in order to protect the
residential area from unreasonable disturbance by movement of people or vehicles, light, noises, or views
incompatible with residential areas. Buffering shall be a minimum of eight feet in height but not exceed ten
feet in height.
(D) Noise. Industrial noise shall be muffled so as not to become objectionable due to intermittence,
beat, frequency, or shrillness.
(E) Exterior lighting. Any lights used for exterior illumination, except for overhead street lighting and
warning, or traffic signals shall direct light away from adjoining zoning districts and shall minimize
disturbance of adjacent properties and interference with traffic.
(F) Internal circulation and ingress/egress. Lots shall include sufficient internal circulation and
ingress/egress to minimize traffic congestion. Ingress and egress shall have minimum 12 foot wide lanes
and minimum radius of curve at the pavement edge of 36 feet.
(G) Odorous matter. No emission of odorous matter shall be allowed in excess of ambient air quality
standards as set forth by the regulations adopted by the Kentucky Department for Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection, Division of Air Pollution, Bowling Green Air Quality Region.
(H) Humidity, heat, or glare. Any activity producing humidity, in the form of steam or moist air or
producing heat or glare, shall be carried on in such a manner that the steam, humidity, heat, or glare is not
perceptible at or beyond any residential or commercial district boundary. Detailed plans for the elimination
of humidity, heat, or glare may be required before the issuance of a building permit.
(I) Vibration. Vibrations shall be measured at the lot line. No vibration is permitted which is
discernible to the human sense of feeling for three minutes or more duration in any one hour.
(J) Emissions and open burning. No emission of particulate matter, sulfur compound, carbon
monoxide, hydrocarbon, nitrogen oxide, and open burning shall be allowed in excess of regulations adopted
by the Kentucky Department for Natural Resources and Environmental Protection, Division of Air
Pollution, Bowling Green Air Quality Region.
(K) Radiation. All sources of ionizing radiation shall be registered or licensed by the Kentucky State
Department of Health and operated in accordance with their regulations.
(L) Electrical radiation. Any electrical radiation shall not adversely affect, at any point on or beyond
the lot line, any equipment other than those of the creation of the radiation. Avoidance of adverse effects
from electrical radiation by appropriate mutual scheduling of operations is permitted.
(M) Storage. Storage of material, supplies, and products on the property outside the building
constructed thereon is permitted to the side and rear of the property providing that storage of materials,
products, supplies, and products are within an area screened from view at the nearest district boundary,
adjacent properties, public streets, or highways.
2006 S-7
108 Lebanon - Land Usage
(N) Fire and explosive hazards. Storage, utilization, or manufacture of solid materials which requires
free burning and intense burning may be allowed if permitted in an industrial district, provided that said
materials or products shall be stored, utilized, or manufactured within completely enclosed buildings
having incombustible walls and protected throughout by an automatic fire extinguishing system. The bulk
storage of flammable liquids or materials which produce flammable or explosive vapors or gases shall not
be permitted in above-ground storage facilities, with the exception of fuel tanks or drums connected to
heating devices or appliances located on the same lot as the fuel tanks and drums. Where a permitted use
requires the storage of flammable liquids or materials that produce flammable or explosive vapors or gases,
storage facilities shall have the following minimum setback from all boundary lines:
(1) Liquid petroleum gases.
Underground storage capacity
Minimum setback
Less than 500 gallons
10 ft
501 - 2,000 gallons
25 ft
Over 2,000 gallons
50 ft.
(2) Flammable liquids.
Underground storage capacity
Minimum setback
Less than 500 gallons
6 ft
501 -2,000 gallons
10 ft
2,001 - 5,000 gallons
20 ft
5,001 - 15,000 gallons
30 ft
15,001 - 20,000 gallons
40 ft
20,001 - 35,000 gallons
50 ft.
(3) Explosives.
Capacity
Minimum setback
Less than 5 pounds
70 ft
6 -10 pounds
90 ft
11 - 20 pounds
110 ft
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 109
21 - 25 pounds
125 ft
Greater than 25 pounds
Not permitted without prior approval from the
Planning Commission
(O) Waste. No waste material or refuse shall be dumped upon or permitted to remain upon any part of
the property outside of the buildings constructed thereon. All sewage and industrial waste shall be treated
and disposed of in such manner so as to comply with the standards of the appropriate authority. All plans
for waste disposal facilities shall be required before the issuance of any building permit. All waste shall be
disposed of in accordance with the regulations of the Kentucky Department of Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection, Division of Waste Management.
(P) Mining and reclamation. All methods of operation, construction of roads, backfilling, grading,
blasting, water impoundments, treatment facilities, and reclamation must be in conformance with the
regulations adopted by the Department of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection, Bureau of
Surface Mining Reclamation and Environment (KRS 352). Any excavation or processing operations shall
be subject to the regulations of the Kentucky Water Pollution Control Commission.
(Q) Blasting and explosives. All blasting and the use of explosives must be conducted in accordance
with the regulations set forth by the Department of Mines and Minerals, Division of Explosives and
Blasting (KRS 351).
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (I-2)
' 154.260 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
The purpose of the Heavy Industrial District (I-2) is to provide appropriate locations for heavy
industrial uses and other uses not otherwise permitted in other districts. A heavy industrial use is a use
ordinarily requiring buildings and open area for manufacturing, fabricating, processing, extraction, heavy
repairing, dismantling, and storage or disposal of equipment, raw materials, manufacturing products, or
wastes. This district shall be adjacent to I-1 district and shall be served by public sanitary sewer.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.261 USES.
General use regulations are set forth in '' 154.065 - 154.068, and a listing of permitted, accessory, and
conditional uses and structures in this district are set forth in the Use Table in Appendix A. Any
2006 S-7
110 Lebanon - Land Usage
use and structure not listed in the Use Table shall be prohibited, unless otherwise determined by the
Administrative Official.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.262 I-2 PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
Development in the I-2 District shall comply with the property development standards set forth in this
chapter. Sections 154.065 - 154.068 set forth general use regulations for all zoning districts.
Lot area (minimum)
43,560 square feet (1 acre)
Lot width (minimum)
100 feet
Lot coverage (maximum)
90%
Setbacks and yards (minimum)
Front yard setback
Side yard setback
Rear yard setback
50 feet
30 feet; two side yards required
30 feet
Building height (maximum)
Not applicable
Accessory structure rear and side yard setbacks
(minimum)
5 feet
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.263 SIGNAGE.
All signage shall comply with the provisions of '' 154.380 - 154.390.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.264 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING/UNLOADING.
All off-street parking and loading/unloading areas shall comply with the provisions of
'' 154.400 - 154.402.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 111
' 154.265 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
(A) Building enclosures. Every use permitted in the I-2 District shall be operated in its entirety within
a completely enclosed building. The Planning Commission may exempt uses from total enclosure and
require an area screened from view at the nearest district boundary.
(B) Landscaping. All I-2 lots shall have a ten foot wide landscaping strip along all property lines
abutting public streets, and all required yards shall be graded to ensure proper drainage and shall either be
open landscaped and grassed areas or be left in a natural state, if acceptable to the Planning
Commission. If said area is to be landscaped, it shall be landscaped attractively with lawn, trees, shrubs, or
other plantings, according to the initial submitted plans which were first approved. Landscaping shall not
interfere with or block views of buildings or the identification of such buildings. The Planning Commission
shall approve all landscaping plans.
(C) Buffering. All I-2 development abutting a residential or business district or use shall be required
to provide a buffer in order to protect the residential area from unreasonable disturbance by movement of
people or vehicles, light, noises, or views incompatible with residential areas. Principal and accessory
buildings and structures shall have a minimum setback of 80 feet from any adjacent residential or business
district or use, and buffering shall be a minimum of eight feet in height but not exceed ten feet in height.
The Planning Commission shall approve all buffering plans.
(D) Noise. Industrial noise shall be muffled so as not to become objectionable due to intermittence,
beat, frequency, or shrillness.
(E) Exterior lighting. Any lights used for exterior illumination, except for overhead street lighting and
warning, or traffic signals shall direct light away from adjoining zoning districts and shall minimize
disturbance of adjacent properties and interference with traffic.
(F) Internal circulation and ingress/egress. Lots shall include sufficient internal circulation and
ingress/egress to minimize traffic congestion. Ingress and egress shall have minimum 12 foot wide lanes
and minimum radius of curve at the pavement edge of 36 feet.
(G) Odorous matter. No emission of odorous matter shall be allowed in excess of ambient air quality
standards as set forth by the regulations adopted by the Kentucky Department for Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection, Division of Air Pollution, Bowling Green Air Quality Region.
(H) Humidity, heat, or glare. Any activity producing humidity, in the form of steam or moist air or
producing heat or glare, shall be carried on in such a manner that the steam, humidity, heat, or glare is not
perceptible at or beyond any residential or commercial district boundary. Detailed plans for the elimination
of humidity, heat, or glare may be required before the issuance of a building permit.
(I) Vibration. Vibrations shall be measured at the lot line. No vibration is permitted which is
discernible to the human sense of feeling for three minutes or more duration in any one hour.
2006 S-7
112 Lebanon - Land Usage
(J) Emissions and open burning. No emission of particulate matter, sulfur compound, carbon
monoxide, hydrocarbon, nitrogen oxide, and open burning shall be allowed in excess of regulations adopted
by the Kentucky Department for Natural Resources and Environmental Protection, Division of Air
Pollution, Bowling Green Air Quality Region.
(K) Radiation. All sources of ionizing radiation shall be registered or licensed by the Kentucky State
Department of Health and operated in accordance with their regulations.
(L) Electrical radiation. Any electrical radiation shall not adversely affect, at any point on or beyond
the lot line, any equipment other than those of the creation of the radiation. Avoidance of adverse effects
from electrical radiation by appropriate mutual scheduling of operations is permitted.
(M) Storage. Storage of material, supplies, and products on the property outside the building
constructed thereon is permitted to the side and rear of the property providing that storage of materials,
products, supplies, and products are within an area screened from view at the nearest district boundary,
adjacent properties, public streets, or highways.
(N) Fire and explosive hazards. Storage, utilization, or manufacture of solid materials which requires
free burning and intense burning may be allowed if permitted in an industrial district, provided that said
materials or products shall be stored, utilized, or manufactured within completely enclosed buildings
having incombustible walls and protected throughout by an automatic fire extinguishing system. The bulk
storage of flammable liquids or materials which produce flammable or explosive vapors or gases shall not
be permitted in above-ground storage facilities, with the exception of fuel tanks or drums connected to
heating devices or appliances located on the same lot as the fuel tanks and drums. Where a permitted use
requires the storage of flammable liquids or materials that produce flammable or explosive vapors or gases,
storage facilities shall have the following minimum setback from all boundary lines:
(1) Liquid petroleum gases.
Underground storage capacity
Minimum setback
Less than 500 gallons
10 feet
501 - 2,000 gallons
25 feet
Over 2,000 gallons
50 feet
(2) Flammable liquids.
Underground storage capacity
Minimum setback
Less than 500 gallons
6 feet
501 - 2,000 gallons
10 feet
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 113
Underground storage capacity
Minimum setback
2,001 - 5,000 gallons
20 feet
5,001 - 15,000 gallons
30 feet
15,001 - 20,000 gallons
40 feet
20,001 - 35,000 gallons
50 feet
(3) Explosives.
Capacity
Minimum setback
Less than 5 pounds
70 ft
6 -10 pounds
90 ft
11 - 20 pounds
110ft
21 - 25 pounds
125 ft
Greater than 25 pounds
Not permitted without prior approval from the
Planning Commission
(O) Waste. No waste material or refuse shall be dumped upon or permitted to remain upon any part of
the property outside of the buildings constructed thereon. All sewage and industrial waste shall be treated
and disposed of in such manner so as to comply with the standards of the appropriate authority. All plans
for waste disposal facilities shall be required before the issuance of any building permit. All waste shall be
disposed of in accordance with the regulations of the Kentucky Department of Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection, Division of Waste Management.
(P) Mining and reclamation. All methods of operation, construction of roads, backfilling, grading,
blasting, water impoundments, treatment facilities, and reclamation must be in conformance with the
regulations adopted by the Department of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection, Bureau of
Surface Mining Reclamation and Environment (KRS 352). Any excavation or processing operations shall
be subject to the regulations of the Kentucky Water Pollution Control Commission.
(Q) Blasting and Explosives. All blasting and the use of explosives must be conducted in accordance
with the regulations set forth by the Department of Mines and Minerals, Division of Explosives and
Blasting (KRS 351).
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
2006 S-7
114 Lebanon - Land Usage
PUBLIC DISTRICT (P)
' 154.275 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
The purpose of the Public District is to provide areas for public and public-related uses in appropriate
locations to accommodate the needs of the community. Public District includes areas with flooding
tendencies, drainage problems, sinkholes or similar problems; or public property, such as schools, parks,
and cemeteries.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.276 USES.
General use regulations are set forth in '' 154.065 - 154.068, and a listing of permitted, accessory, and
conditional uses and structures in this District are set forth in the Use Table in Appendix A. Any use and
structure not listed in the Use Table shall be prohibited, unless otherwise determined by the Administrative
Official.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.277 P PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
Development in the P District shall comply with the property development standards set forth in this
chapter. Sections 154.065 - 154.068 set forth general use regulations for all zoning districts.
Lot area (minimum)
7,500 square feet
Lot width (minimum)
50 feet
Lot coverage (maximum)
50%
Setbacks and yards (minimum)
Front yard setback
Side yard setback
Rear yard setback
25 feet
8 feet; two side yards required
25 feet
Building height (maximum)
45 feet
Accessory structure
Rear and side yard setbacks (minimum)
5 feet
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 115
' 154.278 SIGNAGE.
All signage shall comply with the provisions of '' 154.380 - 154.390.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.279 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING/UNLOADING.
All off-street parking and loading/unloading areas shall comply with the provisions of
'' 154.400 - 154.402.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT (PUD)
' 154.290 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
The city shall promote progressive development of land and construction thereon by encouraging
planned unit developments to achieve the following purposes:
(A) A maximum choice of living environments by allowing a variety of housing and building types
and permitting an increased density per acre and a reduction in lot dimensions, yards, building setbacks,
and area requirements;
(B) A more useful pattern of open space and recreation areas and, if permitted as part of the project,
more convenience in the location of accessory commercial uses and services;
(C) A development pattern which preserves and utilizes natural topography and geologic features,
scenic vistas, trees, and other vegetation and prevents the disruption of natural drainage patterns;
(D) A more efficient use of land than is generally achieved through conventional development
resulting in substantial savings through shorter utilities and streets; and,
(E) A development pattern in harmony with land use, density, transportation facilities, and community
facilities of the Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.291 APPLICABILITY.
The Planned Unit Development is an alternative to the traditional zoning and because of the special
characteristics of these developments; special provisions governing the development of land for this
2006 S-7
116 Lebanon - Land Usage
purpose are required. Whenever there is a conflict or difference between provisions of this subchapter and
other sections of the Zoning Ordinance, the provisions of this section shall prevail for the development of
land for Planned Unit Developments. As necessary, Planned Unit Developments shall also comply with all
applicable requirements of the Kentucky Horizontal Property Law (KRS 381.805 et seq.).
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.292 STANDARDS.
(A) Minimum PUD acreage.
(1) Residential development. Planned Unit Developments exclusively for residential development
shall have a minimum of one acre.
(2) Mixed use development. Planned Unit Developments for mixed commercial and residential
uses shall have a minimum of five acres.
(B) Permitted uses.
(1) Permitted uses in a Planned Unit Development shall conform to the permitted uses of the
zoning district in which it is located.
(2) Planned unit developments which include mixed residential and commercial uses may be
permitted in B-2 and B-3 districts if the following provisions are met:
(a) The PUD must contain at least five gross acres;
(b) The commercial area shall be located on a continuous public arterial street;
(c) The total land area for the commercial use shall not exceed 8% of the gross land area
within the Planned Unit Development;
(d) The commercial area shall be compatible with the overall design of the Planned Unit
Development, provide primarily for the needs of the residents of the development, and visually harmonize
with the residential areas within the development;
(e) No building permits may be issued for structures designated for commercial use until
occupancy permits have been issued for at least 50% of the total residential dwelling units contained within
the Planned Unit Development.
(C) Accessory uses. The following accessory uses shall be provided for in the PUD District:
(1) Private garages, storage sheds, and parking areas;
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 117
(2) Swimming pools, tennis courts, clubhouses, and other private or common use open space and
recreational areas; and
(3) Other uses and structures which are customarily accessory, clearly incidental and subordinate
to the permitted uses.
(D) Conditional uses. Conditional uses are not permitted in the PUD District.
(E) Special design conditions. The Planning Commission shall attach special design conditions to
insure that the Planned Unit Development does not depart from the intent of this chapter and the
Subdivision Regulations. Although Planned Unit Developments may be permitted to depart from the literal
conformance with the individual lot dimensions and area regulations, the development shall not diminish
the total equivalent lot area, parking area, and loading/unloading area requirements necessary for the
equivalent individual lot development. The Planning Commission may allow reductions in
individual lot dimensions and area requirements; however, the developer shall provide evidence that the
efficiencies of large-scale development may permit reductions without destroying the intent of the Zoning
Ordinance and Subdivision Regulations.
(F) Phased development. A PUD designation may be developed in phases. The Planning Commission
must approve the overall PUD plan, and individual phases must comply with the overall approved plan.
(G) Development ownership. The Planned Unit Development may be owned, leased, or controlled
either by a single person or corporation or by a group of individuals or corporations. Such ownership may
be a public or private corporation. The PUD shall not have separate ownership of individual parcels
different than the ownership of the entire project, except in exclusively residential developments.
(H) Common space ownership. The required common space land reserved under the PUD shall either
be held in corporate ownership by the owners of the project area for the use of each owner who buys
property within the PUD or be dedicated to the city and retained as common open space for parks,
recreation, and related uses. All land dedicated to the city must meet the Planning Commission=s area and
dimensional requirements. Public utility and other similar easements and rights-of-way for waterways and
other similar channels are not acceptable for common open space dedication to the city unless such
right-of-way or land is usable as a trail or other similar purpose and approved by the Planning Commission.
Before approval of the final PUD, the developer shall specify the responsibility for maintenance of all open
space.
(I) Utilities. Underground utilities, including telephone, electric, and cable, may be required within
the limits of all PUDs. Appurtenances to these systems that can be effectively screened may be exempted
from this requirement if the Planning Commission finds that such exemption will not violate the intent or
character of the proposed PUD.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
2006 S-7
118 Lebanon - Land Usage
' 154.293 DESIGNATION PROCEDURES.
(A) Subdivision plat requirements. Planned Unit Developments shall be reviewed in accordance to the
Major Subdivision application procedure and approval process and all other provisions of the Subdivision
Regulations and Zoning Ordinance. A zoning map amendment for Planned Unit Development overlay
designation shall only be considered after the conditional approval of the preliminary plat.
(B) Zoning map amendment requirements. Upon conditional approval of the Planned Unit
Development preliminary plat, a Planned Unit Development District designation shall be considered. The
policies and procedures for zoning map amendments set forth in '' 154.400 - 154.402 shall be required for
Planned Unit Development overlay designations. The zoning map amendment for PUD designation shall be
accompanied by any proposed restrictive covenants or homeowners= association documents and
development plan.
(C) PUD development plan requirements. As a condition to the granting of any Planned Unit
Development District overlay district designation, the Planning Commission shall require the submission of
a development plan. Where agreed upon, this Development Plan shall be followed and shall be binding on
all parties. The Development Plan shall be filed in accordance with the provisions and requirements of
'' 154.400 - 154.402 and shall also the following:
(1) The PUD shall provide a road system that will be adequate to serve both the residents of the
PUD and surrounding residents. The design shall provide for the continuation of existing or dedicated
streets on adjoining or nearby tracts and provide for connection to adjoining unsubdivided tracts, especially
those that would otherwise be landlocked. Collector streets as designated in the Comprehensive Plan shall
be extended as shown therein. The developer may petition the Lebanon City Council for acceptance of the
maintenance of any PUD street.
(2) The PUD shall have a harmonious relationship with surrounding land uses. Certain uses may
be limited to specified locations within the PUD district or other restrictions or requirements may be made
as necessary.
(3) The PUD design shall provide for adequate light for each dwelling unit during all seasons of
the year. The Planning Commission or City Council may require a winter shadow plan to be submitted prior
to making a recommendation or decision on the PUD designation. Usable open space shall be distributed
throughout the site so that open space is readily available to each unit. Dwelling units shall be arranged in
relationship to each other in the terrain so that adequate ventilation is provided to each unit.
(4) The Development Plan shall provide for the proper maintenance of common open space and
other common ownership of facilities. Homeowners associations shall be generally required. The restrictive
covenants creating homeowners associations shall provide for the equitable sharing of responsibility for
maintenance among property owners and shall provide for means of exacting annual assessments from
owners to ensure that funds for maintenance will be available. Proposed convents, prepared by a licensed
attorney in the Commonwealth, shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 119
attorney as to their form and content with no assumption of liability on the part of the city. Such covenants
shall also be filed with the PUD plan and shall be recorded prior to or in conjunction with the recording of
the subdivision record plats.
(D) Final plat approval and building permit issuance. The developer shall file a final subdivision plat
for all Planned Unit Developments, and upon certification of the Development Plan and Final Subdivision
Plat, the city will issue building permits in accordance with the Development Plan.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT (RCD) OVERLAY DISTRICT
' 154.305 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
The purposes and intent of the Residential Cluster Development (RCD) Overlay District are:
(A) Provide a means whereby clusters of attached and detached single-family residential units may be
constructed in the R-1 District;
(B) Provide a wide flexibility in the design, location, site of the building, and yard and setback
requirements in order to provide for, to the greatest extent possible, the preservation of unique geographic
and topographic features; and,
(C) Provide for more usable and suitably located recreation facilities and open space than would
otherwise be provided under conventional R-1 residential development procedures and requirements.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.306 GENERAL.
A Residential Cluster Development (RCD) Overlay District may only be permitted to be superimposed
over the R-1 District, provided that all conditions or provisions of this subchapter of the Zoning Ordinance,
the applicable requirements of the Subdivision Regulations, and any additional requirements, as may be
determined necessary to provide for the most efficient layout of the RCD and its proper integration with the
surrounding development, are met; and a public hearing is held on the RCD application.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
2006 S-7
120 Lebanon - Land Usage
' 154.307 APPLICATION AND PROCESSING.
RCD applications shall be processed in two phases:
(A) Phase 1: Zoning Map Amendment and Development Plan. The first phase of a RCD Overlay
District designation is the application and approval process for zoning map amendments and development
plans. The policies and procedures for zoning map amendments set forth in '' 154.415 - 154.417 of this
Zoning Ordinance shall be required for RCD Overlay District designations. The Zoning Map Amendment
application shall be accompanied by a Phase I Development Plan and any proposed restrictive covenants or
homeowners= association documents. The Phase I Development Plan shall include written and/or graphic
material and plans of the subject property, drawn to scale not smaller than one inch equaling 100 feet and
showing the following:
(1) The total area in the project;
(2) The present zoning of the subject property and all adjacent properties;
(3) All public and private rights-of-way and easement lines located on or adjacent to the subject
property which are proposed to be continued, created, enlarged, relocated, or abandoned;
(4) Existing topography, and approximate delineation of any topographical changes shown by
contour with intervals not to exceed five feet;
(5) Delineation of all existing and proposed residential areas in the project with a statement
indicating net density of the total project:
(a) Detached housing. Location and approximate number of lots, including typical section(s)
identifying approximate lot sizes and dimensions, and setback and height of buildings;
(b) Attached housing. Location and description of the various housing types (i.e. townhouse,
fourplex, garden apartment, etc.) including approximate heights of typical structures, and the approximate
number of units by housing type;
(6) Delineation of all existing and proposed nonresidential uses in the project:
(a) Commercial uses. Location and type of all uses including approximate number of acres,
gross floor area and heights of buildings;
(b) Open space/recreation. The approximate amount of area proposed for common open
space, including the location of recreational facilities, and identification of unique natural features to be
retained;
(c) Other public and semi-public uses. Location and type of all uses, including approximate
number of acreage, and height of buildings;
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 121
(7) Location of proposed pedestrian walkways, identifying approximate dimensions;
(8) Location of proposed streets, identifying approximate dimensions of pavement, right-of-way
widths, and grades;
(9) Location of all existing and proposed water, sanitary sewer, and storm drainage lines,
indicating approximate pipe sizes. Indication should also be given regarding the provision of electric and
telephone service.
(10) Certification from appropriate water and sewer agencies that services will be available.
(11) Identification of the soil types and geological formations on the subject property, indicating
anticipated problems and proposed methods of handling said problems.
(12) Other information that may be determined necessary for description and/or to insure proper
integration of the proposed project in the area.
Where agreed upon, this Development Plan shall be followed and shall be binding on all parties. Upon
approval, the official zoning map shall be amended by adding the suffix ARCD@ to the existing residential
zone (e.g., R-1-RCD) for the area shown on the approved plan.
(B) Phase 2: Improvements Plan and Subdivision Plat. The second phase involves the review of RCD
Overlay Districts in accordance with the Major Subdivision application procedure and approval process. An
Improvements Plan and Major Subdivision Plat shall be developed in conformance with the Phase I
Development Plan. The Improvements Plan and Major Subdivision Plat shall be prepared, filed, and
approved in accordance with '' 153.30 through 153.35 of the Lebanon Subdivision Regulations. In
addition to the requirements in Subdivision Regulations, the Improvements Plan shall also include the
following information:
(1) All housing units on the subject property:
(a) Detached housing. Location, arrangement, and number of all lots, including lot
dimensions and setbacks, and maximum height of buildings, and
(b) Attached housing. Location, height, and arrangement of all buildings, indicating the
number of units in each building, and, where applicable, location, arrangement, and dimensions of all lots.
(2) Location, height, arrangement, and identification of all nonresidential buildings and uses on
the subject property and, where applicable, location and arrangement of all lots with lot dimensions;
(3) Location and arrangement of all common open space areas, and recreational facilities,
including lot dimensions. Methods of ownership and operation and maintenance of such lands shall be
identified;
2006 S-7
122 Lebanon - Land Usage
(4) Landscaping features, including identification of planting areas and the location, type, and
height of walls and fences;
(5) Location of signs indicating their orientation and size and height;
(6) All utility lines and easements:
(a) Water distribution systems, including line sizes, width of easements, type of pipe,
location of hydrants and valves, and other appurtenances;
(b) Sanitary sewer system, including pipe sizes, width of easements, gradients, type of pipes,
invert elevations, location and type of manholes, the location, type, size of all lift or pumping stations,
capacity, and process of any necessary treatment facilities, and other appurtenances;
(c) Storm sewer and natural drainage system, including pipe and culvert sizes, gradients,
location of open drainage courses, width of easements, location and size of inlets and catch basins, location
and size of retention and/or sedimentation basins, and data indicating the quantity of storm water entering
the subject property naturally from areas outside the property, the quantity of flow at each pickup point
(inlet), the quantity of storm water generated by development of the subject area, and the quantity of storm
water to be discharged at various points to areas outside the subject property;
(d) Other utilities (e.g., electric, telephone, etc.) including the type of service and the width of
easements;
(7) Location of all off-street parking, loading and/or unloading, and driveway areas, including
typical cross sections, the type of surfacing, dimensions, and the number and arrangement of off-street
parking and loading and/or unloading spaces;
(8) Circulation system, including the following:
(a) Pedestrian walkways, including alignment, grades, type of surfacing, and width;
(b) Streets, including alignment, grades, type of surfacing, width of pavement and
right-of-way, geometric details, and typical cross sections;
(9) A schedule of development, including the staging and phasing of:
(a) Residential area, in order of priority, by type of dwelling unit;
(b) Streets, utilities, and other public facility improvements, in order of priority;
(c) Dedication of land to public use or set aside for common ownership; and
(d) Non-residential buildings and uses, in order of priority.
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 123
(C) Upon approval of the Improvements Plan and Final Plat approval, the plat shall be recorded and
building permits may be issued in accordance with all Phase 1 and Phase 2 plans and plats.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.308 RESIDENTIAL USES AND DENSITIES.
Attached and detached single-family dwellings may be permitted within a RCD Overlay District. The
density of dwelling units in a RCD shall be determined by the density as calculated from the existing
residential zoning district superimposed by the RCD Overlay District. This density shall be applied to the
total project area, excluding the land developed for commercial uses and public and private streets.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.309 PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC USES.
Public and semi-public structures and uses may be permitted in the RCD. These uses shall be
delineated on the development plan and shall be limited to the following uses:
(A) Church;
(B) Community center, including day care facility;
(C) Country club;
(D) Fire or police station;
(E) Library;
(F) Open space/recreation area; and
(G) Nursery, elementary, and secondary school;
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.310 AREA REQUIREMENTS.
No RCD Overlay District shall be permitted on less than four acres of land. However, development of
a smaller tract adjacent to an existing PUD Overlay District may be permitted if the proposed development
conforms to and extends the original development as if the new area had been a part of the original
development.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
2006 S-7
124 Lebanon - Land Usage
' 154.311 HEIGHT, YARD, AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.
Requirements shall be as approved in the development plan.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.312 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING AND/OR UNLOADING AREA.
Off-street parking and, when applicable, loading and/or unloading areas shall be provided in
accordance with '' 154.400 - 154.402.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.313 FENCES, WALLS, AND SIGNS.
The location, height, and type of all fences, walls, and signs shall be shown on and approved in the
development plan.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.314 COMMON OPEN SPACE/RECREATION AREAS.
At least 20% of the total acreage of the proposed RCD shall be retained as common open
space/recreation area and dedicated to a public and/or private entity for operation and maintenance. Such
open space/recreation areas shall be physically situated so as to be readily accessible, available to, and
usable by all residents of the RCD. Common open space/recreation areas shall be that part of the total
project exclusive of dwellings, streets, parking areas, single-family lots, commercial areas, and other
non-open space and non-recreationally-oriented facilities.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.315 UTILITIES.
All utilities must be underground in any new RCD.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.316 AMENDMENTS.
Any amendments to plans shall be made in accordance with the procedure required by this chapter and
any minor amendments may be approved by the Lebanon City Council without a hearing as provided herein
and any major changes shall be heard by the Lebanon City Council at a public hearing after due notice.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 125
' 154.317 EXPIRATION.
Any amendment to the RCD Overlay District shall be subject to the time constraints, as noted below.
Upon expiration of said time period, and any extensions thereto, the Lebanon City Council may initiate a
request for a public hearing by the Lebanon Planning Commission, in accordance with the requirements of
KRS Chapter 100, for the purpose of determining whether said RCD Overlay District should revert to its
original zoning designation. A public hearing may be initiated if either of the following conditions apply:
(A) A particular section of the original Phase I Development Plan has not had Phase II approval by
Lebanon City Council within 24 consecutive months from the date of the approval of the Phase I
approved plan for that particular section, provided an extension may be permitted by the Lebanon City
Council, or its duly authorized representative, if sufficient proof can be demonstrated that prevailing
conditions have not changed appreciably to render the Phase I approved plan obsolete.
(B) Substantial construction has not been initiated within a period of 12 consecutive months from the
date of approval of the Phase II plan by the Lebanon City Council of a particular section; provided that an
extension may be permitted upon approval of the Lebanon City Council, or its duly authorized
representative, if sufficient proof can be demonstrated that the construction was delayed due to
circumstances beyond the applicant=s control, and that prevailing conditions have not changed appreciably
to render the Phase I approved plan obsolete. The amount of construction constituting initiating substantial
completion shall be as approved in the Phase II approved plan.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
HISTORIC OVERLAY DISTRICT (H)
' 154.330 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
The purpose and intent of the Historic Overlay District is to:
(A) Accomplish the preservation, protection, and use of historic districts and landmarks having a
special character or special historic, architectural, aesthetic, or cultural interest and value to the city, Marion
County, Kentucky, and United States;
(B) Promote the educational, cultural, economic, and general welfare of the people and protect the
city=s history and heritage as reflected in such districts and landmarks;
(C) Stabilize and improve property values in such districts and in the city as a whole;
(D) Foster civic pride in the value of notable accomplishments of the past including the construction of
outstanding buildings and creative of livable neighborhoods;
2006 S-7
126 Lebanon - Land Usage
(E) Strengthen the economy of the city by encouraging the appropriate use of its historic buildings;
(F) Provide a review process to help the preservation and the use of historic buildings;
(G) Protect and enhance the city=s attractions to residents, tourists, and visitors and serve as a support
and stimulus to business;
(H) Enhance the visual and aesthetic character, diversity and interest of the city;
(I) Identify as early as possible and resolve conflicts between the preservation of historic property and
alternative use of the land;
(J) Integrate the preservation and rehabilitation of historic property into public and private land use
management, planning, and development;
(K) Encourage neighborhood conservation activities and compatible new development that will
strengthen the historic districts; and;
(L) Encourage public participation in identifying and preserving the city=s landmarks and historic
districts.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.331 LEBANON HISTORIC PRESERVATION BOARD.
The general duties and responsibilities, membership, terms of office, and other organizational structure
and processes of the Lebanon Historic Preservation Board are set forth in '' 154.035 - 154.039 and its
adopted bylaws.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.332 NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES NOMINATIONS.
(A) Initiation of nominations. To participate in the Certified Local Government program, the city of
Lebanon shall initiate all local nominations to the National Register of Historic Places and shall request the
Historic Preservation Board and City Council to submit recommendations on each proposed nomination to
the National Register. The Board and City Council shall obtain comments from the public that shall be
included in their National Register recommendations.
(B) Recommendations from the city. Within 60 days of the receipt of a nomination from a private
individual or the initiation of a nomination by the city, the city shall inform the Kentucky Heritage Council
and owner of the property of the two recommendations regarding the eligibility of the property. If the Board
and City Council do not agree, then both opinions shall be forwarded in the city=s report. If both the Board
and City Council recommend that a property not be nominated, the Kentucky Heritage
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 127
Council shall inform the property owner and the Kentucky Historic Preservation Review Board and the
property will not be nominated unless an appeal is filed with the State Historic Preservation Officer.
(C) Review of nominations. If the Board and City Council agree that a property should be nominated or
if either agrees that a property should be nominated, the nomination will receive a preliminary review by
the Kentucky Historic Preservation Review Board. The Review Board shall make a recommendation to the
State Historic Preservation Officer who then decides whether to forward the nomination to the U.S.
Secretary of the Interior who shall make the decision on listing the property on the National Register.
(D) Appeal. The Board, City Council, or property owner may appeal the final decision by the State
Historic Preservation Officer.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.333 DESIGNATION OF LANDMARKS AND HISTORIC DISTRICTS.
The procedures for the designation of landmarks and historic districts in the city shall be set forth as
follows:
(A) Initiation of designations. The Board may study a property or an area in order to make a
recommendation whether it qualifies for designation as a landmark or a historic district. The City Council,
property owner, individual, or neighborhood organization may also request the Board to make such a study
and recommendation. The Board shall hold at least one public hearing after proper notice is given. The
designation shall be adopted by the City Council.
(B) Adoption of design guidelines. At least 30 days before the public hearing for the designation of
landmarks or historic districts, the Board shall develop and adopt general design guidelines that will apply
to the landmarks and historic districts and will assist owners in the preservation and rehabilitation of their
property. The general design guidelines shall include the Secretary of Interior=s Standards for
Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings and may include other guidelines that
will apply to all designated property in the city. In its guidelines and in its decisions, the Board shall not
limit the new construction to any one architectural style but shall seek to preserve the character and
integrity of the landmark or the historic district. The Board shall adopt the original guidelines and shall
expand or amend the design guidelines upon holding a public hearing on the changes and submitting its
recommendations to the Planning Commission and City Council for their comments. The Board may adopt
specific design guidelines for individual landmarks, historic districts, or individual property within a
historic district.
(C) Public notice. The Board shall give notice of the public hearing in accordance with the provisions
of KRS Chapters 100 and 424 and as set forth in this chapter:
(1) Published notice. The Board shall publish a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the
city at least seven and no more than 21 days before the public hearing in accordance with KRS Chapter
424.
2006 S-7
128 Lebanon - Land Usage
(2) Mailed notice. Notice of the required public hearing shall be sent by first class mail to owners
of property under consideration of designation and owners of adjacent property to the subject land at least
14 days prior to the public hearing. The Board shall utilize the records of the Marion County Property
Valuation Administrator for names and mailing address of property owners of the subject and adjacent
properties.
(3) Posted notice. The Board shall post a notice of the public hearing conspicuously on the
property for 14 consecutive days immediately prior to the hearing and as set forth in KRS Chapter 100.
(D) Public hearing and recommendation.
(1) Public hearing. The Board shall hold at least one public hearing and make findings of fact
and a recommendation of approval or disapproval of the landmark or historic district designation. The
Board must find that designation meets one or more of the following criteria that shall be recorded in the
Board=s minutes, records, and report and recommendations to the Lebanon Planning Commission and City
Council:
(a) Its value as a reminder of the cultural or archaeological heritage of the city, state, or
nation;
(b) Its location as a site of a significant local, state, or national event;
(c) Its identification with a person or persons who significantly contributed to the
development of the city, state, or nation;
(d) Its identification as the work of a master builder, designer, or architect whose individual
work has influenced the development of the city, state, or nation;
(e) Its value as a building or buildings that are recognized for the quality of their architecture
and that retain sufficient elements showing their architectural significance;
(f) Its distinguishing characteristics of an architectural style valuable for the study of a
period, method of construction, or use of indigenous materials;
(g) Its character as a geographically definable area possessing a significant concentration of
buildings, structures, or sites united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development;
(h) Its character as an established and geographically definable residential neighborhood,
united by culture, architectural styles or physical plan and development.
(2) Findings of fact and recommendation. The Board shall forward its findings of fact and
recommendations in a written report, including a summary of the evidence and testimony presented by the
proponents and opponents of the proposed designation, to the Lebanon Planning Commission and City
Council.
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 129
(E) Planning Commission action. Upon receipt of the written report, findings of fact, and
recommendations of the Board, the Lebanon Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the
proposed zoning overlay designation in accordance with the requirements of a zoning map amendment as
set forth in '' 154.415 - 154.417. The Planning Commission shall forward its findings of fact, comments
on Comprehensive Plan and zoning map amendments, and recommendations on the proposed historic
zoning overlay district (H) to the City Council.
(F) Legislative body action. The City Council shall approve, modify, or disapprove the proposed
designation within 60 days upon receipt of the Planning Commission=s findings of fact and
recommendations. If the City Council approves the designation without amendment to the Comprehensive
Plan or zoning map, or if the City Council modifies the proposed designation, the City Council shall
request the Planning Commission to consider an amendment of the Comprehensive Plan and/or the zoning
map or reconsider its earlier recommendations and actions.
(G) Land use certification recordation. The Planning Commission secretary shall file a land use
certificate in the Marion County Court Clerk=s office for all designations within 30 days of the date upon
which the legislative body takes final action. The land use certificate shall be completed and recorded in
conformance with KRS Chapter 100.
(H) Notification. Upon full designation of a landmark or historic district, the Board shall notify each
owner and any and all governmental entities of the designation of a historic overlay zoning district.
(I) Amendment or rescission of designation. The amendment or rescission of any designation shall be
accomplished through the same processes and procedures of the original designation.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.334 CERTIFICATES OF APPROPRIATENESS (COAS).
(A) Certificate of appropriateness required. A Certificate of Appropriateness from the Board shall be
required before a person or entity may undertake the following actions affecting a landmark or property in a
historic district. A Certificate of Appropriateness shall be required even when the proposed work does not
require a building permit. The Board shall hold one public hearing on the Certificate of Appropriateness
application for any of the following activities:
(1) Alterations of the exterior part of a building or structure that is visible to the public from a
public street;
(2) New construction;
(3) Demolition; or
(4) Relocation.
2006 S-7
130 Lebanon - Land Usage
(B) Exception. Routine repairs and maintenance as defined in this chapter and in the design guidelines
shall not require the issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness provided that the routine repairs and
maintenance does not change the exterior of the designated property that is visible to the public. The
Board=s Administrative Official shall review any and all routine repairs and maintenance to ensure
compliance with this Section and the design guidelines.
(C) Pre-application conference. Prior to filing an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness, the
applicant may meet with the Board=s Administrative Official to discuss the proposed plans, requirements,
procedures, and issues related to the proposed Certificate of Appropriateness. This pre-application
conference is intended to alleviate potential problems and conflicts by recognition and consideration of
existing conditions, design guidelines and other recommendations, and other issues related to the proposed
work. The pre-application conference should be held no less than five working days and not more than
three months prior to the filing of a Certificate of Appropriateness application.
(D) Certificate of appropriateness application. An application for a Certificate of Appropriateness
shall be filed with the Board at least 21 days prior to the Board=s scheduled meeting. The Board may
request additional information from the applicant, and the Board shall not consider an application as
complete until all required and requested materials, information, and documentation has been submitted. A
COA application shall include the following information and documentation:
(1) Application signed by an owner or the owner=s agent;
(2) Drawings and specifications of the proposed work;
(3) Photographs of the existing building, structure, or site and of adjacent properties;
(4) Listing of adjoining property owners obtained from Marion County Property Valuation
Administrator=s records, including name(s), mailing address, PVA number, and property street address;
(5) An estimate of the cost of the proposed alteration, demolition, relocation, or new construction;
(6) For demolition applications, report of a licensed structural engineer or architect with
experience in rehabilitation about the building=s structural condition and suitability for rehabilitation;
(7) For demolition applications, estimated market value of the property both in its current
condition and after completion of proposed demolition prepared and/or presented by a qualified appraiser;
(8) For demolition applications, a report from a developer or other real estate professional
experienced in rehabilitation as to the economic feasibility of placing the building to a new use;
(9) For demolition applications, any listing of the property for sale or rent and any offers received
during the previous two years;
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 131
(10) For demolition applications, the annual gross and net income from the property for the
previous two years;
(11) For demolition applications, information on the new building to be constructed on the site,
including construction start date and evidence of project completion;
(12) Any and all additional information, materials, and documentation requested by the Board; and
(13) Non-refundable fee. For Certificate of Appropriateness applications originated by the
Planning Commission, city, or other governmental agency or entity, the filing fee shall be waived.
(E) Stop Work Order; injunction. In the event work is being performed without a Certificate of
Appropriateness, the city shall issue a Stop Work Order. All work shall cease on the designated property,
and no additional work shall be undertaken as long as the Order shall continue in effect. The Board or its
representative shall meet with the owner or tenant to resolve the problem. The City Attorney may seek an
injunction in Circuit Court and any other appropriate relief in order that the intent of this chapter be carried
out.
(F) Public notice. The Board shall give notice of the public hearing in accordance with the provisions
of KRS Chapters 100 and 424 and as set forth in this chapter:
(1) Published notice. The Board shall publish a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the
City of Lebanon at least seven and no more than 21 days before the public hearing in accordance with KRS
Chapter 424.
(2) Mailed notice. Notice of the required public hearing shall be sent by first class mail to the
applicant and owners of adjacent property to the subject land at least 14 days prior to the public hearing.
The Board shall utilize the records of the Marion County Property Valuation Administrator for names and
mailing address of property owners of the subject and adjacent properties.
(3) Posted notice. The Board shall post a notice of the public hearing conspicuously on the
property for 14 consecutive days immediately prior to the hearing and as set forth in KRS Chapter 100.
(G) Public hearing and board recommendation. The Board shall hold at least one public hearing
within 30 days upon the receipt of a complete application by the Board.
(H) Board action. The Board shall make a decision on the Certificate of Appropriateness application
within 45 days after receipt of a complete application. When the application is for demolition or new
construction, the Board may extend the time for its decision for an additional 60 days. The Board shall
approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove each application, and it shall make findings based on
the following criteria and design guidelines. When the Board approves an application with modifications,
the Board=s findings of fact shall set forth the modifications accepted by the applicant. The Board=s
decision shall not relieve the applicant from complying with the requirements of other local,
2006 S-7
132 Lebanon - Land Usage
state, and federal laws, rules, and regulations. If the Commission fails to decide upon an application within
the specified time period, the application shall be deemed approved as submitted.
(1) Alterations. When an applicant requests a Certificate of Appropriateness for exterior
alterations of a designated property visible to the public from a public right-of-way, the Board shall
consider the existing conditions, design guidelines and other recommendations, and other issues related to
the proposed work and shall make findings based on the design guidelines.
(2) Demolition. When an applicant requests a Certificate of Appropriateness for the demolition
of a designated property, the Board shall negotiate with the applicant alternatives to demolition. When an
applicant requests approval of demolition based on economic hardship, the Board shall consider whether
the property can be placed into a reasonable beneficial use without the approval of the application and in
the case of an income-producing building, whether a reasonable return can be realized from the building.
The Board may approve demolition applications if a designated building or structure does not have
architectural or historical significance and value. In cases of economic hardship, the Board may approve
applications if the applicant has not proved economic hardship or lack of reasonable return.
(3) Relocation. When an applicant proposes to relocate a designated building or structure or
when an applicant proposes to relocate a building or structure to a lot containing a landmark or to a lot
within a designated historic district, the Board shall consider the following in deciding upon an application:
the contribution of the building or structure to its present setting, the definite plans for the proposed vacated
site, evidence of effects of relocation on the physical integrity of the designated building or structure, and
compatibility of the building or structure to its site and adjacent properties.
(4) Archaeological sites. Applications involving designated archaeological sites shall be
reviewed through the same procedures and processes as other Certificate of Appropriateness applications
considered by the Board. When an unidentified archaeological site is discovered during construction, the
owner and builder shall stop work and immediately notify the Board and seek assistance of a qualified
archaeologist to evaluate the significance of the archaeological finding. If the Board and archaeologist agree
that no adverse effect on the archaeological site will occur, the project may proceed immediately. If the
Board and archaeologist determine that an adverse effect will occur, the Board shall meet with the owner
and builder to develop methods to avoid, reduce, or mitigate the effects on the site while balancing the
needs of the owner and protection of the archaeological site.
(I) Land use certification recordation. The Board=s secretary shall file a land use certificate in the
Marion County Court Clerk=s office for all Certificates of Appropriateness within 30 days of the date upon
which the Board takes final action. The land use certificate shall be completed and recorded in conformance
with KRS Chapter 100.
(J) Length of validity of certificate of appropriateness. A Certificate of Appropriateness shall remain
valid for one year after it is issued. Work shall start before the end of the one year period. If the approved
work is not completed within one year after the issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness, the Board shall
review the situation and require a new application for the work to be submitted.
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 133
(K) Appeal. An applicant may appeal the decision of the Board to the Circuit Court.
(L) Conformity with certificate of appropriateness. All work performed pursuant to a Certificate of
Appropriateness shall conform to any and all provisions of such Certificate. It shall be the responsibility of
the Board or its Administrative Official or authorized representative to inspect from time to time any work
being performed to assure such compliance. If work is being performed and is not in compliance with the
Certificate of Appropriateness, the city shall issue a Stop Work Order. All work shall cease on the
designated property. No additional work shall be undertaken as long as the Stop Work Order remains in
effect. The Board or its representative shall meet with the owner or tenant to resolve the problem. The City
Attorney may seek an injunction in Circuit Court and any other appropriate relief in Circuit Court in order
to carry out the intent of this chapter.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.335 EMERGENCY CONDITIONS AND DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT.
Every owner or person in charge of a designated landmark or property within a designated historic
district shall maintain all exterior and interior portions of such building or structure to minimize
deterioration, damage, or disrepair. Every owner or person in charge shall undertake any and all necessary
maintenance and repairs to prevent deterioration, damage, or disrepair. In any case where the Building
Inspector, Board, or city determines that demolition by neglect has occurred or that emergency conditions
dangerous to safety, health, and welfare of the general public have occurred, the city shall order the remedy
of the conditions without the Board=s approval. The city shall immediately notify the Board and the owner
or person in charge of the designated property and order that necessary work begin immediately to protect
and preserve the property and to ensure the public safety, health, and welfare.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOME STANDARDS
' 154.345 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
The purpose of this subchapter is to provide the minimum standards to safeguard the health, welfare,
and safety of the citizens of the city by establishing standards for the placement of manufactured and
modular homes on individual lots or subdivision development lots in the city and distinguishing between
manufactured and modular homes and mobile homes.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
2006 S-7
134 Lebanon - Land Usage
' 154.346 STANDARDS.
(A) A manufactured or mobile home as defined in KRS 227.550, which does not bear a seal certifying
that it was manufactured in accordance with the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety
Standards Act, and not bearing either a Class A or B Seal issued by the Kentucky Department of Housing,
Building, and Construction, Office of the State Fire Marshal is not acceptable for residential occupation.
(B) Establishment, location, and use of manufactured homes as scattered site residences shall be
permitted in agriculture and residential zones permitting installation of a single-family dwelling unit
applying generally to such residential use in the district, subject to the following additional requirements:
(1) Permanent foundation system shall be anchored in accordance with the state standards set
forth in KRS 227.570.
(2) Exterior material shall be material customarily used on site-built dwellings, such as board
siding, plywood or presswood siding, vinyl, stucco, brick, non-reflective aluminum, etc. and shall be
compatible with the conventionally built residential structures in the neighborhood.
(3) Roofing material shall be of wood, tile, composition shingles, or other materials compatible
with the conventionally built residential structures in the neighborhood that shall be installed on a surface
appropriately pitched for the materials used.
(4) Exterior covering material extending to the ground or the top of the foundation shall be used.
Skirting materials which harmonize with the architectural style of the home shall be used and be compatible
with the conventionally built residential structures in the neighborhood.
(5) Structural additions or alterations shall be subject to the same regulations and requirements
and procedures, including building permits which must be complied with, in order to obtain such a permit
for additions or alterations to a conventionally built house.
(6) Manufactured homes in a manufactured home community or mobile homes in a mobile home
park shall conform to the requirements as prescribed in 902 KAR 15:010 for manufactured and mobile
home communities.
(7) Manufactured homes not conforming to the requirements of this subchapter shall be permitted
in the MHP District designed only for permitting mobile homes.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.347 PERMITTED PLACEMENT OF MOBILE HOMES.
(A) Class A and B mobile homes may be placed in manufactured home communities or mobile home
parks as a permitted residential unit type and in accordance with these zoning regulations and the Lebanon
Subdivision Regulations.
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 135
(B) Class A and B mobile homes may also be placed in the agricultural district for use as a tenant
dwelling with the issuance of a conditional use permit by the Board of Adjustment and in accordance with
this Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision Regulations.
(C) Manufactured homes with no HUD Code seal and mobile homes with no Class A or B seal are not
permitted in any zoning district or in mobile home parks. Those which at the time of the adoption of this
chapter are located within the jurisdiction are non-conforming uses, subject to the same requirements as any
other non-conforming use.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.348 PERMITS.
(A) If building permits are required for other single-family residential dwellings, building permits for
manufactured homes shall be issued, providing that the other requirements for the zoning district are met,
upon presentation of certification either by the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development or the Kentucky Department of Housing, Building, and Construction, or Office of the State
Fire Marshal, and that the home has been constructed in accordance with the Manufactured Home
Construction and Safety Standards Act. Inspection shall be limited to the foundation of any accessory
additions, such as porches, basements, or other added or altered structures.
(B) If building permits are required for other single-family residential dwellings, building permits for
Class A and Class B mobile homes shall be issued where permitted upon receipt of certification that they
are Class A or Class B mobile homes and after compliance with all the other provisions of this Zoning
Ordinance and Subdivision Regulations. Inspection shall be limited to the foundation and other on-site
improvements, if any.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
CELLULAR ANTENNA TOWERS AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES STANDARDS
' 154.360 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for the safest and most efficient integration of cellular
antenna towers for cellular telecommunications services or personal communication services within the
community, to provide for such facilities in coordination with the recommendations of the Comprehensive
Plan, and to allow for such facilities with the intention of furthering the public health, safety, and general
welfare.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05) Penalty, see ' 154.999
2006 S-7
136 Lebanon - Land Usage
' 154.361 GENERAL.
Cellular antenna towers for cellular telecommunications services or personal communication services
may be allowed in any zone after the Planning Commission reviews in accordance with the following
procedures to ascertain agreement with the adopted Comprehensive Plan and the regulations
contained within the Zoning Ordinance, and after being granted a Certificate of Necessity and Convenience
by the Public Service Commission.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05) Penalty, see ' 154.999
' 154.362 APPLICABILITY.
Every utility, or a company that is engaged in the business of providing the required infrastructure to a
utility that proposes to construct an antenna tower for cellular telecommunications services or personal
communications services shall submit a copy of the utility=s completed uniform application to the Planning
Commission within five consecutive days of applying to the Public Service Commission for a certificate of
necessity and convenience.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05) Penalty, see ' 154.999
' 154.363 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
Applications for the construction of cellular antenna towers or cellular telecommunications services or
personal communications services shall include the following:
(A) All information that the applicant is required to submit to the Public Service Commission, per the
requirements of the uniform application;
(B) A copy of the applicant=s FCC license, or if the applicant is not an FCC license holder, a copy of
at least one letter of commitment from an FCC license holder to locate at least one antenna on the
applicant=s tower;
(C) Unless co-locating, certification, supported by evidence, that collocation of the proposed facility
with an existing approved tower or facility cannot be accommodated. The applicant=s certification shall
include a listing of all existing towers and facilities within a two mile radius of the proposed tower location,
a description of each existing site, and discussion of the ability or inability to collocate on each existing
site, according to the following:
(1) No existing towers or facilities are located within a two mile radius of the proposed tower
location;
(2) Existing towers or facilities are not of sufficient height to meet the applicant=s engineering
requirements;
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 137
(3) Existing towers or facilities do not have sufficient structural strength to support the
applicant=s proposed antenna(s) or related equipment;
(4) The applicant=s planned equipment would cause frequency interference with other existing or
planned equipment of the tower or facility, or the existing or planned equipment of the tower or
facility would cause frequency interference with the applicant=s planned equipment, and which cannot be
reasonably prevented;
(5) Unwillingness of the owner of the existing tower or facility to entertain a collation proposal.
(D) Unless collocating, certification, supported by evidence, that the proposed site is the only
appropriate site for the location of the facility, the applicant=s certification shall include a listing of all
potential sites within a two mile radius of the proposed tower location, a description of each potential site,
and a discussion of the ability or inability of the site to host such a facility, according to the following:
(1) Unwillingness of the site owner(s) to entertain such a facility;
(2) Topographic limitations on the site;
(3) Adjacent impediments that would obstruct adequate transmission;
(4) Physical site constraints that would preclude the construction of such a facility;
(5) A statement demonstrating that the proposal is in agreement with the adopted Comprehensive
Plan and is in conformity with this section;
(6) A development plan, drawn to scale not smaller than one inch equaling 100 feet, showing;
(a) The total area of the site in question;
(b) All public and private rights-of-way and easement lines located on or adjacent to the
subject property which are proposed to be continued, created, enlarged, relocated, or abandoned;
(c) Existing topography and approximate delineation of any topographical changes shown by
contour with intervals not to exceed five feet;
(d) Location, height, arrangement, and identification of all nonresidential buildings,
structures, and uses on the subject property and, where applicable, location and arrangement of all lots with
lot dimensions;
(e) Location and arrangement of all common open space areas and methods of ownership
and operation and maintenance of such lands shall be identified;
2006 S-7
138 Lebanon - Land Usage
(f) Landscaping features, including identification of planting areas and the location, type,
and height of walls and fences;
(g) Location of all signs, indicating their orientation, size, and height;
(h) All utility lines and easements for water distribution systems, including line sizes,
easement widths, pipe type, hydrant and valves location, and other appurtenances; for sanitary sewer
system, including pipe sizes, easement widths, gradients, pipe types, invert elevations, manhole locations
and types; all lift or pumping stations locations, types, sizes, and capacity and process of any necessary
treatment facilities and other appurtenances; and for storm sewer and natural drainage system, including
pipe and culvert sizes, gradients, location of open drainage courses, easement widths, inlets and catch basin
locations and size, and retention and/or sedimentation basin locations and size, and for other utilities, such
as electric, telephone, etc., including the type of service and easement widths.
(i) Location of all off-street parking, loading and/or unloading, and driveway areas,
including typical cross sections, type of surfacing, dimensions, number and arrangement of off-street
parking and loading and/or unloading spaces;
(j) Circulation system, pedestrian walkways, including alignment, grades, surface type, and
width; and streets, including alignment, grades, surface type, pavement and right-of-way width, geometric
details, and typical cross sections.
(k) Provisions of control of erosion and storm drainage, hillside slippage and sedimentation,
indicating the temporary and permanent control practices and measures which will be implemented during
all phases of clearing, grading, and construction.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05) Penalty, see ' 154.999
' 154.364 APPLICATION PROCESS.
Applications for the construction of cellular antenna towers or cellular telecommunications services or
personal communications services shall be processed as follows:
(A) New sites.
(1) At least one public hearing on the proposal shall be held, at which hearing interested parties
and citizens shall have the opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be
published at least once, but may be published two or more times, in a newspaper of general circulation in
the county, provided that one publication occurs not less than seven calendar days nor more than 21 days
before the occurrence of such hearing;
(2) Notice of such hearing shall be posted conspicuously on the property in question for 14
consecutive days immediately prior to the hearing. Said posting shall consist of one or more signs,
constructed of durable material, and clearly depicting the following information: A(Name of Utility)
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 139
proposes to construct a telecommunications (Atower@ or Amonopole@) on this site@ (four inch high
lettering); date, place, and time of public hearing (one inch high lettering); and address, including telephone
number of the Planning Commission where additional information regarding the hearing may be obtained.
(3) Notice of the hearing shall be given at least 14 days in advance of the hearing, by first class
mail, with certification by the Planning Commission secretary, or other officer of the Planning
Commission, that the notice was mailed to an owner of every parcel of property within 500 feet of the base
of the proposed tower or monopole. It shall be the duty of the applicant proposing the facility to furnish the
Planning Commission with the names and addresses of said property owners. Records maintained by the
PVA may be relied upon consecutively to determine the identity and address of said owner. In the event
such property is in condominium or cooperative forms of ownership, then the person notified by mail shall
be the president or chairperson owned by the condominium or cooperative owners. A joint notice may be
mailed to two or more co-owners of an adjoining property who are listed in the PVA=s records as having
the same address.
(4) Upon holding such hearing, the Planning Commission shall, within 60 days commencing
from the date that the application is received by the Planning Commission, or within a date specified in a
written agreement between the Planning Commission and the applicant, make its final decision to approve
or disapprove the uniform application. The Planning Commission shall submit to the Public Service
Commission, along with their action, the basis for their decision. If the Planning Commission fails to issue
a final decision within 60 days, and if there is no written agreement between the Planning Commission and
the utility to a specific date for the Planning Commission to issue a decision, it is presumed that the
Planning Commission has approved the utility=s uniform application.
(B) Previously approved site.
(1) For facilities located on previously approved sites, the Planning Commission=s
Administrative Officer shall review the application for its conformity with these regulations and all
regulations contained within the Zoning Ordinance;
(2) If the Planning Commission=s Administrative Officer determines that the application is in
conformity with these regulations and all regulations contained within the Zoning Ordinance, an
administrative approval may be granted;
(3) If the Planning Commission=s Administrative Officer determines that the application is not in
conformity with these regulations and all regulations contained within the Zoning Ordinance, a public
hearing, pursuant to this section, shall be scheduled.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05) Penalty, see ' 154.999
' 154.365 DESIGN STANDARDS.
At the time of the application submittal, the applicant shall provide information demonstrating
compliance with the following requirements. Where the Planning Commission or its Administrative
2006 S-7
140 Lebanon - Land Usage
Official finds that the circumstances or conditions relating to the particular application are such that one or
more of the requirements listed below are not necessary or desirable for the protection of surrounding
property or the public health, safety, and general welfare, and that such special conditions or circumstances
make one or more said requirements unreasonable, the Planning Commission or its Administrative Official
may modify or waive such requirement, either permanently or on a temporary basis. The applicant shall
request any such modification or waiver, and the applicant shall submit a written justification for each
requested modification or waiver.
(A) All structures, except fences, shall be located at least 50 feet from the property line or lease line of
any residentially zoned property;
(B) A cellular antenna tower or alternative antenna tower structure may be constructed to a maximum
height of 200 feet. This also applies to any tower taller than 15 feet constructed on the top of another
building or structure, with the height being the overall height of the building/structure and tower together,
measured from the grade to the highest point. The Planning Commission may allow antennas greater than
200 feet in height upon review of the applicant=s justification that the additional height meets the criteria
identified in this subchapter.
(C) When any cellular antenna tower or alternative antenna tower structure is taller than the distance
from its base to the nearest property line or lease line, the applicant shall furnish the Planning Commission
with a certification from an engineer registered in the Commonwealth of Kentucky that the tower will
withstand winds of 70 miles per hour, in accordance with the current ANSI/EIA/TIA standards.
(D) Cellular antenna towers shall not be illuminated, except in accordance with other state and federal
regulations.
(E) The site shall be unstaffed. Personnel may periodically visit the site for maintenance, equipment
modification, or repairs. To accommodate such visits, ingress/egress shall only be from approved access
points.
(F) A minimum of one off-street parking space per provider shall be provided on the site.
(G) A chain link (80% open) or solid fence made from wood or other materials (less than 50% open)
shall be used to enclose the site. Such fences shall not be less than four feet in height nor more than eight
feet in height. The use of woven wire, barbed wire, or sharp pointed fences shall be prohibited. Such fences
shall be located within the front, side, or rear yard.
(H) Screening shall be required when the site in question abuts residentially zoned property. Screening
shall be provided by evergreen trees planted in a staggered pattern at a maximum distance of 15 feet on
center. The screening shall be placed in an area between the property line, or lease line, and a ten foot
setback.
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 141
(I) Any site to be purchased or leased for the installation of a cellular antenna tower or alternative
antenna tower and ancillary facilities shall comply with the minimum lot size requirements of the zoning
district in which the facility is to be located, provided that such area shall not be required to exceed 1/2
acre.
(J) Surfacing of all driveways and off-street parking areas shall be of either concrete or asphalt and
shall comply with the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.
(K) There shall be no signs permitted, except those displaying emergency information, owner contact
information, warning or safety instructions, or signs which are required by a federal, state, or local agency.
Such signs shall not exceed five square feet in area.
(L) All new cellular antenna towers shall be designed and constructed to accommodate a minimum of
three service providers.
(M) All option and site lease agreements shall contain non-exclusive co-location clauses.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05) Penalty, see ' 154.999
' 154.366 CRITERIA.
Evaluation of the proposal shall be based upon the following criteria:
(A) Agreement with the various elements of the Comprehensive Plan and where applicable, any other
adopted plan or regulation;
(B) Extent to which the proposal is consistent with the purposes of these regulations;
(C) Adequacy of the proposed site, considering such factors as the sufficiency of the size of the site to
comply with the established criteria, the configuration of the site, and the extent to which the site is formed
by logical boundaries (e.g., topography, natural features, streets, relationship of adjacent uses, etc.)
(D) Extent to which the proposal responds to the impact of the proposed development on adjacent land
uses, especially in terms of visual impacts;
(E) Extent to which the proposed cellular antenna tower is camouflaged (e.g., use of Astealth
technology@);
(F) Extent to which the proposed facility is integrated with existing structures (e.g., buildings,
structures, etc.)
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05) Penalty, see ' 154.999
2006 S-7
142 Lebanon - Land Usage
' 154.367 AMENDMENTS.
Any amendments to plans, except for minor adjustments as determined by the Planning Commission or
its Administrative Official, shall be made in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter,
subject to the same limitations and requirements as those under which such plans were originally approved.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05) Penalty, see ' 154.999
' 154.368 GUARANTEE.
To ensure the removal of all improvements at any abandoned telecommunications facility, any
applicant filing a request under these regulations shall, at the time of the submittal, deposit with the
Planning Commission, and to the benefit of the Planning Commission, a letter of credit, performance bond,
or other security acceptable to the Planning Commission in the amount equal to the cost of the demolition
and removal of the facility. An applicant having multiple telecommunications facilities within the Planning
Commission=s jurisdiction may deposit a single guarantee in the amount equal to the cost of the demolition
and removal of the one facility it owns which would cost the most to demolish and remove until such time
as the number of multiple facilities exceeds four such facilities; then the applicant
shall increase the amount on deposit to an amount equal to the cost of the most costly demolition and
removal plus 25% of the cost of demolition and removal of the applicant=s other existing facilities. Any
guarantee submitted shall be irrevocable and shall provide for the Planning Commission to collect the full
amount of the guarantee if the applicant fails to maintain the guarantee.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05) Penalty, see ' 154.999
SIGNAGE STANDARDS
' 154.380 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
The purpose of this subchapter is to promote and protect the public health, welfare, and safety by
regulating existing and proposed outdoor advertising signs of all types. It is intended to protect property
values, create a more attractive economic and business climate, enhance and protect the physical
appearance of the community and preserve the scenic and natural beauty of designated areas. It is further
intended to reduce sign and advertising distraction and obstructions that may contribute to traffic accidents,
reduce hazards that may be caused by signage overhanging or projecting over public rights-of-way, provide
more open space, curb the deterioration of the natural environment and enhance community development.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05; Am. Ord. passed 9-8-08)
2008 S-9
Zoning Regulations 143
' 154.381 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ADDRESS SIGN. The numeric reference of a use or building to a street name.
ADMINISTRATOR. The Sign Administrator as appointed by the Mayor of the city or his/her
designated representative.
AREA OF SIGN. The total area of the sign face which is used to display a message, not including its
supporting poles or structures.
AWNING. A shelter projecting from and supported by the exterior wall of a building.
AWNING BLADE SIGN. Any sign which is erected under a building=s awning and extends beyond
the building wall more than 12 inches, but no more than 48 inches. Awning blade signage of any sort must
not be more than 18 inches high, 36 inches wide and two inches thick. Awning blade signage must be hung
on approved, black, wrought-iron chain, with non-corroding hanging equipment. Awning blade signage
may not hang lower than seven feet above the sidewalk, and no more than 12 feet above the sidewalk. Any
building having an awning which prohibits signage in compliance with these standards may not have blade
signage in place. Accepted color palette for signage includes any color from established Williamsburg
period collections.
AWNING SIGN. A sign painted on, printed on, or attached flat against the surface of an awning.
BENCH SIGN. A sign painted on or affixed to any portion of a bench or seating area at bus stops or
other such pedestrian areas.
BILLBOARD SIGN. Any off-site sign, available for rent, on a permanent structure on which the copy
is periodically changed, and which is not located on the premises to which such advertising copy pertains.
BLADE SIGN. Any sign which is erected on a building wall or structure and extends beyond the
building wall more 12 inches, but no more than 48 inches. Blade signage of any sort must not be more than
18 inches high, 36 inches wide and two inches thick. Blade signage must be hung on an approved, black,
wrought-iron bar, with non-corroding hanging equipment. Blade signage may not hang any lower than
seven feet above the sidewalk, and no more than 12 feet above the sidewalk. Accepted color palette for
signage includes any color from established Williamsburg period collections.
BLINKING SIGN. A form of flashing where the pattern of sudden illumination changes occur with
more than two on-off cycles per second.
2008 S-9
144 Lebanon - Land Usage
BUILDING. As defined in the Building Code or Zoning Regulations.
BUILDING-MOUNTED SIGN. A sign which is connected to a building. This includes, but is not
limited to, a wall, building canopy, projecting or awning sign.
CANOPY, BUILDING. A rigid multi-sided structure covered with fabric, metal or other material, and
supported by a building at one or more points, and by columns or posts at the other points. May be
illuminated by means of internal or external sources.
CANOPY, FREESTANDING. A rigid multi-sided structure covered with fabric, metal or other
material, and supported by columns or posts. May be illuminated by means of internal or external sources.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN/READER BOARD. A sign, or portion thereof, with characters, letters,
or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or the surface of the sign. A sign
on which the only copy that changes is an electronic or mechanical indication of time or temperature shall
be considered a Atime and temperature@ portion of a sign and not a changeable copy sign for purposes of
this chapter.
DIRECTORY SIGN. A sign which lists the names of the occupants of a multiple occupancy building.
ELECTION SIGN. A temporary sign directly associated with national, state, or local elections.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE BOARD (EMB). A sign displaying static images controlled by electronic
communications. (Static dwell time: a minimum of four seconds.)
FLASHING SIGN. A pattern of changing light illumination where the sign illumination alternates
suddenly between fully illuminated and fully non-illuminated in a time frame of less than four seconds.
(Static dwell time is typically four to ten seconds.)
FREESTANDING SIGN. A sign that is set firmly in or upon the ground surface and is not attached to
any building or other structure.
GROUND-MOUNTED SIGN. A freestanding sign with a solid masonry base.
ILLEGAL SIGN. A sign which was not in compliance with this, or the applicable ordinance, when it
was erected, installed, altered or displayed.
ILLUMINATED SIGN. A sign with an artificial light source incorporated internally or externally for
the purpose of lighting the sign.
2008 S-9
Zoning Regulations 145
INCIDENTAL SIGN. A sign, generally informational, that has a purpose secondary to the use of the
lot on which it is located, such as Ano parking@, Aentrance@, Aloading only@, Atelephone@, and other
similar directives. No sign with a commercial message legible from a position off the lot on which the sign
is located shall be considered incidental.
LANDMARK SIGN. A sign that is designated by the Historic Review Board as having historic and/or
architectural significance. A LANDMARK SIGN shall be at least 20 years old, unless the Historic Review
Board makes a finding that a newer sign with historic and/or architectural significance should be designated
to protect it.
NONCONFORMING SIGN. A sign that was erected, installed or displayed in compliance with
previous sign regulations, but which is not in compliance with this chapter and which has not been
reconstructed, altered or otherwise modified since the adoption of this chapter, except to bring the sign into
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
OFF-SITE SIGN. A sign which directs attention to a business not located on the same lot where the
sign is displayed.
ON-SITE SIGN. A sign which directs attention to a business located at or a service or product offered
on the same lot where the sign is displayed.
PORTABLE SIGN. A sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a
sign designed to be transported, including but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of
wheels; signs converted to A or T frames; menu board signs; balloons used as signs; umbrellas used for
advertising; and signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way.
PROJECTING SIGN. Any sign which is erected on a building wall or structure and extends beyond
the building wall more than 12 inches.
ROOF SIGN. A sign erected and constructed, wholly or in part, upon, against, or above the roof of a
building. For purposes of this chapter, any portion of a building above or behind the fascia or parapet of a
building shall be considered part of the roof.
SCROLLING SIGN. The act of sliding a horizontal or vertical presentation of content.
SIGN. Any device, structure, fixture, display, or placard using graphics, symbols, and written copy for
the primary purpose of identifying, providing directions, or advertising any establishment, product, goods,
place, activity, business, or service.
SIGN PLAN. A coordinated plan for developing signs for an individual building or a group of
buildings.
2008 S-9
146 Lebanon - Land Usage
TEMPORARY SIGN. A sign, including paper, cardboard and fabric, which is used for a limited
period of time and is not permanently mounted.
TIME OR TEMPERATURE SIGN. A sign, or portion thereof, on which the only copy that changes
is an electronic or mechanical indication of time or temperature.
WINDOW SIGN. A sign that is placed inside a window, or applied or attached to window panes or
glass, and which is visible from the exterior of the window and is not permanently painted or otherwise
permanently affixed to the window. Signs that are permanently painted or otherwise permanently affixed to
the window shall be considered wall-mounted signs.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05; Am. Ord. passed 9-8-08)
' 154.382 SIGNS REQUIRING PERMIT.
All sandwich, blade and awning blade signage in District B-1 shall require a preliminary hearing with
the Lebanon Main Street/Renaissance Committee. All signage, except temporary signs, shall require a
permit to be obtained from the Building Inspector. The applicant shall submit a sign permit application,
fees, and all applicable documentation, including but not limited to, sign size, shape, location, color(s),
materials, content, sign owner, temporary or permanent status, and other pertinent information. The
Building Inspector shall review the sign permit application to ensure safety, suitability, and compatibility
with the surrounding neighborhood, and shall have the power to approve or deny the application or require
signage modifications.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05; Am. Ord. passed 9-8-08)
' 154.383 GENERAL SIGNAGE REGULATION.
(A) Conflict with state or federal regulations. In no way shall the provisions of this subchapter be
taken to be in conflict with state or federal regulations regarding obstructions or the placement of structures
in state or federal rights-of-way. In all cases, the most restrictive provision will apply.
(B) Ingress and egress free. No signage shall be erected, constructed, or maintained so as to obstruct
any fire escape or any window or door or opening used as a means of egress, or so as to prevent free
passage from one part of a roof to any part thereof. No sign shall be attached in any form, shape,
or manner to a fire escape, and shall not be placed in such a manner as to interfere with any opening
required for legal ventilation.
(C) Flashing signage. Flashing signs shall not be permitted in any zone, whether permanent or
temporary, on or off premise. A FLASHING SIGN shall be defined as a sign, the illumination of which is
not kept constant in intensity at all times when in use. Illuminated signs that indicate time, temperature,
weather or similar public service information, shall not be considered flashing signs. Revolving signs of
constant illumination shall not be considered flashing signs.
2008 S-9
Zoning Regulations 147
(D) Illumination. Signage shall not be internally or externally illuminated, unless otherwise specified
in this subchapter or approved by the Planning Commission.
(E) Prohibited signage. Signage advertising products, services, or uses not manufactured, rendered, or
available on the property on which the sign is located shall be prohibited, unless otherwise specified in this
chapter.
(F) Nonconforming signage. Any sign not conforming with these regulations can request approval
from the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05; Am. Ord. passed 9-8-08)
' 154.384 EXEMPT SIGNS.
The following signs shall be exempt on the basis that they implement a compelling government interest
in protecting the health, safety, and welfare of persons and property, and shall not require permits:
(A) Temporary or permanent signs erected and maintained by a city, county, state, or federal
government, or official agency thereof, for traffic direction or for direction to or identification of a
government facility or event.
(B) Any official sign of a governmental agency pertaining to the general health, safety, or welfare of
the public, or any other sign required by law, ordinance, or governmental regulation.
(C) Historical markers and other signs of a similar purpose.
(D) One sign denoting the name and address of the occupants of the premises, not to exceed two
square feet in size, or in the case of a farm or estate or residential community, not to exceed 20 square feet.
(E) Identification signs containing the names of various civic organizations.
(F) (1) Signs directing and guiding traffic and parking on private property, not exceeding two square
feet and bearing no advertising material. Two such signs are permitted per entrance or exit. Signs
shall not be placed within the right-of-way of any street and used by businesses occupying the premises,
and may include the business name, address and logo.
(2) Exception. Signs directing and guiding traffic for hospitals may exceed the size and number
provisions set forth herein, so long as the signs do not obstruct traffic views or constitute other similar
traffic hazards.
2008 S-9
148 Lebanon - Land Usage
(G) One business sign for a permitted home occupation; non-illuminated, not exceeding two square
feet in size, and mounted flat against the principal building.
(H) Flags, emblems and insignias of national, state or local political subdivisions. Flags which are
considered to be home flags that are placed to show spirit, pride, or some type of season or activity.
(NOTE: pennants and streamers are not included in this subsection).
(I) Beacons and searchlights for emergency health or safety purposes.
(J) One sign advertising the sale, lease, or rental of the premises upon which the sign is located. Such
signs shall not be subject to other temporary sign regulations set forth in this chapter, nor shall they require
a sign or building permit.
(K) An owner or agent of an existing, conforming sign may alter the content of the sign without
obtaining a new sign permit, so long as the alterations do not materially alter the physical structure of the
sign. Material alterations shall include any alterations that add more than one foot in height to the originally
permitted sign, more than one square foot of area to the originally permitted sign face, and/or any alteration
to the sign, sign structure, or sign location, including illumination and lighting elements or additional sign
faces.
(L) (1) Temporary signs (as defined herein) advocating a political candidate, political party, or other
ballot issue for an upcoming primary, general, or runoff election. No such sign may partially or wholly
obstruct traffic and other public safety signs; nor shall they be placed or constructed in a manner that is
hazardous to public safety, as defined herein.
(2) Where signs are otherwise permitted, an election sign may be erected no sooner than 60 days
before the election, and the sign shall be removed within five days following the election to which it
applies. The owner of the property shall be responsible for its removal.
(3) Election signs may be placed on private fences with the owner=s permission no sooner than
60 days before the election, and the signs shall be removed within five days after the election.
(4) Election signs may not be erected or placed on public property, or on rocks, trees, public
fences, sign posts, or on utility poles on public property.
(M) Temporary off-premise signs may be located on private property, announcing or relating to a
campaign, drive, or event of a civic, philanthropic, educational or religious organization, providing that
they are non-profit (501.C.3) agencies. All signs permitted under this section shall be no more than
four square feet in size (no more than one banner-type sign per event shall be permitted on any one
property), and shall not be erected or otherwise installed more than 21 days in advance of the event or the
particular campaign or drive, and shall be removed within three days after the conclusion of the event or the
particular campaign or drive.
2008 S-9
Zoning Regulations 149
(N) One sign, a banner or window sign not exceeding 40 square feet in size, as well as balloons or
pennants, may be erected on the premises of an establishment, business or activity having a grand opening,
special event, or sale, provided that such sign be displayed for a period not to exceed 14 consecutive
calendar days, up to four times a year. Any advertisement on the banner or sign cannot exceed 25% of the
total footage of the sign, and a permit at no cost must be obtained from City Hall before any signage is
displayed.
(O) Yard and garage sale signs shall not exceed eight square feet in sign area, and must abide by all
regulations regarding visibility at intersections in this chapter. Yard and garage sale signs shall not be
posted earlier than seven days prior to the start of the yard sale, and shall be removed no later than
the following day of the sale. Yard sale and garage sale signs shall only be posted in the yard where the sale
is conducted. No signs are allowed on utility poles or public property.
(P) Temporary auction signs, not to exceed 32 square feet of sign area, advertising auction sales shall
be permitted at street intersections. Auction signs shall be permitted up to 48 hours in advance of the
auction, and shall be removed within 24 hours after the auction.
(Q) Temporary signs advertising the sale of lots within a new subdivision of five or more lots shall be
permitted for a maximum of one year. The maximum sign area shall be 60 square feet, and the maximum
sign height shall be five feet. The sign shall not be illuminated. The signage shall advertise only the
subdivision in which it is located and shall be erected at a dedicated street entrance.
(R) Temporary construction signs identifying the owner, architect, engineer, contractor and others
instrumental in the construction of a building shall be permitted only on the property in which construction
is taking place. The maximum sign height shall be 15 feet. The sign shall be removed within 30 days of
completion of construction or receipt of occupancy.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05; Am. Ord. passed 9-8-08)
' 154.385 PROHIBITED PERMANENT AND TEMPORARY SIGNS.
The regulations contained in this subchapter shall apply to all use districts. Prohibited permanent and
temporary signs include:
(A) Any sign which constitutes a traffic hazard or a detriment to public safety, or which may be
confused with a traffic control signal or device or the light of an emergency or road equipment vehicle.
(B) Signs which make use of words, symbols, phrases or characters in such a manner as to interfere
with, mislead or confuse traffic.
(C) Any sign which obstructs the view of vehicular traffic.
2008 S-9
150 Lebanon - Land Usage
(D) Signs located in the sight triangle.
(E) Mobile or portable signs, except where conforming to the standards set in ' 154.386(C), and with
the exception of new businesses which have a 90-day grace period.
(F) (1) Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, off-premise signs, including billboards.
(2) Exception. Upon application and approval, an off-premise sign(s) may be permitted for a
specified period of limited duration not more than 60 consecutive days.
(G) Signs attached to any tree or utility pole.
(H) Any sign located in a public right-of-way, except those allowed by this chapter.
(I) Signs, except for safety purposes, attached to a fire escape or any door or window giving access to
any fire escape.
(J) Blinking, flashing, and scrolling signs.
(K) Window signs (including approved temporary signs and signs drawn or painted directly on a
window surface), visible from any public or private street or highway, that occupy more than 20% of the
window surface.
(L) Streamers, tag signs, any sidewalk signs, banners, posters, pennants, ribbons, spinners, beacons,
searchlights, or other similar devices shall not be permitted or attached to any other sign, except in
accordance with ' 154.384.
(M) Signs attached to the face of accessory buildings, except those attached to automatic teller
machines or similar structures.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05; Am. Ord. passed 9-8-08)
' 154.386 PERMITTED PERMANENT SIGNS BY ZONE.
(A) Agriculture and residential districts. Signage is allowed within agriculture and residential districts
on a limited basis and shall conform to the regulations set forth in this section:
2008 S-9
Zoning Regulations 151
Sign Type
Structural Type
Number
(maximum)
Sign Area
(maximum)
Sign Height
(maximum)
Home occupation
identification
Wall
1
4 square feet
Not applicable
Real estate, sale, rental, or
lease
Freestanding
1
9 square feet
5 feet
Subdivision, multi-family
complex, or Planned Unit
Development identification
Freestanding
(monument only)
1
20 square feet
5 feet
Property identification
Wall nameplate
1
1 square foot
Not applicable
Bed & breakfast
Wall
1
2 square feet
Not applicable
Freestanding
1
9 square feet
5 feet
Church, school, park,
library, hospital, or other
public facility identification
Wall
1
20 square feet
Not applicable
Freestanding
1
20 square feet
5 feet
(B) Office and professional district. Signage is allowed within the Office and Professional District on
a limited basis and shall conform to the regulations set forth in this subchapter:
Sign Type
Structural Type
Number
(maximum)
Sign Area
(maximum)
Sign Height
(maximum)
Business/commercial
identification
Wall
1
10 square feet
Not applicable
Freestanding
(monument only)
1
40 square feet
8 feet
Sale, rental, or lease of
real estate
Wall or
freestanding
1
12 square feet
5 feet
Church, school, park,
library, hospital, or other
public facility
identification
Wall
1
20 square feet
Not applicable
Freestanding
1
20 square feet
5 feet
2008 S-9
152 Lebanon - Land Usage
(C) Business districts. Signs permitted under this section shall be limited to those described in this
subchapter.
Sign Type
Structural
Type
Number
(maximum)
Sign Area
(maximum)
Sign Height
(maximum)
All Business Districts
Sale, rent, or lease of real
estate
Wall or
freestanding
1
32 square feet
5 feet
Church, school, park,
library, hospital, or other
public facility
identification
Wall
1
2 square feet
Not applicable
Freestanding
1
40 square feet
5 feet
B-1
Professional office,
business, or commercial
identification
Wall
2
*50 square feet
Not applicable
Blade or
awning blade
(as determined
by building)
1 2-sided sign
per business, or
1 2-sided sign
per 20 linear
feet of building
frontage in
cases of
multiple
businesses in
one building
4.5 square feet
12 feet
(no lower than
7 feet)
Sandwich
board
1 per business
16 square feet
total (8 square
feet per side)
4 feet
B-2 and B-3
Business, commercial, or
professional office
identification
Wall
3
*150 square feet
each
Not applicable
Freestanding
1 per lot of 200
feet or less of
frontage.
Maximum of 2
signs with over
200 feet
120 square feet
per sign
20 feet
2008 S-9
Zoning Regulations 153
Sign Type
Structural
Type
Number
(maximum)
Sign Area
(maximum)
Sign Height
(maximum)
Planned shopping center
identification
Freestanding
1 per center
entrance
200 square feet
20 feet
Wall or
projecting
1 per tenant
30 square feet or
5% of wall
frontage,
whichever is
larger
8 feet above
sidewalk
surface for
projecting sign
height
NOTE: Electronic message boards are allowed only in B-2 and B-3 zones as part of the signage
allowance, and are not to exceed 15 square feet. (Static dwell time must be at least four
seconds.)
(1) In the B-3 District, a high-rise pylon sign may be approved through a Development Plan by
the Planning Commission. All such freestanding signs shall be set back 25 feet from the front property line.
(2) All freestanding signs designed to face a residential district shall be located 50 feet from the
property line abutting a residential district.
(3) Portable signage for permitted uses shall not be permitted if permanent signage exists, except
in the case of sandwich boards conforming to the specifications set above. Sandwich boards shall be placed
on the sidewalk, adjacent and perpendicular to the building in which the business is located, as long as the
remaining area on the sidewalk is ADA complaint. Sandwich boards shall be attached by hook and eye to
the facade of the building in order to keep the sign erect. Portable signage shall maintain the same setback
as required for permanent signage and shall conform to all signage requirements set forth in this chapter.
* $If the business has a total of three building-mounted signs, each sign may be up to 5% of
the building elevation.
$If the business has a total of two building-mounted signs, each sign may be up to 7% of
the building elevation.
$If the business has only one building-mounted sign, each sign may be up to 9% of the
building elevation.
(D) Industrial districts. Signs permitted under this section shall be limited to those described in this
subchapter:
2008 S-9
154 Lebanon - Land Usage
Sign Type
Structural Type
Number
(maximum)
Sign Area
(maximum)
Sign Height
(maximum)
Business, commercial, or
industrial identification
Wall
1
100 square feet
Not applicable
Freestanding
1
100 square feet
20 feet
Industrial park
identification and
directional
Freestanding
1
50 square feet
10 feet
Off-premise advertising
on vacant, undeveloped
land
Freestanding
1
100 square feet
20 feet
Real estate sale, rental, or
lease
Wall or freestanding
1
32 square feet
5 feet
Church, school, park,
library, hospital, or other
public facility
Wall
1
2 square feet
Not applicable
Freestanding
1
50 square feet
20 feet
(1) All freestanding signs designed to face a residential district shall be located 50 feet from the
property line abutting a residential district.
(2) Portable signage for permitted uses shall not be permitted if permanent signage exists.
Portable signage shall maintain the same setback as required for permanent signage and shall conform to all
signage requirements set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05; Am. Ord. passed 9-8-08)
' 154.387 SIGN MAINTENANCE.
(A) It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector or his/her authorized agent to inspect every
off-premise sign and business sign at least one time annually.
(B) Should any sign become insecure or in danger of falling or otherwise unsafe, in the opinion of the
Building Inspector, the owner thereof, or the person or firm maintaining the same, shall, upon written
notice from the Administrative Official, in the case of immediate danger forthwith and in any case within
ten days, secure the same in a manner to be approved by the Administrative Official or remove such sign. If
such order is not complied with within ten days, the Administrative Official shall remove or cause removal
of such sign at the expense of the owner or lessee thereof.
2008 S-9
Zoning Regulations 155
(C) All signs for which a permit is required, together with all their supports, braces, guys, and anchors,
shall be kept in repair, unless constructed of galvanized or non-corroding material, and shall be thoroughly
painted at least once every two years. The Building Inspector shall order the removal of any sign that is not
maintained in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter. Such removal shall be at the expense of
the owner or lessee.
(D) Any sign now or hereafter existing which no longer advertises a bona fide business shall be taken
down and removed by the owner, his/her agent, or person having the beneficial use of the building,
structure, or lot. Upon failure to comply with such notice within the time specified in such order, the
Building Inspector is hereby authorized to cause the removal of such sign. The owner of the building,
structure, or lot to which the sign is attached shall pay any expense incidental thereto.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05; Am. Ord. passed 9-8-08)
' 154.388 VIOLATIONS.
In case any sign shall be installed, erected, constructed, or maintained in violation of any of the terms
of these regulations, the Administrative Official shall notify, by registered mail or written notice served
personally to the owner or lessee thereof, to alter such sign as to comply with these zoning regulations, and
to secure the necessary permit therefor, or to remove the sign. If such order is not complied with within ten
days, the Building Inspector shall remove such sign at the expense of the owner or lessee thereof.
Additionally, failure to comply with any of the provisions of this subchapter shall be deemed a violation,
and shall be punishable under ' 154.999.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05; Am. Ord. passed 9-8-08)
' 154.389 NONCONFORMING SIGNS AND ADVERTISING STRUCTURES.
Any advertising sign, billboard, commercial advertising structure or statuary which is existing and
maintained at the time this chapter becomes effective, which does not conform with the provisions hereof,
shall be considered nonconforming and shall not be structurally altered or replaced except to comply with
this chapter.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05; Am. Ord. passed 9-8-08)
' 154.390 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, a NONCONFORMING SIGN shall be defined as a sign existing at
the effective date of this chapter, which could not be built under the terms of this chapter or under the terms
of other city ordinances.
(A) The following are to be removed or made to conform to this chapter within five days:
2008 S-9
156 Lebanon - Land Usage
(1) All temporary signs other than those permitted herein.
(2) All nonconforming off-premises signs.
(B) Where a change in use, occupancy or ownership occurs which necessitates the altering of a sign in
any manner, the altered or changed sign shall be brought into conformance with the requirements of this
chapter.
(C) Upon failure to comply within the time specified, the Administrator is hereby required to cause
removal of any nonconforming sign. Any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the owner, agent, or
lessee of the sign or of the property upon which the sign is located.
(D) Nothing in this section shall prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of a nonconforming sign
or replacement of a broken part of a nonconforming sign. Replacement of broken parts of a nonconforming
sign is permitted so long as it does not change its dimensions, location, or size.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05; Am. Ord. passed 9-8-08)
OFF-STREET AND ON-STREET PARKING AND LOADING/UNLOADING STANDARDS
' 154.400 OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
(A) General. Off-street parking shall be provided with vehicular access to the public right-of-way and
shall conform to the regulations set forth in this subchapter. The off-street parking requirements and
ingress/egress shall not, except for single-family residences, be used in the computation of parking spaces.
(B) Existing parking space. Existing off-street parking space provided for any building or use at the
time of the enactment of this chapter shall not thereafter be reduced unless it exceeds the requirements of
this chapter. Any existing building or use not providing off-street parking space in conformance with this
chapter shall, at the time of any structural alteration of the building or expansion of the use, provide the
required parking.
(C) Minimum parking space dimensions. The minimum dimensions of off-street parking shall be ten
feet in width by 20 feet in length, or 200 square feet. Additional area shall be required in order to provide
vehicle maneuvering space, access, and egress.
(D) Minimum number of off-street parking spaces. The following table sets forth the minimum
number of off-street parking spaces for specific uses. The gross floor area of warehouses, storage space,
employee workshop areas, or accessory structures shall not be utilized in the computation of parking space
requirements. Where more than one use occupies a building, the total of the combined standards shall be
required:
2008 S-9
Zoning Regulations 156A
Use
Minimum parking area or parking space(s)
Residential
Bed and Breakfast
One space per room/unit offered for overnight accommodations plus two
spaces per dwelling unit
Home Occupation
One space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area GFA
Residential Structure
Two spaces per dwelling unit
Rooming and boarding
house
One space per room/unit offered for overnight accommodations plus two
spaces per dwelling unit
Commercial or institutional
Assisted living and
residential care
facilities
Two spaces for every three beds, or 0.66 spaces per bed
Churches, Sunday
School, and other place
of religious assembly
One space per ten seats at maximum
capacity
Day care or child care
center
One space per each 420 square feet gross floor area (GFA), exclusive of
kitchen and bathroom
General commercial or
retail use not specified
Four spaces for the first 1,000 square feet of gross floor area (GFA) of the
principal structure and one additional space for each additional 150 square
feet of gross floor area (GFA) of the principal structure (Note: The
computation of GFA shall not include warehouses, storage space,
employee workshop areas, or accessory structures).
Hospital, medical
clinic, sanitarium, and
nursing home
One space per four beds or each four beds in use, whichever is greater,
plus one space for every 1,000 square feet of gross floor area (GFA)
Hotel or motel
One space per room offered for overnight accommodations
Professional office
One space per 200 square feet of gross floor area (GFA)
School, elementary and
middle
One space per classroom
School, high school
and post secondary
Four spaces per classroom or one space per every six seats in auditorium,
gym, arena, or stadium at maximum capacity, whichever is greater;
maximum 300 spaces
2008 S-9
156B Lebanon - Land Usage
Zoning Regulations 157
Theaters, auditorium,
stadium, or other place
of public assembly
One space for each ten seats at maximum capacity
Industrial
General manufacturing
or industrial use
One space per two employees at maximum capacity
Uses not elsewhere specified
Unspecified use
One space per 300 square feet of gross floor area (GFA)
(E) Minimum setback. Parking areas shall be located no closer than five feet from any property line.
(F) Space arrangement and layout. Off-street parking shall be located on the same property as the
permitted use, unless the Planning Commission authorizes the use of other properties. Combined uses shall
provide parking equal to the sum of the individual uses. The required parking area for the permitted use
shall not be reduced or encroached upon in any manner.
(G) Off-street parking on adjacent property. If off-street parking cannot be reasonably provided on
the same lot on which the permitted use is conducted, the Board of Adjustments may permit off-street
parking and loading on adjacent property, provided that such space is within 400 feet of an entrance to the
permitted use. This off-street parking area shall be deemed as required open space associated with the
permitted use and shall not thereafter be reduced or encroached upon in any manner. The Planning
Commission may require a plat, deed, or any other proof necessary to show that the required
loading/unloading space, if located off the premises it serves, is controlled by and available to the applicant.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.401 OFF-STREET LOADING/UNLOADING REQUIREMENTS.
(A) General. Permitted uses shall provide off-street loading/unloading areas and adequate
ingress/egress. No building shall be designed, erected, altered, used, or occupied unless the required
off-street loading/unloading requirements are satisfied. Off-street loading/unloading areas shall be located
on the same property as the permitted use and structure it serves and shall be paved.
(B) Minimum setback. Loading/unloading areas shall be located no closer than five feet from any
property line.
(C) Minimum size of off-street loading/unloading spaces. Loading/unloading berths shall be a
minimum of ten feet in width, 35 feet in length, and 15 feet in height.
2006 S-7
158 Lebanon - Land Usage
(D) Minimum number of off-street loading/unloading. The following listing sets forth minimum
number of off-street loading/unloading berths:
Gross floor area of permitted
structures/buildings
Minimum off-street loading/unloading berths
Less than 40,000 square feet
1
40,001 - 100,000 square feet
2
100,001 - 160,000 square feet
3
160,001 - 240,000 square feet
4
240,001 - 320,000 square feet
5
320,001 - 400,000 square feet
6
Greater than 400,000 square feet
1 per additional 100,000 square feet GFA
(E) Off-street loading/unloading on adjacent property. If off-street loading/unloading cannot be
reasonably provided on the same lot on which the permitted use is conducted, the Board of Adjustments
may permit off-street parking and loading on adjacent property, provided that such space is within 400 feet
of an entrance to the permitted use. This off-street loading/unloading area shall be deemed as required open
space associated with the permitted use and shall not thereafter be reduced or encroached upon in any
manner. The Planning Commission may require a plat, deed, or any other proof necessary to show that the
required loading/unloading space, if located off the premises it serves, is controlled by and available to the
applicant.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.402 ON-STREET PARKING AND LOADING/UNLOADING.
The on-street parking of vehicles 20 feet or longer in length on public streets shall be prohibited in a
residential district, except for the delivery, maintenance, construction, or other loading/unloading purposes.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 159
ZONING ORDINANCE TEXT AND ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS
' 154.415 ZONING ORDINANCE AND ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS.
The Lebanon Zoning Ordinance and Zoning Map may be amended or repealed but only in accordance
with the procedures set forth in KRS Chapter 100 and in this subchapter.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05; Am. Ord. 06-07, passed 7-12-06)
' 154.416 ZONING ORDINANCE TEXT AMENDMENT PROCEDURES.
The procedure for amendments to the Lebanon Zoning Ordinance shall be the same as the adoption of
the original Zoning Ordinance and as set forth in KRS Chapter 100.
(A) Origination of Zoning Ordinance text amendment. A proposal to amend the text of the Lebanon
Zoning Ordinance may originate with the Lebanon Planning Commission or Lebanon City Council. The
Planning Commission must hold at least one public hearing after proper notice is given.
(B) Public notice. The Planning Commission shall publish in a newspaper of general circulation in
Lebanon-Marion County at least seven days and no more than 21 days before the public hearing in
accordance with KRS Chapter 424.
(C) Public hearing and Planning Commission action. The Planning Commission shall hold at least
one public hearing and make a recommendation as to the text of the amendment and whether the
amendment shall be approved or disapproved and shall state the reasons for its recommendation. In the case
of a proposed text amendment originating with the Lebanon City Council, the Planning Commission shall
make its recommendation within 60 days of the date of its receipt of the proposed text amendment.
(D) Legislative body action. The Planning Commission shall make a recommendation on the
proposed zoning text amendment to the Lebanon City Council, and the Lebanon City Council shall take
final action on the zoning map amendment and shall approve or disapprove the zoning map amendment
pursuant to KRS Chapter 100. Approval of the zoning ordinance text amendment shall take an affirmative
vote of a majority of the Lebanon City Council.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05; Am. Ord. 06-07, passed 7-12-06)
' 154.417 ZONING MAP AMENDMENT PROCEDURES.
The procedures for zoning map amendments shall be the same as defined in KRS Chapter 100 and in
addition, as follows:
(A) Origination of zoning map amendment. A proposal for a zoning map amendment with an owner
of the property in question shall be subject to this subchapter and any other applicable law. If the proposal
for a zoning map amendment originates with an owner of the property in question, a pre-
2006 S-7
160 Lebanon - Land Usage
application conference must be conducted and a written application must be filed with the Planning
Commission as set forth in these regulations, but no such pre-application conference shall be required if the
application originates with the City Council or Planning Commission.
(B) Pre-application conference. Prior to the owner of the property in question filing an application for
a zoning map amendment, the applicant shall meet with the Planning Commission=s Administrative
Official to discuss the proposed amendment requirements, procedures, and issues related to the proposed
zoning map amendment. This pre-application conference is intended to alleviate potential problems and
conflicts by recognition and consideration of existing conditions, necessary facilities, Comprehensive Plan
recommendations, and other issues related to the proposed amendment. The pre-application conference
shall be held no less than five working days and no more than three months prior to the filing of a zoning
map amendment application. The Planning Commission shall not accept a zoning map amendment
application from an owner of the property in question if a pre-application conference has not been
conducted.
(C) Zoning map amendment application. An application for a zoning map amendment from the owner
of the property must be filed with the Planning Commission and must include the following information
and documentation.
(1) Application signed by an owner or the owner=s agent;
(2) Plat and site plan of the property in question, prepared by a licensed land surveyor, including
the following information:
(a) Name of owner(s) and applicant(s);
(b) Scale and north arrow;
(c) Bearing and distances;
(d) Lot dimensions and setbacks;
(e) Locating distance to nearest road or railroad centerlines or rights-of-way;
(f) Address of property or intersecting street on each side;
(g) Rights-of-way of road and pavement width;
(h) Adjacent property, showing property lines and names of adjacent property owner(s);
(i) Acreage of property;
(j) Vicinity map;
(k) Surveyor=s stamp and certification;
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 161
(l) Floodplain area(s) and FEMA certification;
(m) Exterior dimensions and use of all existing and proposed structures; and,
(n) Any and all other information necessary for determining conformance with the Zoning
Ordinance.
(3) Listing of adjoining property owners obtained from Marion County Property Valuation
Administrator=s records, including name(s), mailing address, PVA number, and property street address.
(4) Certificate from the Marion County Health Department approving the proposed water and
sewerage facilities.
(5) Fifteen copies of a Development Plan prepared and signed by a licensed land surveyor and/or
registered professional engineer dependent upon development content. A Development Plan shall meet the
following requirements and contain the information listed below:
(a) Shall be drawn on durable, dimensionally stable media of a size no larger than 24" x 36.@
More than one sheet may be used. Sheets shall be numbered in sequence if more than one sheet is used, and
each shall be labeled ADevelopment Plan.@
(b) Shall be drawn at a convenient and standard scale.
(c) Shall have a title block containing the following information:
1. Name of the development, if applicable;
2. Name and mailing address of the property owner(s);
3. Name and mailing address of the developer(s), if different from owner(s);
4. Name and mailing address of the professional land surveyor, if applicable, and name
of the firm that performed the survey, if applicable;
5. Name and mailing address of the professional engineer;
6. Date of preparation;
7. All other pertinent data and information.
(d) Graphic and written scale.
(e) North arrow.
2006 S-7
162 Lebanon - Land Usage
(f) Vicinity map of sufficient detail to locate land being subdivided and showing major
streets and other durable physical features.
(g) Topographic map shall show the following:
1. Topographic contour lines must be depicted with sufficient accuracy to permit the
planning of drainage, streets, and other proposed improvements. The plans must include two foot contours
on land less than 5% gradient and five-foot contours on land more than 5% gradient. The contour lines are
not to be more than one 100 feet apart horizontally and shall extend for at least 40 feet beyond the boundary
lines of the proposed development. Contours shall relate to the United States Geological Survey (USGS) of
the area and shall relate to the nearest benchmark. All contours shall be marked in feet above sea level. The
benchmark shall be clearly shown or identified.
2. Size, top of frame, and invert elevations for all culverts, manholes or catch basins
and flow line elevations for all brooks at 100 foot stations. This data shall be provided for at least 40 feet
beyond the boundary lines of the proposed development.
3. Sinkholes shall be clearly labeled and their low point clearly marked.
4. All existing watercourses, inland wetlands, floodplains and flowage easements.
5. Present wooded areas indicated by foliage line.
(h) Names, locations, record sources, and current zoning designation of adjoining
subdivisions and locations, record sources, current zoning designation, and names of owners of adjoining
property along with intersecting property lines.
(i) Total calculated area of subject land computed either to the nearest hundredth of an acre
or nearest square foot.
(j) Layout of proposed tracts of land, including dimensions of lots, lot lines, lot numbers,
and minimum building setback lines. Tracts shall be laid out according to sound planning principles.
(k) All existing and proposed structures.
(l) Direction and length of each line as follows: (1) Bearings shown in degrees, minutes, and
seconds and distances shown to hundredths of a foot or (2) a geometrically-curved line identified with a
beginning point, terminus point, and with sufficient curve data to define the curve.
(m) Cemetery or grave site, if discernible or of notice during the performance of the field
survey or the required research.
(n) Accurate location, description and material of all monuments.
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 163
(o) Layout of existing and proposed streets and utilities on and adjacent to the subject
property.
(6) Other applications for variances or conditional uses.
(7) Non-refundable fee. For zoning map amendments originated by the Planning Commission,
Lebanon City Council, or other governmental agency or entity, a filing fee shall not be required.
(D) This division (D) shall be applicable to circumstances in which the city has annexed property but
has not elected to follow the procedure of KRS 100.209 prior to the adoption of the annexation ordinance.
An application for a zoning map amendment, including the designation of zones for annexed property
which previously were not zoned or were zoned pursuant to the regulations of a different planning unit,
which is filed by the Lebanon City Council or the Planning Commission must include the following
information:
(1) Application signed by authorized officer and/or agent of the City Council or Planning
Commission per an authorizing resolution of the respective City Council or Planning Commission;
(2) Plat of the property in question, prepared by a licensed land surveyor, including all
information required in ' 154.417(C) for an application filed by the owner of the property, except that
exterior dimensions of existing structures may be estimated from public records and that proposed
structures of which the applicant does not have current written information do not have to be identified on
the submitted plat.
(3) No Certificate from the Marion County Health Department approving proposed water and
sewerage facilities has to be included in the application unless such Certificate exists in the public records
of the Health Department at the time of the application filing.
(4) No Development Plan has to be included in the application in that the City Council and/or
Planning Commission are not reasonably expected to know of or anticipate specific structures and
development of private property which is being zoned subsequent to annexation or is being proposed to be
assigned to a new zone based on new circumstances or circumstances not having been previously
considered.
(5) The application shall include the applicant=s analysis and justification as to why the
proposed zoning map amendment is supported under the standards of KRS 100.213 and the application
shall include preliminary proposed findings for the Planning Commission consistent with KRS 100.213.
(6) The application may include documents, studies, expert reports, exhibits of any kind, legal
analysis, correspondence, surveys, maps, and any other materials the applicant may seek to include. The
inclusion or omission of such materials in connection with the filing of the application shall not prohibit the
applicant from supplementing the materials to be submitted up through the time the administrative record
is open at public hearings before the Planning Commission and City Council.
2006 S-7
164 Lebanon - Land Usage
(E) Administrative official review and findings. Upon the filing of a zoning map amendment
application, the Administrative Official shall review the application, make whatever studies the Planning
Commission deems necessary and report findings at the public hearing. In addition, the Planning
Commission may require an applicant to submit further information subsequent to the filing of an
application if necessary to make a recommendation.
(F) Public Notice. The Planning Commission shall give notice of the public hearing in accordance
with the provisions of KRS Chapters 100 and 424 and as set forth in this chapter:
(1) Published notice. The Planning Commission shall publish a notice in a newspaper of general
circulation in Lebanon and Marion County at least seven and no more than 21 days before the public
hearing in accordance with KRS Chapter 424.
(2) Mailed notice.
(a) Map amendments originating with the owner. Notice of the required public hearing shall
be sent by first class mail to owners of property adjacent to the subject land at least 14 days prior to the
public hearing. Notice of such required public hearing shall also be sent via first class mail to the County
Judge/Executive of Marion County, Kentucky if the property proposed to be subject to a map amendment
adjoins property which is in the unincorporated area of Marion County (or to the mayor of any city which
the property adjoining the property in Lebanon is located) or such notice shall be sent to any planning unit
which has jurisdiction over such incorporated territory in compliance with KRS 100.212(3) .
(b) Map amendments originating with the Planning Commission or Lebanon City Council.
Per KRS Chapter 100, when a map amendment originates with the Planning Commission or the Lebanon
City Council, notice of required public hearing shall be sent by first class mail to an owner of every parcel
of property for which the classification is proposed to be changed at least 30 days prior to the public
hearing. Notice of such required public hearing shall also be sent via first class mail to owners of property
adjacent to the subject property and also to owners of the subject property at least fourteen days prior to the
public hearing before the Planning Commission in compliance with KRS 100.212(2), as amended. Notice
of such required public hearing shall also be sent via first class mail to the County Judge/Executive of
Marion County, Kentucky if the property proposed to be subject to a map amendment adjoins property
which is in the unincorporated area of Marion County (or to the mayor of any city which the property
adjoining the property in Lebanon is located) or such notice shall be sent to any planning unit which has
jurisdiction over such incorporated territory in compliance with KRS 100.212(3).
(3) Posted notice. The Planning Commission shall post a notice of the public hearing
conspicuously on the property for 14 consecutive days immediately prior to the hearing and as set forth
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 165
in KRS Chapter 100. The Administrative Official shall seek the advance timely consent of the property
owner to posting of such notice when the relevant application has been filed by the City Council or
Planning Commission, but the failure of the owner to provide such consent shall not divest the city or the
Planning Commission of its authority to pursue a map amendment and the failure of the property owner to
consent to posting of such notice shall be deemed a waiver of objection by the owner to notice of the
zoning map amendment.
(G) Public hearing and Planning Commission action.
(1) The Planning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing and make findings of fact and
a recommendation of approval or disapproval of the proposed map amendment to the Lebanon City
Council. The Planning Commission must find that the zoning map amendment is in agreement with the
adopted Lebanon Comprehensive Plan, or in the absence of such a finding, that one or more of the
following apply and such finding shall be recorded in the minutes and records of the Planning Commission:
(a) That the existing zoning classification given to the property is inappropriate and that the
proposed zoning classification is appropriate; and
(b) That there have been major changes of an economic, physical, or social nature within the
area involved which were not anticipated in the adopted Lebanon Comprehensive Plan and which have
substantially altered the basic character of such area.
(2) The Planning Commission shall forward its findings of fact and recommendations in
writing, including a summary of the evidence and testimony presented by the proponents and opponents of
the proposed amendment, to the Lebanon City Council.
(H) Legislative body action. Upon receipt of the findings of fact and recommendations of the Planning
Commission, the Lebanon City Council shall take into consideration the zoning map amendment pursuant
to KRS Chapter 100 requirements.
(I) Land use certification recordation. The Planning Commission secretary shall file a land use
certificate in the Marion County Court Clerk=s office for all zoning map amendments within 30 days of the
date upon which the legislative body takes final action on the zoning map amendment. The land use
certificate shall be completed and recorded in conformance with the KRS Chapter 100. If the zoning map
amendment resulted from application of the City Council or Planning Commission, a copy of the recorded
land use certificate shall also be mailed to the property owner of the subject property according to the
records of the Property Valuation Administrator as of the date of the zoning map amendment within 30
days of such map amendment.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05; Am. Ord. 06-07, passed 7-12-06)
2006 S-7
166 Lebanon - Land Usage
CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS, VARIANCES, AND APPEALS
' 154.430 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS, VARIANCES, AND APPEALS.
The Lebanon Board of Adjustments shall have the power to hear and decide on applications for
conditional use permits, variances, and appeals in accordance with the procedures set forth in KRS Chapter
100 and in this subchapter.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.431 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS.
The owner of the subject property or an agent of the owner, bearing a written power of attorney
granting authority for this purpose, may apply for a conditional use permit.
(A) Application. An application for a conditional use permit must be filed with the Board of
Adjustment. The application must be accompanied by the following information and documentation:
(1) Application signed by an owner or the owner=s agent;
(2) Plat and site plan of the property to which the conditional use permit will apply, prepared by a
licensed land surveyor and containing the following information:
(a) Name of owner(s) and applicant(s);
(b) Scale and north arrow;
(c) Bearing and distances;
(d) Lot dimensions and setbacks;
(e) Locating distance to nearest road centerlines or rights-of-way;
(f) Address of property or intersecting street on each side;
(g) Rights-of-way of road and pavement width;
(h) Adjacent property, showing property lines and names of adjacent property owner(s);
(i) Acreage of property;
(j) Vicinity map;
(k) Surveyor=s stamp and certification;
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 167
(l) Floodplain area(s) and FEMA certification;
(m) Exterior dimensions and use of all existing and proposed structures; and
(n) Any and all other information necessary for determining conformance with the Zoning
Ordinance.
(3) Listing of adjoining property owners obtained from Marion County Property Valuation
Administrator=s records, including name(s), mailing address, PVA number, and property street address.
(4) Certificate from the Marion County Health Department approving the proposed water and
sewerage facilities.
(5) Non-refundable fee.
(B) Staff review and findings. Upon the filing of a conditional use permit application, the Board of
Adjustments staff shall review the application, make whatever studies the Board of Adjustments deems
necessary and report findings at the public hearing. In addition, the Planning Commission may require an
applicant to submit further information subsequent to the filing of an application if necessary to make a
recommendation.
(C) Public notice.
(1) Published notice. The Board of Adjustments shall publish in a newspaper of general
circulation in Lebanon and Marion County a public notice at least seven days and not more than 21 days
before the public hearing in accordance with KRS Chapter 424.
(2) Mailed notice. The Board of Adjustments shall send notice of the required public hearing by
first class mail to owners of real property that are adjacent to the land that is subject to the conditional use
permit application at least 14 days prior to the public hearing.
(3) Posted notice. The Board of Adjustments shall post a notice of the public hearing
conspicuously on the property for 14 consecutive days immediately prior to the hearing and as set forth in
KRS Chapter 100.
(D) Board of Adjustments action. Within 30 days of the receipt of a conditional use permit
application, the Board of Adjustments shall hold at least one public hearing. The Board of Adjustments
may approve, modify, or deny any application. If it approves such permit, it may attach necessary
conditions such as time limitations, requirements that one or more things be done before the request can be
initiated, or conditions of a continuing nature. Any such conditions shall be recorded in the Board of
Adjustments= minutes and on the conditional use permit, along with a reference to the specific section of
the Zoning Ordinance listing the conditional use under consideration.
(E) Land use certification recordation. The Board of Adjustments secretary shall file a land use
certificate in the Marion County Court Clerk=s office for all conditional use permits within 30 days of
2006 S-7
168 Lebanon - Land Usage
the date upon which the Board of Adjustments takes final action to adopt the conditional use permit. The
land use certificate shall be completed and recorded in conformance with the KRS Chapter 100.
(F) Revocation of conditional use permits. The Board of Adjustments shall have the power, after
notifying the permit holder and holding a public hearing, to revoke conditional use permits for
noncompliance with the conditions therein or if the property owner violates any requirements of any local,
state, or federal regulations. Furthermore, the Board of Adjustments shall have a right of action to compel
offending structures or uses removed at the cost of the violator and may have judgment in person for such
cost.
(G) Time limit. In any case where a conditional use permit has not been exercised within the time limit
set by the Board of Adjustments, or within one year if no specific time limit has been set, such conditional
use permit shall not revert to its original designation unless there has been a public hearing. AExercised,@
as set out in this section, shall mean that binding contracts for the construction of the main building or other
improvements have been let, or in the absence of contracts, that the main building or other improvement is
under construction to a substantial degree, or that prerequisite conditions involving substantial investment
is under contract, in development, or completed. When construction is not a part of the use, Aexercised@
shall mean that the use is in operation in compliance with the conditions as designated in the permit
(H) Annual review. The Administrative Official shall review all conditional use permits, except those
for which all conditions have been satisfied, at least once annually, to determine if the conditions in the
permit are being met. The Administrative Official shall review any conditional use permit, except those for
which all conditions have been satisfied, on the request of the Board of Adjustments to determine if the use
of the conditions in the permit are being met and to determine if the land violates any laws or regulations.
(1) Inspection and report. The Administrative Official shall have the power to inspect the land or
structure where the conditional use is located in order to ascertain that the landowner is complying with all
the conditions that are listed on the conditional use permit. If the property owner is not complying with all
of the conditions listed on the conditional use permit, the Administrative Official shall report the fact in
writing to the Chairman of the Board of Adjustments. The report shall state specifically the manner in
which the landowner is not complying with the conditions on the conditional use permit, and a copy of the
report shall be furnished to the property owner at the same time that it is furnished to the Chairman of the
Board of Adjustment.
(2) Public hearing. The Board of Adjustments shall hold a hearing on the report within 30 days,
and a notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be furnished to the property owner at least one week
prior to the hearing. If the Board of Adjustments finds that the facts alleged in the report of the
Administrative Official are true and that the property owner has taken no steps to comply with them
between the date of the report and the date of the hearing, the Board of Adjustments may authorize the
Administrative Official to revoke the conditional use permit and take the necessary legal action to cause the
termination of the activity on the land which the conditional use permit authorizes.
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 169
(I) Conditional uses as permitted uses. Once the Board of Adjustments has completed a conditional
use permit and all the conditions required are of such type that they can be completely and permanently
satisfied, the Administrative Official, upon request of the applicant, may, if the facts warrant, make a
determination that the conditions have been satisfied, and enter the facts which indicate that the conditions
have been satisfied and the conclusion in the margin of the copy of the conditional use permit which is on
file. Thereafter said use, if it continues to meet the other requirements of the Zoning Ordinance, will be
treated as a permitted use.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.432 VARIANCES.
The owner of the subject property or an agent of the owner, bearing a written power of attorney
granting authority for this purpose, may apply for a variance.
(A) Permitted variances. The Board of Adjustments shall have the authority to hear and decide on
applications for variances from the terms of the Zoning Ordinance as defined and permitted in KRS 100,
but only in the following situations and provided that such relief may be granted without substantial
detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of the Zoning
Ordinance. The Board of Adjustments shall deny any request for a variance, from which relief is sought,
arising from circumstances that are the result of a willful violation of the Zoning Ordinance by the applicant
subsequent to the adoption of the Zoning Ordinance.
(1) Where, by reasons of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape of a specific piece of
property, which at the time of the adoption of this Zoning Ordinance, was a lot of record; or,
(2) Where, by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary or exceptional
situation or condition of a piece of property, the strict application of dimensional requirements would cause
practical difficulties to or exceptional and undue hardship upon the owner of such property. Financial
disadvantage to the property owner is no proof of hardship within the purpose of this chapter; or,
(3) Where it is shown that the land in question cannot be subdivided and that more open space is
created, a lower density can be established, traffic problems are lessened, and a better relationship between
the land and buildings is created by not subdividing the land and where a multi-building development will
retain the neighborhood character and not violate this chapter.
(B) Prohibited variances. The following variances shall be prohibited:
(1) Variances shall not be issued to allow the extension of a nonconforming use.
(2) Variances shall not be permitted to increase the density of a use above that permitted by the
applicable zoning district.
(3) Variances shall not be permitted to allow a use prohibited by the Zoning Ordinance.
2006 S-7
170 Lebanon - Land Usage
(4) Variances shall not be permitted which arise from circumstances that are the result of willful
violations of the Zoning Ordinance.
(5) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodways.
(C) Application. An application for a variance must be filed with the Board of Adjustments. The
application must be accompanied by the following information and documentation:
(1) Application signed by an owner or the owner=s agent;
(2) Boundary survey and site plan of the property to which the conditional use permit will apply,
prepared by a licensed land surveyor and containing the following information:
(a) Names of owner(s) and applicant(s);
(b) Scale and north arrow;
(c) Bearing and distances;
(d) Lot dimensions, setbacks, and coverage;
(e) Locating distance to nearest road centerlines or rights-of-way;
(f) Address of property or intersecting street on each side;
(g) Rights-of-way of road and pavement width;
(h) Adjacent property, showing property lines and names of adjacent property owner(s);
(i) Acreage of property;
(j) Vicinity map;
(k) Surveyor=s stamp and certification;
(l) Floodplain area(s) and FEMA certification;
(m) Exterior dimensions and use of all existing and proposed structures; and,
(n) Any and all other information necessary for determining conformance with the Zoning
Ordinance.
(3) Listing of adjoining property owners obtained from Marion County Property Valuation
Administrator=s records, including name(s), mailing address, PVA number, and property street address.
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 171
(4) Certificate from the Marion County Health Department approving the proposed water and
sewerage facilities.
(5) Non-refundable fee.
(D) Staff review and findings. Upon the filing of a conditional use permit application, the Board of
Adjustments staff shall review the application, make whatever studies the Board of Adjustments deems
necessary and report findings at the public hearing. In addition, the Board of Adjustments may require an
applicant to submit further information subsequent to the filing of an application if necessary to make a
recommendation.
(E) Public notice.
(1) Published notice. The Board of Adjustments shall publish in a newspaper of general
circulation in Lebanon-Marion County a public notice at least seven days and not more than 21 days before
the public hearing in accordance with KRS Chapter 424.
(2) Mailed notice. The Board of Adjustments shall send notice of the required public hearing by
first class mail to owners of real property that are adjacent to the land that is subject to the variance
application at least 14 days prior to the public hearing.
(3) Posted notice. The Board of Adjustments shall post a notice of the public hearing
conspicuously on the property for 14 consecutive days immediately prior to the hearing and as set forth in
KRS Chapter 100.
(F) Board of Adjustment findings and action.
(1) Within 30 days of the receipt of a variance application, the Board of Adjustments shall hold at
least one public hearing. The Board of Adjustments may approve, modify, or deny any application. The
Board of Adjustments may grant a variance if it concludes that unnecessary hardship would result from the
strict application of this Zoning Ordinance. The Board of Adjustments shall determine and express in
writing, all of the following findings:
(a) That the requested variance arises from special circumstances which do not generally
apply to land in the general vicinity or the same zone;
(b) That the strict application of the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance would deprive the
applicant of the reasonable use of the land or would create an unnecessary hardship on the applicant;
(c) That the circumstances are not the result of the applicant taken subsequent to the adoption
of the Zoning Ordinance from which relief is sought;
(d) That the requested variance will not adversely affect the public health, safety, or welfare,
will not alter the character of the general vicinity, will not cause a hazard or a nuisance to the public, and
will not allow unreasonable circumvention of the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.
2006 S-7
172 Lebanon - Land Usage
(2) In granting a variance, the Board of Adjustments may attach thereto such conditions regarding
the location, character, and other features of the proposed building, structure, or use as it may deem
advisable in the furtherance of the purposes of the Ordinance.
(G) Land use certification recordation. The Board of Adjustments secretary shall file a land use
certificate in the Marion County Court Clerk=s office for all conditional use permits within 30 days of the
date upon which the Board of Adjustments takes final action to grant the variance. The land use certificate
shall be completed and recorded in conformance with the KRS Chapter 100.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.433 APPEALS.
Any person, or entity claiming to be injuriously affected or aggrieved by an official action, order,
requirement, interpretation, grant, refusal, or decision of the Administrative Official may take appeals to the
Board of Adjustments.
(A) Time limitation. Such appeal shall be made within 30 days of the grievance by filing a notice of
appeal with the Board of Adjustments, specifying the grounds therefore and giving notice of such appeal to
any and all parties of record.
(B) Administrative official action. The Administrative official shall transmit to the Board of
Adjustments all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken, and shall be
treated as and be the respondent in such further proceedings.
(C) Public notice.
(1) Published notice. The Board of Adjustments shall fix a reasonable time for hearing the appeal
and give public notice in a newspaper of general circulation in Lebanon and Marion County at least seven
days and not more than 21 days before the public hearing in accordance with KRS Chapter 424.
(2) Mailed notice. The Board of Adjustments shall send notice of the required public hearing by
first class mail to the appellant and the Administrative Official at least one week prior to the hearing.
(D) Public hearing. The Board shall hold one public hearing within 60 days and shall fix a reasonable
time for the hearing of an appeal. The affected party may appear at the hearing in person or be represented
by an attorney. At the public hearing on the appeal held by the Board of Adjustments, any interested person
may appear and enter his appearance, and all shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
(E) Findings requirements. The Board of Adjustments review on appeal shall be limited to a
determination of whether the decision being appealed was (1) not based upon substantial evidence and (2)
arbitrary and capricious. The Board of Adjustments shall affirm the decision that is being appealed
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 173
unless one or both of the factors set forth above exists. The Board of Adjustments shall not substitute its
judgment for the judgment of the Administrative Official.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
NONCONFORMITIES
' 154.445 INTENT.
Within the districts established by this Zoning Ordinance or amendments that may be later adopted,
there exist lots, structures, and uses of land and structures which were lawful before this chapter was passed
or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this chapter or future
amendments. It is the intent of this Zoning Ordinance to permit these nonconformities to continue until they
are removed, but not to encourage their survival. It is further the intent of this chapter that nonconformities
shall not be enlarged upon or expanded, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses
prohibited elsewhere in the same district.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.446 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.
Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter which
could not be built under the terms of this chapter by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height,
yard, its location on the lot, or other requirements concerning the structure, such structure may be continued
so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
(A) No nonconforming structure may be enlarged, moved, or structurally altered in a way which
increases its nonconformity, but any structure or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its
nonconformity;
(B) Should such nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of such structure be destroyed by
any means to an extent of 55% or more of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, exclusive of
foundations, it shall not be repaired or reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this
Zoning Ordinance;
(C) Should such nonconforming structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatsoever, it
shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved;
(D) No nonconforming structure may be re-established after it has been discontinued for 24
consecutive months or more, except when government action impedes access to the premises. A vacated
premises or building of non-operative status shall be evidence of a discontinued use;
2006 S-7
174 Lebanon - Land Usage
(E) No nonconforming structure may be changed to any other use except one which is a permitted use
in the zoning district in which it is located;
(F) The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to residential structures in industrial districts;
(G) When a nonconforming structure is superseded by a permitted use, the structure shall thereafter
conform to the regulations for the zoning district, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be
resumed.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.447 NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND.
Where at the time of passage of this chapter or amendments, lawful use of land exists which would not
be permitted in the zoning district under the terms of this chapter, the lawful use may be continued as it
remains otherwise lawful subject to the following provisions:
(A) No nonconforming use, except single-family residential uses in the Agriculture and Single-Family
Residential Districts, shall be enlarged, increased, or extended to occupy a greater area of land than was
occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter;
(B) No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or part to any portion of the lot or parcel
other than that occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter;
(C) If any nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for 24 consecutive months or more, except
where government action impedes access to the premises, any subsequent use of land shall not thereafter be
used except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located;
(D) No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this chapter shall be erected in
connection with such nonconforming uses of land.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.448 NONCONFORMING USE OF STRUCTURES OR STRUCTURES/PREMISES.
Where at the time of passage of this chapter or amendments, lawful use involving individual structures,
or of structure and premises in combination, exists which would not be permitted in the zoning district
under the terms of this chapter, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful,
subject to the following provisions:
(A) No structure, or structure and premises in combination, devoted to a nonconforming use shall be
enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in changing the use of
the structure to a use permitted in the zoning district in which it is located;
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 175
(B) Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is
superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the zoning district, and the
nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed;
(C) If any nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in combination, ceases for 24
consecutive months or more, except when government action impedes access to the premises, any
subsequent use of the structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used
except in conformity with the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. Vacated premises or
building of non-operative status shall be evidence of a discontinued use;
(D) Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, removal or
destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. Destruction for the
purposes of this division is defined as damage to an extent of more than 55% or more of its replacement
cost, exclusive of foundation, at time of destruction.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.449 NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD.
(A) Single lot. In any zoning district in which single-family dwellings were permitted as of the
adoption of this chapter, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any
single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter notwithstanding
limitations imposed by other provisions of this chapter. This provision shall apply even though such lot
fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the zoning district,
provided that yard dimensions and requirements other than these applying to area or width, or both, of the
lot shall conform to these regulations for the district in which such lot is located. Variance of yard
requirements shall be obtained only through action of the Board of Adjustments.
(B) Variance required. The owner of a nonconforming lot of record at the time of the adoption of this
chapter may submit an application to the Board of Adjustments for a variance from the terms of this chapter
in accordance with the provisions of '' 154.430 - 154.433.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.450 REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE.
(A) Ordinary repair. On any nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a
nonconforming use, any change that does not require a building permit is considered ordinary maintenance
and shall not affect the nonconforming status.
(B) Unsafe buildings. If a nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a
nonconforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to the lack of repairs and maintenance, and
is declared by any building official to be unsafe or unlawful by reason of physical condition, it shall not
thereafter be restored, repaired, or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of the zoning district in
which it is located.
2006 S-7
176 Lebanon - Land Usage
(C) Mobile homes. Any mobile home that was properly permitted prior to the adoption of this Zoning
Ordinance, but now considered a nonconforming use, may be replaced by a newer model, affixed with an
AA@ or AB@ seal, without affecting its nonconforming status but must meet other requirements of all local,
state, and federal rules, requirements, and restrictions.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
FEES
' 154.460 FEE SCHEDULE.
Fees for review of applications and inspections are hereby authorized and set by the Lebanon Planning
Commission and the city. All applicable fees shall be tendered with the application.
Fee type
Fee
Zoning map amendment
$300
Conditional use permit
$100
Temporary use permit
$100
Variance
$75
Administrative waiver
$25
Development plan review
$100
Appeal
$75
Recording fees
Actual cost, minimum $25
Note: If the applicant reschedules a public hearing, all postage and advertising costs shall be paid by
the applicant.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.461 FEE PAYMENT.
All fees shall be paid in advance and shall be made to the Lebanon City Clerk at the time of
application. No hearing, review, request, or application shall be considered until all applicable fees have
been paid. All fees are nonrefundable.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 177
ENFORCEMENT
' 154.475 ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Building Inspector or Codes
Enforcement Officer of the city or Lebanon Planning Commission, or any other person authorized by the
Lebanon City Council or Lebanon Planning Commission. Such enforcement personnel shall have the power
to:
(A) Make inspections of any premises necessary to carry out the enforcement of this chapter;
(B) Issue citations for violations of this chapter in accordance with the provisions of KRS 100.991 and
the procedures set forth in KRS 431.015;
(C) Bring action or cause action to be brought in court of appropriate jurisdiction for any and all relief
as provided in KRS 100.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
' 154.999 PENALTY.
Violations pursuant to KRS 100.991. Violations of this Zoning Ordinance pursuant to KRS 100.991
shall be subject to the following:
(A) Any person or entity who violates any of the provisions of KRS 100.201 to 100.347 or any of the
regulations adopted pursuant thereto for which no other penalty is provided, shall upon conviction, be fined
not less than $10 but not more than $500 for each conviction. Each day of violation shall constitute a
separate offense.
(B) Any person, owner, or agent who violates this section shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than
$100 dollars nor more than $500 for each lot or parcel which was subject of sale or transfer, or a contract
for sale or transfer.
(C) Any person who intentionally violates any provision of KRS 100.3681 to 100.3684 shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $500.
(D) Civil injunctions per KRS Chapter 100 and other applicable enforcement remedies as provided in
the law.
(E) Any person who violates any of the provisions of '' 154.360 through 154.368 for which no other
penalty is provided shall upon conviction be fined in an amount not less than $20 nor more than $250. Each
day of the violation shall constitute a separate offense. Any person violating '' 154.360 through 154.368
may also be found guilty of a civil offense. The civil fine shall be no less than $20 nor
2006 S-7
178 Lebanon - Land Usage
more than $250. The civil fine shall be paid directly to the city. If the fine is not paid within 30 days from
the date of notification, then the city may recover said fine in a civil action in a court of proper jurisdiction.
The city may also obtain injunctions or abatement orders to insure compliance with '' 154.360 through
154.368 or pursue administrative remedies when appropriate, including injunctions and abatement
proceedings.
(Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-05)
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 179
APPENDIX A: PERMITTED USES
2006 S-7
180 Lebanon - Land Usage
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 181
2006 S-7
182 Lebanon - Land Usage
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 183
2006 S-7
184 Lebanon - Land Usage
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 185
2006 S-7
186 Lebanon - Land Usage
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 187
2006 S-7
188 Lebanon - Land Usage
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 189
2006 S-7
190 Lebanon - Land Usage
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 191
2006 S-7
192 Lebanon - Land Usage
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 193
2006 S-7
194 Lebanon - Land Usage
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 195
2006 S-7
196 Lebanon - Land Usage
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 197
2006 S-7
198 Lebanon - Land Usage
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 199
2006 S-7
200 Lebanon - Land Usage
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 201
2006 S-7
202 Lebanon - Land Usage
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 203
2006 S-7
204 Lebanon - Land Usage
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 205
2006 S-7
206 Lebanon - Land Usage
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 207
2006 S-7
208 Lebanon - Land Usage
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 209
2006 S-7
210 Lebanon - Land Usage
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 211
2006 S-7
212 Lebanon - Land Usage
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 213
2006 S-7
214 Lebanon - Land Usage
2006 S-7
Zoning Regulations 215
2006 S-7
216 Lebanon - Land Usage
2006 S-7
CHAPTER 155: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ENFORCEMENT
Section
155.01 Title
155.02 Definitions
155.03 Jurisdiction
155.04 Property Maintenance Code Enforcement Officer(s); powers, responsibilities, and
procedures
155.05 Appeal process
155.06 Appointment of members; term of office; removal from office; liability
155.07 General powers of the Board
155.08 Organization of Board; conduct of meetings and Board members; quorum
155.09 Board hearing; notice; final order
155.10 Appeal to District Court; final judgement
155.11 Citation fine schedule
155.12 Lien; charges, costs, penalties, and fees
155.13 Transfer of ownership
155.14 Property maintenance code
155.15 Demolition and demolition permits
155.16 Validity of existing liens previously filed
' 155.01 TITLE.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the AProperty Maintenance Code Enforcement
Chapter.@
(Ord. 09-11, passed 12-7-09)
' 155.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning.
ABANDONED. Property or any improvements thereon that is unoccupied, not in use, neglected,
and/or not serviced by public utilities.
217
2010 S-10
218 Lebanon - Land Usage
DEMOLITION. The act of demolishing or razing of a building, structure or part thereof to the ground
level.
HEAT SUPPLY DAYS. As used in ' 155.14 and the International Property Maintenance Code
'' 602.3 and 602.4, shall be the period from September 1 to May 30.
OFFENSES.
(1) FIRST OFFENSE. A citation issued on a specific parcel of property on one occasion within
a 12-month period.
(2) SECOND OFFENSE. A citation issued on a specific parcel of property on two occasions
within a 12-month period.
(3) THIRD + OFFENSE. A citation issued on a specific parcel of property on three or more
occasions within a 12-month period.
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE. Includes the ANuisance Code@ as that term is defined in state
law. It shall consist of all of the provisions set forth herein and any and all other ordinances hereafter
adopted by the Mayor and City Council pursuant to state law as may be amended from time to time.
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD. The administrative body created
and acting under the authority of state law.
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Includes all city citation
officers and other positions authorized to enforce this code.
PUBLIC NUISANCE. Includes, but is not limited to, the following:
(1) The physical condition or occupancy of any property regarded as a public nuisance at common
law;
(2) Any physical condition or occupancy of any property or appurtenances considered an
attractive nuisance to children, including, but not limited to, abandoned wells, or swimming pools, shafts,
basements, excavations and unsafe fences or structures;
(3) Any property that has unsanitary sewerage or plumbing facilities;
(4) Any property that is unsafe for human habitation;
(5) Any property that is in imminent danger of becoming a fire or other hazard, or is manifestly
unsafe or unsecure, so as to pose an imminent threat or danger to life, limb or property;
2017 S-16
Property Maintenance Code Enforcement 219
(6) Any property from which the plumbing, electrical, heating or other facilities required by this
code have been removed or from which utilities have been disconnected, destroyed, removed or rendered
ineffective or the required precautions against trespassers have not been provided;
(7) Any property that is unsanitary, littered with rubbish or garbage or has uncontrolled grass and
weeds growing on it;
(8) Any residence, building, outbuilding or other structure that is in a state of dilapidation,
disrepair, deterioration or decay, faulty construction, overcrowded, open, vacant or abandoned, damaged by
fire to the extent that it is uninhabitable, in danger of collapse or failure or dangerous to anyone on or near
the property.
(9) Any residence, building, outbuilding or other structure that has been abandoned for a
minimum continuous period of six months, thereby creating an attractive nuisance to children and/or which
tends to diminish the value of adjacent properties.
REMEDY. The action taken to abate any nuisance, in order to bring the property determined to be in
violation, into compliance with the requirements of this Property Maintenance Code.
VENTILATION DAYS. As used in ' 155.14 and International Property Maintenance Code ' 304.14,
the period from April 1 to October 31.
(Ord. 09-11, passed 12-7-09)
' 155.03 JURISDICTION.
The Property Maintenance Code Enforcement Officer and Property Maintenance Code Enforcement
Board shall have jurisdiction over and shall enforce this Property Maintenance Code and all other
ordinances hereafter adopted which specifically provide for the enforcement by the Code Enforcement
Officer(s) or Board, in the manner set forth herein.
(Ord. 09-11, passed 12-7-09)
' 155.04 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER(S); POWERS,
RESPONSIBILITIES, AND PROCEDURES.
The following provisions shall govern all enforcement powers, responsibilities and procedures
administered by the Property Maintenance Code Enforcement Officer(s).
(A) Notice of violation. Except as provided in division (B) below, if a Property Maintenance Code
Enforcement Officer believes, based on the Officer=s personal observation or investigation, that a person
has violated the Property Maintenance Code, the Officer shall issue a notice of violation to the property
2010 S-10
220 Lebanon - Land Usage
owner, resident, tenant, occupant or other violator, allowing that person a specified and reasonable number
of days to abate the violation. The violator may upon request, be allowed a reasonable extension of time to
abate the violation without imposition of any charges, costs, penalties, and fees, in the sole discretion of the
Property Maintenance Code Enforcement Officer. If the violator fails to abate the violation within the time
prescribed therein, a new and separate notice of violation may be issued for subsequent and separate
violations of the Property Maintenance Code. In the event that the resident, tenant, occupant or other
violator is issued a notice of violation, the property owner of record will receive a copy of the notice.
(B) Notice of violation procedure. Notices of violation issued by Code Enforcement Officer for
violations of the Code shall contain the following information:
(1) The address, location or description of the property found to be in violation of the Code;
(2) The date and time of inspection;
(3) The name and address of the person to whom the notice is issued;
(4) The date the notice is issued;
(5) The facts constituting the offense;
(6) The section of the Code violated;
(7) The name of the Property Maintenance Code Enforcement Officer;
(8) The fines, charges, costs, penalties, and/or administrative fees, imposed for the violation if it
is not abated in the manner required by the Property Maintenance Code Enforcement Officer;
(9) The maximum fine that may be imposed under this chapter for the violation in question;
(10) The procedure for the violator to follow in order to appeal the notice;
(11) A statement that if the violator fails to appeal the citation or time to abate within the time
allowed, the violator shall be deemed to have waived his or her right to a hearing before the Code
Enforcement Board to appeal the notice and the Code Enforcement Officer=s determination that the
violation occurred shall be final; and
(12) Notice that a lien may be filed against the property on which the violation occurred if it is not
abated in the manner required by the Property Maintenance Code Enforcement Officer and that proceedings
to enforce the lien may be initiated to collect fines, charges, costs, penalties, and/or fees, including attorney
and administrative fees.
2010 S-10
Property Maintenance Code Enforcement 221
(C) Type and delivery of notice. The notice of violation shall be in writing and shall be reasonably
calculated to inform the violator of the nature of the violation. It may be hand-delivered to the property
owner, resident, tenant, occupant or other violator or may be served or sent by first class mail addressed to
the last known property owner of record as listed in the Marion County Property Valuation Office. If the
notice cannot be delivered to the owner, resident, tenant, occupant or other violator in person or notice sent
by first class mail is returned by the US Postal Service because the notice is undeliverable, marked return to
sender or the owner has left no forwarding address, notice shall be given by placing it on the door of the
most visible entrance to the property with dwellings or structures located thereon, or by posting a sign, at
least eight and one-half inches by 11 inches in dimension in a conspicuous location on the property.
(D) Issuance of citation. If the property owner, resident, tenant, occupant or other violator fails or
refuses to abate the violation within the time and manner required by the Code Enforcement Officer, the
Officer is authorized to issue a citation. The citation shall represent a determination by the Code
Enforcement Officer that a violation has been committed and that determination shall be final unless it is
appealed by the alleged violator to the Property Maintenance Code Enforcement Board in the manner
prescribed herein.
(E) Citation procedure. Citations issued by Code Enforcement Officer for violations of the Code shall
contain the following information:
(1) The address, location or description of the property found to be in violation of the Code;
(2) The date and time of inspection;
(3) The name and address of the person to whom the citation is issued;
(4) The date the citation is issued;
(5) The facts constituting the offense;
(6) The section of the Code violated;
(7) The name of the Property Maintenance Code Enforcement Officer;
(8) The fines, charges, costs, penalties, and/or administrative fees, imposed for the violation if the
citation is not appealed in the manner prescribed within this chapter;
(9) The maximum fine that may be imposed under this chapter for the violation in question;
(10) The procedure for the violator to follow in order to pay the fine or to appeal the citation;
2010 S-10
222 Lebanon - Land Usage
(11) A statement that if the violator fails to pay the fine set forth in the citation or appeal the
citation within the time allowed, the violator shall be deemed to have waived his/her right to a hearing
before the Code Enforcement Board to appeal the citation and the Code Enforcement Officer=s
determination that the violation occurred shall be final; and
(12) Notice that a lien may be filed against the property on which the violation occurred and that
proceedings to enforce the lien may be initiated to collect fines, charges, costs, penalties, and/or fees,
including attorney and administrative fees.
(F) Type and delivery of citation. The citation shall be in writing and shall be reasonably calculated to
inform the violator of the nature of the violation. It shall be hand-delivered to the property owner, resident,
tenant, occupant or other violator or may be served or sent by first class mail addressed to the last known
property owner of record as listed in the Marion County Property Valuation Office. If the notice cannot be
delivered to the owner in person or notice sent by first class mail is returned by the US Postal Service
because the notice is undeliverable, marked return to sender or the owner has left no forwarding address,
notice shall be given by placing it on the door of the most visible entrance to the property with dwellings or
structures located thereon, or by posting a sign, at least eight and one-half inches by 11 inches in dimension
in a conspicuous location on the property.
(G) Abatement of nuisance. If the violator does not appeal the citation within the time prescribed, the
Code Enforcement Officer issuing the citation shall enter a final order finding and determining that the
violation was committed and no appeal was timely filed. The Code Enforcement Officer may thereafter
cause the nuisance to be abated by any and all means reasonable and necessary. A copy of the final order
shall be served on the property owner, resident, tenant, occupant or other violator found to be in violation of
this Code.
(H) Emergency abatement. Nothing in division (G) above shall prohibit the city from taking
immediate action to abate any violation of this chapter without prior notice to the property owner, resident,
tenant, or other occupant when an Enforcement Officer, upon inspection of the property has reason to
believe that, in the absence of immediate remedial action, a violation will, within reasonable probability,
cause irreparable or irreversible harm and/or property damage. Immediately on the next business day after
an emergency abatement by the Officer, the Officer shall immediately provide written notice to the Mayor
of the emergency determination and the abatement action undertaken.
(I) Right of entry. Enforcement Officer(s), and their duly authorized agents, assistants, employees, or
contractors, after first having obtained the consent of the property owner, resident, tenant, or other occupant
may enter upon private or public property to conduct inspections. If the property owner, resident, tenant, or
other occupant does not give the Enforcement Officer(s) consent to enter upon and inspect the property, an
on-site inspection of the property shall not occur until it is authorized by a court of competent jurisdiction.
2010 S-10
Property Maintenance Code Enforcement 223
(J) Liability. The Code Enforcement Officer(s), charged with the enforcement of this chapter, while
acting within the course and scope of their duties under this chapter, shall not thereby be rendered liable
personally and are hereby relieved from any and all personal liability for injuries and damage to persons or
property. It is thus intended by this chapter that any suit instituted against any Code Enforcement Officer or
employee because of a lawful act performed by that Officer or employee in the discharge of duties imposed
under the provisions of this chapter be defended by the city=s liability carrier until final adjudication of any
proceedings.
(K) Discretionary modifications. The Enforcement Officer shall have the discretion to modify a notice
of violation, only before the issuance of a citation, provided the Officer shall first find that special
circumstances that makes strict compliance with this chapter impractical and the modification is in
compliance with the intent and purpose of this chapter. A modified notice shall constitute a Anew@ notice
and shall be deemed to replace the original (voided) notice. The details of actions granting modifications
shall be recorded and entered in the Building and Codes Department files.
(Ord. 09-11, passed 12-7-09)
' 155.05 APPEAL PROCESS.
(A) Appeal of notice of violation. Any property owner, resident, tenant, occupant or other violator
served with a notice of violation or on whose property a notice of violation is posted, shall no later than ten
days after the issuance of the notice of violation or posting thereof on the property, may file an appeal in
writing to City Hall, attention to the Mayor and the Building and Codes Officer of the City of Lebanon,
Kentucky requesting a hearing before the Property Maintenance Code Enforcement Board to appeal the
notice of violation. If the violator fails to appeal the notice within ten days as provided herein, the person
shall be deemed to have waived his/her right to a hearing before the Property Maintenance Code
Enforcement Board and the Code Enforcement Officer=s determination that a violation was committed
shall be considered final and enforceable.
(B) Appeal of citation. Upon receipt of a citation, the property owner, resident, tenant, occupant or
other violator shall respond to it not later than ten days following the issuance or posting on the property the
notice of violation by either paying the fines, charges, costs, penalties and/or fees, including administrative
fees assessed therein, or by filing an appeal in writing with the City of Lebanon, Kentucky, in writing,
requesting a hearing before the Property Maintenance Code Enforcement Board. Payment of assessed
fines, charges, administrative fees and penalties shall not relieve the property owner, resident, tenant,
occupant, or other violator from his or her obligation to bring the property on which the violation occurred
into compliance with this Code within a reasonable time thereafter, as solely determined by the Property
Maintenance Code Enforcement Officer.
(Ord. 09-11, passed 12-7-09)
2010 S-10
224 Lebanon - Land Usage
' 155.06 APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS; TERM OF OFFICE; REMOVAL FROM OFFICE;
LIABILITY.
(A) There is hereby created pursuant to state law, a City of Lebanon Property Maintenance Code
Enforcement Board (hereafter the ABoard@), which shall be composed of five members.
(B) Qualifications. Members of the Board shall own property within the city for a period of at least
one year prior to appointment to the Board and shall maintain legal ownership interest in at least one parcel
of real property within the city throughout the term in office.
(C) Members shall be appointed by the Mayor of the City of Lebanon with the approval of the
Lebanon City Council.
(D) The initial appointments to the five-member Board shall be as follows: one member shall be
appointed to a one-year term. One member appointed to a two-year term. One member appointed to a
three-year term. All subsequent Board appointments shall be for a term of three years.
(E) If a vacancy on the Board occurs, the Mayor with approval of the City Council, shall within 60
days of the vacancy, appoint a new member or members. If the vacancy is not filled within the prescribed
time period, the City Council shall appoint a member to fill the vacancy.
(F) Members of the Board shall only be removed therefrom by the Mayor for misconduct, inefficiency
or willful neglect of duty. Prior to removal, the Mayor or member(s) of the City Council requesting same,
shall submit in writing to the member in question and the Lebanon City Council, the reasons for it.
(G) Liability. Members of the Board charged with the enforcement of this chapter, while acting on
behalf of the city and within their official duties and capacity, shall not thereby be rendered liable
personally, and are hereby relieved individually and collectively from all personal liability for any injury
and or damages to persons or property as a result of the discharge of official duties imposed herein. Any
suit instituted against any Board Member because of an act performed by that Board Member in the lawful
discharge of duties and under the provisions of this chapter shall be defended by the legal representative of
the city until the final determination of the proceedings.
(Ord. 09-11, passed 12-7-09)
' 155.07 GENERAL POWERS OF THE BOARD.
(A) The Board is authorized and directed to conduct evidentiary hearings, issue decisions and
abatement orders and impose fines, charges, costs, penalties, and/or fees, including administrative fees in
the final adjudication of appeals brought before it.
2017 S-16
Property Maintenance Code Enforcement 225
(B) To adopt any and all policies, rules and regulations, reasonably required to implement, administer
and conduct its business and hearings brought before it.
(C) Authorize Enforcement Officer(s) to file liens against properties found to be in violation of the
Code to secure the collection of fines, penalties, fees, charges and or cost, including administrative fees.
(Ord. 09-11, passed 12-7-09)
' 155.08 ORGANIZATION OF BOARD; CONDUCT OF MEETINGS AND BOARD
MEMBERS; QUORUM.
(A) The Board shall annually elect a chairperson from among its members. The chairperson shall be
the presiding officer and a full voting member of the Board.
(B) The Board shall hold regular monthly meetings on a date, and during times to be established by the
Board. Regular and special meetings shall be scheduled and held in accordance with requirements of the
Kentucky Open Meetings Act. Regular and special meetings may be cancelled if there are no appeals or
other business to be considered by the Board.
(C) All meetings and hearings of the Board shall be held in accordance with the requirements of state
law, Roberts Rules of Order, the Kentucky Open Meetings Act, and the Kentucky Open Records Act and
the City of Lebanon Code of Ethics.
(D) For the purpose of conducting all business and hearings brought before it, three members of the
Board, shall, if present, constitute a quorum.
(E) Minutes, records and/or transcripts of all proceedings and action taken shall be kept by the Board
and the vote of each member on any issue decided by them shall be recorded therein.
(Ord. 09-11, passed 12-7-09)
' 155.09 BOARD HEARING; NOTICE; FINAL ORDER.
(A) When an appeal has been properly filed and a hearing has been requested, the Board shall convene
for the purposes of conducting a hearing not later than 60 days after the appeal has been filed with the city.
Otherwise the Board may convene for the purpose of conducting any other business brought before it or a
majority of the membership of the Board.
(B) Not less than ten days before any requested hearing, the Board shall notify the appellant of the
date, time, and place of the hearing. Notice shall be given by certified mail, return receipt requested at his
or her last known address; or by personal delivery.
2017 S-16
226 Lebanon - Land Usage
(C) Any person requesting a hearing before the Board who fails to appear at the time and place set for
the hearing shall be deemed to have waived the right to a hearing on an appeal a notice of violation or
citation and a determination that a violation was committed shall be entered and become final. The Board
shall enter a final order confirming the violation and shall direct the nuisance to be abated and/or impose
the fines, charges, costs, penalties, and/or fees, including administrative fees assessed in the citation. If the
violator has not abated the nuisance conditions on the notice of violation or citation within the time
provided, the city may promptly abate the nuisance and/or issues another violation which may be a new and
separate offense in accordance with ' 155.04(A). A copy of the final order shall be served upon the
violator/appellant.
(D) When a hearing is held under this section, the Board shall elicit testimony from witnesses and
allow relative demonstrative evidence. All testimony shall be recorded by audio, video, or stenographic
means. The chairperson or any Board member shall have authority to administer the following oath. ADo
you solemnly swear and affirm to tell the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth@. Testimony shall
be taken from the Property Maintenance Code Enforcement Officer, the alleged violator and any witnesses
to the violation offered by the Property Maintenance Code Enforcement Officer or alleged violator and any
witnesses with relevant personal knowledge of the violation or citation on appeal. Formal rules of evidence
shall not apply, but fundamental due process shall be observed and shall govern the proceedings.
(E) In making its determination, the Board shall, based solely on the evidence, adduced during the
hearing determine by a preponderance of the evidence whether or not a violation has been committed. If at
the conclusion of the hearing, the Board determines that a violation has been committed, an order shall be
issued upholding the notice of violation or citation and the Board shall authorize the Building and Codes
Department to abate the nuisance condition on appeal and impose reasonable and necessary fines, charges,
costs, penalties, and/or fees, including administrative fees imposed therein, or a combination of the
forgoing remedies. Provided however, the final order of the Board shall provide the violator with
reasonable time, not to exceed 30 days, to abate the violation. If the violator does not abate in the manner
required and within the time provided in the final order, another notice of violation may be issued in
accordance with ' 155.04(A), for another violation of the Property Maintenance Code.
(F) Findings of fact, conclusions of law and decisions of the Board shall be reduced to writing and
signed and dated by the majority of the Board the date the order was entered. A copy of the findings of
fact, conclusions of law and decisions of the Board shall be furnished to the appellant named in the citation
at his or her last known address.
(G) The Property Maintenance Code Enforcement Officer may abate the violation in order to bring the
property into compliance with the Property Maintenance Code if a final order upholding the citation is
entered by the Board or any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 09-11, passed 12-7-09)
2010 S-10
Property Maintenance Code Enforcement 227
' 155.10 APPEAL TO DISTRICT COURT; FINAL JUDGMENT.
(A) An appeal from any judgment, decision, or determination of the Board shall be made to the
Marion County District Court within seven days of the date of the Board=s judgment, decision or
determination. The appeal shall be initiated by the filing of a complaint and a copy of the Board=s final
order in the same manner as any civil action under the Kentucky Rules of Civil Procedure.
(B) The action before the District Court shall be tried de novo and the burden shall be upon the city to
establish that a violation occurred. If the court finds that a violation occurred, the property owner, resident,
tenant, occupant or other violator shall be ordered to abate the violation and pay to the city all fines,
charges, costs, penalties, and/or fees, including administrative fees occurring as of the date of the judgment.
If the District Court finds a violation did not occur, the city shall be ordered to dismiss the notice of
violation or citation and the plaintiff /appellant shall be authorized to recover his court costs (filing fees, not
attorney fees). If the property owner, resident, tenant, occupant or other violator does not abate the
violation in the time provided, another notice of violation may be issued in accordance with ' 155.04(A),
for each subsequent and separate violation of the Property Maintenance Code.
(C) If no appeal from a final judgment, decision or order of the Board is filed within the time period
set in division (A) of this section, the Board=s order shall be deemed final and enforceable for all purposes
provided herein.
(Ord. 09-11, passed 12-7-09)
' 155.11 CITATION FINE SCHEDULE.
Citations issued by the Property Maintenance Enforcement Officer that are not appealed or which are
upheld by the Board or any court of proper jurisdiction, shall be subject to the following schedule of civil
penalties for each violation:
Violation
1st Offense
2nd Offense
3rd+ Offense
All Violations
$100
$250
$500
(Ord. 09-11, passed 12-7-09)
' 155.12 LIEN; CHARGES, COSTS, PENALTIES, AND FEES.
(A) The city shall have a lien against any property or properties finally determined by the Code
Enforcement Officer, the Board or court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the Property
Maintenance Code to secure the payment and recovery of the reasonable value of labor and materials used
to abate the nuisance violation, including fines, charges, costs, penalties, and/or fees, including
2010 S-10
228 Lebanon - Land Usage
administrative fees authorized in state law. The lien shall be superior to and have priority over, all other
subsequent liens on the property except state, county, school board and city taxes and prior perfected
secured interest (i.e., mortgage and the like).
(B) The lien shall be recorded in the office of the County Clerk. The lien shall be notice to all persons
from the time of its recording and shall bear interest, at the rate of 12% per annum thereafter, until paid.
(C) In addition to the remedy prescribed in division (A) of this section, the person found to have
committed the violation shall be personally responsible for the amount of all fines, charges, costs, penalties,
and/or fees, including administrative fees assessed for the violation and for all charges and fees incurred by
the city in connection with the enforcement of the Property Maintenance Code. The city may bring a civil
action against the person and shall have the same remedies as provided for the recovery of a debt.
(Ord. 09-11, passed 12-7-09)
' 155.13 TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit or structure who has received a notice of
violation, to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such dwelling unit or structure to another
until the requirements listed in the notice of violation have been complied with, or until such owner shall
first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any notice of violation issued by the
Property Maintenance Code Enforcement Officer and shall furnish to the Enforcement Officer a signed and
notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such
notice of violation and fully accepting the responsibility without condition for making the necessary
corrections and repairs required by such notice of violation.
(Ord. 09-11, passed 12-7-09) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 155.14 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
(A) Provisions of the current International Property Maintenance Code adopted by reference herein.
The city hereby adopts, enacts and incorporates by reference, as if fully set forth herein, in their entirety,
sections:
108 Unsafe Structures and Equipment
201 General
202 General Definitions
301 General
302 Exterior Property Areas
303 Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs
2017 S-16
Property Maintenance Code Enforcement 229
304 Exterior Structure
305 Interior Structure
306 Handrails and Guardrails
308 Extermination
401 General
402 Light
403 Ventilation
404 Occupancy limitations
501 General
502 Required Facilities
503 Toilet Rooms
504 Plumbing Systems and Fixtures
505 Water System
506 Sanitary Drainage System
507 Storm Drainage
601 General
602 Heating Facilities
603 Mechanical Equipment
604 Electrical Facilities
605 Electrical Equipment
606 Elevators, Escalators and Dumbwaiters
607 Duct Systems
701 General
702 Means of Egress
703 Fire-Resistance Ratings
704 Fire Protection Systems
of the A2006 International Property Maintenance Code@ as published by the International Code Council,
Inc., as same may be amended from time to time hereafter. Violations of the provisions therein shall be
deemed a nuisance enforceable by any and all provisions of this chapter.
(B) Unsafe structure: imminent danger. Pursuant to the notice and citation provisions of this chapter,
when, in the opinion of the Property Maintenance Code Enforcement Officer, there is imminent danger of
failure or collapse of a building or structure which endangers life, or when any structure or part of a
structure has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the structure, or when there is actual danger
to the building occupants or those in proximity of any structure because of explosive fumes or vapors or the
presence of toxic fumes, gases or materials, or operation of defective or dangerous equipment, the
Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized and empowered to order and require occupants to vacate the
premises forthwith. The Enforcement Officer shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such structure a
notice reading as follows: AThis Structure Is Unsafe and Its Occupancy Has Been Prohibited by the
Property Maintenance Code Enforcement Officer.@ It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such
structure except for the purpose of securing the structure, making repairs, removing the hazardous condition
or of demolishing the same.
2010 S-10
230 Lebanon - Land Usage
(C) Temporary safeguards. Notwithstanding other provisions of this code, whenever, in the opinion
of the Property Maintenance Code Enforcement Officer, there is imminent danger due to an unsafe
condition as set forth in division (B) of this section, the Enforcement Officer shall order the necessary work
to be done, including the boarding up of openings, to render such structure temporarily safe whether or not
the legal procedure herein described has been instituted; and shall cause such other action to be taken as the
Enforcement Officer deems necessary to meet such emergency.
(D) Closing streets. When necessary for public safety, the Property Maintenance Code Enforcement
Officer shall temporarily close structures and close, or order the authority having jurisdiction to close,
sidewalks, streets, public ways and places adjacent to unsafe structures, and prohibit same from being
utilized.
(E) Emergency repairs. For the purpose of this section, the Enforcement Officer shall employ the
necessary labor and materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as possible. Cost incurred in
the performance of emergency work shall be paid by the city. The legal counsel of the jurisdiction shall
institute appropriate action against the owner of the premises where the unsafe structure is located for the
recovery of such costs.
(F) Demolition in general. Pursuant to notice and citation provisions herein, the Property
Maintenance Code Enforcement Officer shall order the owner of any premises upon which is located any
structure, which in the Officer=s judgment is so old, dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to be
dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation or occupancy, and such that it is
unreasonable to repair the structure, to demolish and remove the structure; or if such structure is capable of
being made safe by repairs, to repair and make safe and sanitary or to demolish and remove at the owner=s
option; or where there has been a cessation of normal construction of any structure for a period of more
than two years, to demolish and remove such structure.
(G) Junked motor vehicles and appliances.
(1) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
(a) JUNKED APPLIANCES. Any unit, or part thereof, of machinery, furniture, or
equipment, whether functional or ornamental, and whether mechanical or powered by some source of
energy or not, including, but not limited to, stoves, refrigerators, television sets, beds, lamps, tools, objects
of art, and the like, the condition of which upon inspection, are found to be in one or more of the following
conditions:
1. Wrecked;
2. Dismantled;
3. Partially dismantled;
4. Inoperative;
5. Abandoned; or
6. Discarded.
2010 S-10
Property Maintenance Code Enforcement 231
(b) JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES. Any vehicle, device or other contrivance, or parts
thereof, propelled by human or mechanical power that if operational, would be used for transportation of
persons or property on public streets and highways, which upon inspection, are found to be in one or more
of the following conditions:
1. Wrecked;
2. Dismantled;
3. Partially dismantled;
4. Inoperative;
5. Abandoned; or
6. Discarded.
(2) Declaration junked motor vehicles and appliances; exceptions.
(a) The presence of any junked motor vehicle or appliance on public property or on any
private lot, tract or parcel of land or portion thereof, occupied or unoccupied, improved or unimproved,
within the city shall be deemed a public nuisance, and shall further be considered rubbish or refuse, and it
shall be unlawful for any person to cause or maintain such public nuisance by wrecking, dismantling,
partially dismantling, rendering inoperable, abandoning or discarding any motor vehicle or appliance on the
real property of another or to suffer, permit or allow a junked motor vehicle or appliance to be parked, left
or maintained on his own real property, provided that this provision shall not apply with regard to:
1. Any motor vehicle or appliance in an enclosed building;
2. Any motor vehicle on the property of a business enterprise operated in a lawful
manner, when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise and the owner can satisfactorily
establish the business enterprise is legitimate; or
3. Any motor vehicle on property occupied and used for repair, reconditioning and
remodeling of motor vehicles or appliances in conformance with the Zoning Code of the city. With respect
to any such vehicle, the vehicle and the property upon which it is located shall be subject to inspection by
the Enforcement Official to examine the length of time that vehicle has been so maintained, as well as for
production by the property owner of current vehicle registration and licensing.
(b) Proper disposal of appliances. All appliances shall be properly disposed of and shall be
properly stored, including but not limited to state, federal, environmental or health and safety regulations
(i.e., removing doors or other closing mechanisms, and the like) until the appliance can be destroyed or
disposed of permanently.
(3) Liability for damages to removed vehicle. Neither the owner nor occupant of the property
from which any aforesaid junked motor vehicles shall be removed, their servants or agents, or any
department of the city, or its agents, shall be liable for any loss or damage to the junked motor vehicle while
being removed or as a result of any subsequent sale or other disposition.
2010 S-10
232 Lebanon - Land Usage
(4) Compliance by removal of vehicle. The removal of a junked motor vehicle from the property
within the number of days required in the notice of violation issued by the Property Maintenance
Enforcement Officer, shall be deemed to be in compliance with the provisions of this section and no further
action shall be taken against the owner of the junked motor vehicle or appliance or the owner or occupant
of the property.
(5) Right of entry. In the enforcement of this chapter, a Property Maintenance Code Enforcement
Officer, and his or her duly authorized agents, assistants, employees, or contractors with the prior consent
of the owner, tenant or occupant, or by order of a court of competent jurisdiction may enter upon private or
public property to examine a junked motor vehicle or appliance, or obtain information as to the identity of a
junked motor vehicle or appliance and of the owner thereof, and to remove or cause removal of a junked
motor vehicle or appliance declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter.
(6) Chapter supplemental to other regulations.
(a) The provisions of this chapter are supplemental and in addition to all other regulatory
codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore enacted by the city, state or any other legal entity or agency
having jurisdiction.
(b) The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed cumulative of the provisions and
regulations contained in the Code of Ordinances, City of Lebanon, Kentucky, save and except that, where
the provisions of this chapter and the sections hereunder are in conflict with the provisions elsewhere in this
Code, then the provisions contained herein shall prevail. Any and all ordinances or parts of ordinances in
conflict herewith are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
(H) Other miscellaneous nuisances. It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or person having
control or management of any real property within the city to permit a public nuisance to develop thereon.
The following conditions are declared to be public nuisances.
(1) Accumulation of rubbish. An accumulation on any property of filth, refuse, trash, garbage, or
other waste material which endangers the public health, welfare, or safety, or materially interferes with the
peaceful enjoyment by owners or occupants of adjacent property because of the danger that it will catch or
communicate fire, attract and propagate vermin, rodents, or insects, or blow rubbish into any street,
sidewalk, or property of another.
(2) Storage of explosives. The storage of explosive material which creates a safety hazard to
other property or persons in the vicinity.
(3) Weeds and grass. The excessive growth of weeds, grass, or other vegetation, except flowers
or other ornamental vegetation, which are properly maintained. Unless otherwise provided, Aexcessive@
shall mean growth to a height of eight inches or more.
2011 S-11
Property Maintenance Code Enforcement 233
(4) Open wells. The maintenance of any open, uncovered, or insecurely covered cistern, cellar,
well, pit, excavation, basement, or vault situated upon private property in any open or unfenced lot or place.
(5) Obstructions of storm water and drainage facilities. Permitting or causing or allowing limbs,
leaves, grass clippings, or yard debris or other objects to be placed in a manner that interferes with the use,
function or maintenance of any storm water and drainage facilities. In this context, the prohibited activities
shall include but not be limited to:
(a) Mowing in such a manner that grass clippings, leaves and yard debris come to rest on the
public street, sidewalk or right-of-way; or
(b) Blowing grass clippings, leaves or yard debris onto the public street, sidewalk or
right-of-way; or
(c) Allowing placement of limbs, leaves, grass clippings or other yard debris or objects so
that it interferes with the storm water and drainage facilities.
(6) Limitation on RVs and boats. The parking of any recreational vehicle or boat anywhere in any
residential area except for only one of any such vehicles per premises:
(a) In the rear yard of any lot or parcel of real estate such that it is not visible from the street
fronting the premises and is not within five feet of any point in the nearest boundary line; or
(b) In a side or rear yard garage or covered carport or other such structure which neatly
covers the recreational vehicle or boat and no part of such vehicle is within one foot of any point in the
nearest boundary line; or
(c) In any uncovered driveway for a period not to exceed two weeks cumulatively.
(7) Exterior use or storage of indoor furniture. The use or storage of furniture which is
upholstered or not designed for outdoor use in any uncovered or exposed area in which it is likely to decay,
decompose or retain moisture causing a health hazard or diminution in the value of neighboring properties.
(Ord. 09-11, passed 12-7-09; Am. Ord. 2010-12, passed 1-10-11; Am. Ord. 2014-08, passed 9-8-14)
Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 155.15 DEMOLITION AND DEMOLITION PERMITS.
(A) Demolition permit required. It shall be unlawful to demolish any building, structure or part thereof
without filing a written application for a demolition permit with the Building and Codes Department.
2015 S-15
234 Lebanon - Land Usage
(B) (1) Demolition permit fees. For the demolition of any building, structure or part thereof, the
permit fee shall be:
(a) Two Hundred Fifty dollars ($250) for all residential structures; and
(b) Five Hundred dollars ($500) for any commercial and industrial structures.
(2) The permit fees shall be refunded to the permit applicant if the demolition is deemed timely
and properly completed upon inspection by the Enforcement Officer. All demolitions are subject to
inspection by the Enforcement Officer for determination of status and compliance with this section.
(C) Double fee. Where work for which a permit is required by this chapter is started or proceeded with
prior to obtaining the required permit, the fees herein specified shall be doubled, but the payment of such
double fee shall not relieve any persons from fully complying with the requirements of this chapter in the
execution of the work nor from any other penalties prescribed herein.
(D) Demolition or alteration of common or fire wall. When demolition of any structure involves
alterations to a common, party wall or a fire wall or fire separation wall, the owner or contractor is (1)
required to submit detailed plans to the building official detailing scope of work to correct any defects in
the remaining wall(s) and (2) post a bond with the city in an amount not less than$20,000 to insure proper
completion of the exposed, remaining wall to building code standards.
(E) Liability insurance. Proof of liability insurance is required to be submitted to the city by the
contractor prior to issuance of demolition permit for protection of adjoining properties and public
right-of-way improvements.
(F) Time limit. The Property Maintenance Code Enforcement Officer may impose a time limit as an
additional condition of a permit for completion of demolition work once such work shall have commenced,
provided that for cause one or more extensions of time, for periods not exceeding 30 days each, may be
allowed in writing by the Enforcement Officer.
(G) Standards. The following standards shall apply to demolition.
(1) Demolition work, having commenced, shall be pursued diligently and without unreasonable
interruption with due regard to safety. It is the intent of this chapter to limit the existence of an unsafe
condition or nuisance on the premises during the period of demolition operations.
(2) Any surface holes or irregularities, wells, septic tanks, basements, cellars, sidewalk vaults, or
coal chutes remaining after demolition of any building or structure shall be filled with material as approved
by the Enforcement Officer, and shall be graded in such manner that will provide effective surface
drainage. Any surface irregularities resulting from the demolition process shall be leveled to match
surrounding grade.
2015 S-15
Property Maintenance Code Enforcement 235
(3) All debris and accumulation of material resulting from demolition of any building or structure
shall be removed from all premises
(4) All building sewers shall be effectively plugged with concrete at the property line, or as may
be required by the Lebanon Water Works.
(H) Inspections. The Property Maintenance Code Enforcement Officer shall make the following
inspections upon notification from the permit holder or his agent:
(1) Initial inspection is to be made after all utility connections have been disconnected and
secured in such manner that no unsafe or unsanitary conditions shall exist during or remain after demolition
operations
(2) Final inspection is to be made after all demolition work is completed.
(Ord. 09-11, passed 12-7-09) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 155.16 VALIDITY OF EXISTING LIENS PREVIOUSLY FILED.
The adoption of this chapter by the Lebanon City Council shall not constitute a release, satisfaction or
discharge of any lien filed of record in the office of the Marion County Clerk which affects the rights, title
and interest of any parcel of real property cited for violation of the Property Maintenance Code in effect
prior to the effective date of this chapter; it being hereby declared and established that such liens created
hereunder shall remain in full force and effect until adjudicated or released.
(Ord. 09-11, passed 12-7-09)
2015 S-15
236 Lebanon - Land Usage
ORDINANCE NO. 97-01
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR CITY OF LEBANON,
KENTUCKY, REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN
EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF LEBANON DEALING WITH
SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES, AND DECLARING AN
EMERGENCY
WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the City of Lebanon are inadequately
arranged and classified and are insufficient in form and substance for the complete preservation of the
public peace, health, safety and general welfare of the municipality and for the proper conduct of its
affairs; and
WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Kentucky empower and authorize the City to
revise, amend, restate, codify and compile any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not
heretofore adopted or published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book form;
and
WHEREAS, the City Council of the city has authorized a general compilation, revision and
codification of the ordinances of the City of a general and permanent nature and publication of such
ordinance in book form; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the city and for the immediate
preservation of the public peace, health, safety and general welfare of the City that this ordinance take
effect at an early date.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF LEBANON,
KENTUCKY, AS FOLLOWS:
SECTION 1: The general ordinances of the City as revised, amended, restated, codified, and compiled
in book form are hereby adopted as and shall constitute the “Code of Ordinances of
the City of Lebanon, Kentucky.”
SECTION 2: Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section I shall consist of the following Titles:
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
TITLE IV: PUBLIC WORKS
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
PARALLEL REFERENCES
INDEX
1998 S-1 1
2 Lebanon - Adopting Ordinance
SECTION 3: All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such Code of Ordinances shall be
deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this ordinance, except as they
are included and reordained in whole or in part in such Code; provided, such repeal
shall not affect any offense committed or penalty incurred or any right established
prior to the effective date of this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions
of ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory,
establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons, authorizing
public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money,
authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property, granting or accepting
easements, plat or dedication of land to public use, vacating or setting the boundaries
of streets or other public places; nor shall such repeal affect any other ordinance of a
temporary or special nature or pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by
the Code.
SECTION 4: Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption and approval by the
City and the City Clerk is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such Code
of Ordinances in the Office of the Clerk.
SECTION 5: Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in Section 6, and such Code shall
be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the ordinance and all provisions,
sections, penalties and regulations therein contained and of the date of passage, and
that the same is properly signed, attested, recorded, and approved and that any public
hearings and notices thereof as required by law have been given.
SECTION 6: The Code shall be in full force and effect from and after its date of passage, approval and
publication as required by law. The Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts
and places of the ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and regulations
therein contained, and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly signed,
attested, recorded and approved, and that any public hearings and notices thereof as
required by law have been given.
CITY OF LEBANON, KENTUCKY
KATHERINE M. BLANDFORD /s/
KATHERINE M. BLANDFORD, MAYOR
ATTEST:
JOYCE A. FORD /s/
JOYCE A. FORD, City Clerk
1998 S-1
Adopting Ordinance 3
First reading given February 10, 1997,
Second reading given March 10, 1997,
Published in The Lebanon Enterprise on February 19,1997.
JOYCE A. FORD /s/
JOYCE A. FORD, City Clerk
1998 S-1
4 Lebanon - Adopting Ordinance
ORDINANCE NO. 98-01
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A
SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE
CITY OF LEBANON, KENTUCKY
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio has completed the 1997
supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lebanon, Kentucky, which supplement contains
all ordinances of a general nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this
municipality; and
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision or addition of
certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or make references to sections of the
Kentucky Revised Statutes; and
WHEREAS, it is the intent of the City Council to accept these updated sections in accordance with
the changes of the law of the Commonwealth of Kentucky;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City of Lebanon, Kentucky:
Section 1.
That the 1997 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lebanon, Kentucky, as
submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, and as attached hereto, be and the
same is hereby adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety.
Section 2.
That this ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its date of passage, approval
and publication as required by law.
Passed this 9th day of March, 1998.
CITY OF LEBANON, KENTUCKY
KATHERINE M. BLANDFORD /s/
KATHERINE M. BLANDFORD, MAYOR
ATTEST:
JOYCE A. FORD /s/
JOYCE A. FORD, City Clerk
5
1998 S-2
6 Lebanon - Adopting Ordinance
First reading given February 9, 1998,
Second reading given March 9, 1998,
Published in The Lebanon Enterprise on March 18, 1998.
JOYCE A. FORD /s/
JOYCE A. FORD, City Clerk
1998 S-2
ORDINANCE NO. 99-01
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO
THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF LEBANON,
KENTUCKY
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio has completed the 1998
supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lebanon, Kentucky, which supplement contains
all ordinances of a general nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this
municipality; and
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision or addition of
certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or make reference to sections of the
Kentucky Revised Statutes; and
WHEREAS, it is the intent of the City Council to accept these updated sections in accordance with
the changes of the law of the Commonwealth of Kentucky;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City of Lebanon, Kentucky:
Section 1.
That the 1998 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lebanon, Kentucky, as
submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, and as attached hereto, be and the
same is hereby adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety.
Section 2.
That this ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its date of passage, approval
and publication as required by law.
Passed this 8th day of February, 1999.
CITY OF LEBANON, KENTUCKY
GARY D. CRENSHAW /s/
GARY D. CRENSHAW, MAYOR
ATTEST:
JOYCE A. FORD /s/
JOYCE A. FORD, City Clerk
7
2000 S-3
8 Lebanon - Adopting Ordinance
First reading given January 11, 1999.
Second reading given February 08, 1999.
Published in The Lebanon Enterprise on February 10, 1999.
Joyce A. Ford /s/
JOYCE A. FORD, City Clerk
ORDINANCE NO. 06-08
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO
THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF LEBANON, KENTUCKY
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio has completed the 2005
supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lebanon, Kentucky, which supplement contains
all ordinances of a general nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this
municipality; and
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision or addition of
certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or make reference to sections of the
Kentucky Revised Statutes; and
WHEREAS, it is the intent of the City Council to accept these updated sections in accordance with
the changes of the law of the Commonwealth of Kentucky;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City of Lebanon, Kentucky:
Section 1.
That the 2005 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lebanon, Kentucky, as
submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, and as attached hereto, be and the
same is hereby adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety.
Section 2.
That this ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its date of passage, approval
and publication as required by law.
Passed this 16th day of November, 2006.
CITY OF LEBANON, KENTUCKY
GARY D. CRENSHAW /s/
GARY D. CRENSHAW, MAYOR
ATTEST:
JOYCE A. FORD /s/
JOYCE A. FORD, City Clerk
9
2007 S-8
10 Lebanon - Adopting Ordinance
First reading passed on November 13, 2006.
Second reading passed on November 16, 2006.
Published in The Lebanon Enterprise on November 29, 2006.
Joyce A. Ford /s/
JOYCE A. FORD, City Clerk
2007 S-8
ORDINANCE NO. 07-16
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO
THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF LEBANON, KENTUCKY
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio has completed the 2006
supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lebanon, Kentucky, which supplement contains
all ordinances of a general nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this
municipality; and
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision or addition of
certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or make reference to sections of the
Kentucky Revised Statutes; and
WHEREAS, it is the intent of the City Council to accept these updated sections in accordance with
the changes of the law of the Commonwealth of Kentucky;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City of Lebanon, Kentucky:
Section 1.
That the 2006 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lebanon, Kentucky, as
submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, and as attached hereto, be and the
same is hereby adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety.
Section 2.
That this ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its date of passage, approval
and publication as required by law.
Passed this 12th day of November, 2007.
CITY OF LEBANON, KENTUCKY
GARY D. CRENSHAW /s/
GARY D. CRENSHAW, MAYOR
ATTEST:
GINA N. WHEATLEY /s/
GINA N. WHEATLEY, City Clerk
11
2008 S-9
12 Lebanon - Adopting Ordinance
First reading passed on October 08, 2007
Second reading passed on November 12, 2007.
Published in The Lebanon Enterprise on November 21, 2007.
GINA N. WHEATLEY /s/
GINA N. WHEATLEY, City Clerk
2008 S-9
ORDINANCE NO. 08-14
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO
THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF LEBANON, KENTUCKY
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio has completed the 2007
supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lebanon, Kentucky, which supplement contains
all ordinances of a general nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this
municipality; and
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision or addition of
certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or make reference to sections of the
Kentucky Revised Statutes; and
WHEREAS, it is the intent of the City Council to accept these updated sections in accordance with
the changes of the law of the Commonwealth of Kentucky;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City of Lebanon, Kentucky:
Section 1.
That the 2007 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lebanon, Kentucky, as
submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, and as attached hereto, be and the
same is hereby adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety.
Section 2.
That this ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its date of passage, approval
and publication as required by law.
Passed this 8th day of December, 2008.
CITY OF LEBANON, KENTUCKY
GARY D. CRENSHAW /s/
GARY D. CRENSHAW, MAYOR
ATTEST:
GINA N. WHEATLEY /s/
GINA N. WHEATLEY, City Clerk
13
2010 S-10
14 Lebanon - Adopting Ordinance
First reading passed on November 10, 2008
Second reading passed on December 08, 2008.
Published in The Lebanon Enterprise on December 24, 2008.
GINA N. WHEATLEY /s/
GINA N. WHEATLEY, City Clerk
2010 S-10
ORDINANCE NO. 2010-04
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO
THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF LEBANON, KENTUCKY
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio has completed the 2010
supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lebanon, Kentucky, which supplement contains
all ordinances of a general nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this
municipality; and
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision or addition of
certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or make reference to sections of the
Kentucky Revised Statutes; and
WHEREAS, it is the intent of the City Council to accept these updated sections in accordance with
the changes of the law of the Commonwealth of Kentucky;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City of Lebanon, Kentucky:
Section 1.
That the 2010 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lebanon, Kentucky, as
submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, and as attached hereto, be and the
same is hereby adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety.
Section 2.
That this ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its date of passage, approval
and publication as required by law.
Passed this 27th day of May, 2010.
CITY OF LEBANON, KENTUCKY
GARY D. CRENSHAW /s/
GARY D. CRENSHAW, MAYOR
ATTEST:
GINA N. WHEATLEY /s/
GINA N. WHEATLEY, City Clerk
15
2011 S-11
16 Lebanon - Adopting Ordinance
First reading passed on May 10, 2010
Second reading passed on May 27, 2010.
Published in The Lebanon Enterprise on June 9, 2010.
GINA N. WHEATLEY /s/
GINA N. WHEATLEY, City Clerk
2011 S-11
ORDINANCE NO. 2011-05
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO
THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF LEBANON, KENTUCKY
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio has completed the 2011
supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lebanon, Kentucky, which supplement contains
all ordinances of a general nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this
municipality; and
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision or addition of
certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or make reference to sections of the
Kentucky Revised Statutes; and
WHEREAS, it is the intent of the City Council to accept these updated sections in accordance with
the changes of the law of the Commonwealth of Kentucky;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City of Lebanon, Kentucky:
Section 1.
That the 2011 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lebanon, Kentucky, as
submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, and as attached hereto, be and the
same is hereby adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety.
Section 2.
That this ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its date of passage, approval
and publication as required by law.
Passed this 9th day of May, 2011.
CITY OF LEBANON, KENTUCKY
GARY D. CRENSHAW /s/
GARY D. CRENSHAW, MAYOR
ATTEST:
GINA N. WHEATLEY /s/
GINA N. WHEATLEY, City Clerk
17
2012 S-12
18 Lebanon - Adopting Ordinance
First reading passed on May 09, 2011.
Second reading passed on _________.
Published in The Lebanon Enterprise on ___________.
GINA N. WHEATLEY /s/
GINA N. WHEATLEY, City Clerk
2012 S-12
ORDINANCE NO. 2012-02
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO
THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF LEBANON, KENTUCKY
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio has completed the 2012
supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lebanon, Kentucky, which supplement contains
all ordinances of a general nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this
municipality; and
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision or addition of
certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or make reference to sections of the
Kentucky Revised Statutes; and
WHEREAS, it is the intent of the City Council to accept these updated sections in accordance with
the changes of the law of the Commonwealth of Kentucky;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City of Lebanon, Kentucky:
Section 1.
That the 2012 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lebanon, Kentucky, as
submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, and as attached hereto, be and the
same is hereby adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety.
Section 2.
That this ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its date of passage, approval
and publication as required by law.
Passed this 7th day of May, 2012.
CITY OF LEBANON, KENTUCKY
GARY D. CRENSHAW /s/
GARY D. CRENSHAW, MAYOR
ATTEST:
GINA N. WHEATLEY /s/
GINA N. WHEATLEY, City Clerk
2013 S-13 19
20 Lebanon - Adopting Ordinance
First reading passed on May 07, 2012.
Second reading passed on June 11, 2012.
Published in The Lebanon Enterprise on July 4, 2012.
GINA N. WHEATLEY /s/
GINA N. WHEATLEY, City Clerk
2013 S-13
ORDINANCE NO. 2013-04
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO
THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF LEBANON, KENTUCKY
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has completed the 2013
supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lebanon, Kentucky, which supplement contains
all ordinances of a general nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this
municipality; and
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision or addition of
certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or make reference to sections of the
Kentucky Revised Statutes; and
WHEREAS, it is the intent of the City Council to accept these updated sections in accordance with
the changes of the law of the Commonwealth of Kentucky;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City of Lebanon, Kentucky:
Section 1.
That the 2013 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lebanon, Kentucky, as
submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, and as attached hereto, be and the
same is hereby adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety.
Section 2.
That this ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its date of passage, approval
and publication as required by law.
Passed this 13th day of May, 2013.
CITY OF LEBANON, KENTUCKY
GARY D. CRENSHAW /s/
GARY D. CRENSHAW, MAYOR
ATTEST:
GINA N. WHEATLEY /s/
GINA N. WHEATLEY, City Clerk
2014 S-14 21
22 Lebanon - Adopting Ordinance
First reading passed on May 13, 2013.
Second reading passed on June 10, 2013.
Published in The Lebanon Enterprise on June 19, 2013.
GINA N. WHEATLEY /s/
GINA N. WHEATLEY, City Clerk
2014 S-14
ORDINANCE 2014-03
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO
THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF LEBANON, KENTUCKY
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has completed the 2014
supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lebanon, Kentucky, which supplement contains
all ordinances of a general nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this
municipality; and
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision or addition of
certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or make reference to sections of the
Kentucky Revised Statutes; and
WHEREAS, it is the intent of the City Council to accept these updated sections in accordance with
the changes of the law of the Commonwealth of Kentucky;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City of Lebanon, Kentucky:
Section 1.
That the 2014 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lebanon, Kentucky, as
submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, and as attached hereto, be and the
same is hereby adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety.
Section 2.
That this ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its date of passage, approval
and publication as required by law.
Passed this 9th day of June, 2014.
CITY OF LEBANON, KENTUCKY
GARY D. CRENSHAW, MAYOR
ATTEST:
GINA N. WHEATLEY, City Clerk
2015 S-15 23
24 Lebanon - Adopting Ordinance
First reading passed on June 9, 2014.
Second reading passed on July 7, 2014.
Published in The Lebanon Enterprise on July 16, 2014.
GINA N. WHEATLEY, City Clerk
2015 S-15
ORDINANCE 2015-10
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF LEBANON, KENTUCKY
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio has completed the
2015 supplement to the Code of Ordinance of the City of Lebanon, Kentucky, which supplement
contains all ordinances of a general nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of
Ordinances of this municipality; and
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision or addition
of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or make reference to sections of the
Kentucky Revised Statutes; and
WHEREAS, it is the intent of the City Council to accept these updated sections in accordance
with the changes of the law of the Commonwealth of Kentucky;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City of Lebanon, Kentucky:
Section 1.
That the 2015 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lebanon, Kentucky, as
submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, and as attached hereto, be and the
same is hereby adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety.
Section 2.
That this ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its date of passage, approval
and publication as required by law.
Passed this 7th day of December, 2015.
CITY OF LEBANON, KENTUCKY
______________________________
GARY D. CRENSHAW, MAYOR
ATTEST:
______________________________
GINA N. WHEATLEY, CITY CLERK
25
2017 S-16
26 Lebanon - Adopting Ordinance
First reading passed on December 7, 2015.
Second reading passed on January 11, 2016.
Published in The Lebanon Enterprise on January 20, 2016.
________________________________
Gina N. Wheatley, City Clerk
2017 S-16
ORDINANCE 2017-01
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF LEBANON, KENTUCKY
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio has completed the 2017
supplement to the Code of Ordinance of the City of Lebanon, Kentucky, which supplement contains all
ordinances of a general nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this
municipality; and
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision or addition of
certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or make reference to sections of the
Kentucky Revised Statutes; and
WHEREAS, it is the intent of the City Council to accept these updated sections in accordance with
the changes of the law of the Commonwealth of Kentucky;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City of Lebanon, Kentucky:
Section 1.
That the 2017 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lebanon, Kentucky, as submitted
by American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, and as attached hereto, be and the same is
hereby adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety.
Section 2.
That this ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its date of passage, approval and
publication as required by law.
Passed this 13th day of March, 2017.
CITY OF LEBANON, KENTUCKY
______________________________
GARY D. CRENSHAW, MAYOR
ATTEST:
______________________________
GINA N. WHEATLEY, CITY CLERK
27
2018 S-17
28 Lebanon - Adopting Ordinance
________________________________
Gina N. Wheatley, City Clerk
First reading passed on March 13, 2017
Second reading passed on
Published in The Lebanon Enterprise on
________________________________
Gina N. Wheatley, City Clerk
2018 S-17
ORDINANCE 2018-03
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF LEBANON, KENTUCKY
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio has completed the 2018
supplement to the Code of Ordinance of the City of Lebanon, Kentucky, which supplement contains all
ordinances of a general nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this
municipality; and
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision or addition of
certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or make reference to sections of the
Kentucky Revised Statutes; and
WHEREAS, it is the intent of the City Council to accept these updated sections in accordance with
the changes of the law of the Commonwealth of Kentucky;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City of Lebanon, Kentucky:
Section 1.
That the 2018 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lebanon, Kentucky, as submitted
by American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, and as attached hereto, be and the same is
hereby adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety.
Section 2.
That this ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its date of passage, approval and
publication as required by law.
Passed this 12th day of March, 2018.
CITY OF LEBANON, KENTUCKY
______________________________
GARY D. CRENSHAW, MAYOR
ATTEST:
______________________________
GINA N. WHEATLEY, CITY CLERK
29
2019 S-18
30 Lebanon - Adopting Ordinance
First reading passed on March 12, 2018
Second reading passed on April 9, 2018
Published in The Lebanon Enterprise on April 18, 2018
________________________________
Gina N. Wheatley, City Clerk
2019 S-18
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
Table
I. ANNEXATIONS
II. BOND ISSUES
III. FRANCHISES
IV. INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS
V. ZONING MAP CHANGES
1
1998 S-2
2 Lebanon - Table of Special Ordinances
TABLE I: ANNEXATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
86-1 1-16-86 Annexation of land located on the northerly side
of U.S. Highway 68 and contiguous to portions
of the easterly boundary of the city.
88-12 9-12-88 Annexation of land lying on the easterly side of
Highway 55 north of and contiguous to portions
of the city's northerly boundary.
89-3 2-27-89 Annexation of land containing 18.057 acres,
more or less, lying on the easterly side of
Highway 55 north of and contiguous to portions
of the city's northerly boundary.
90-3 5-7-90 Annexation of land consisting of Lots 9 and 10,
Wilson Subdivision, Section 1, lying on the north
side of St. Rose Road adjacent to the city's
westerly boundary.
93-07 8-16-93 Annexation of land located on the southwesterly
side of Highway 208 and adjacent to
Pebblebrook Street, and contiguous to portions of
the city's southwesterly boundary.
93-09 10-6-93 Annexation of land consisting of Lots 1 through
7 and 17A through 17G of Block “D” of January
Woods, Inc., Subdivision, Lots 1 through 11,
Block “G” of Westwind Subdivision, and 5.91
acres located on the southwesterly side of
Highway 208 and adjacent to Pebblebrook Street,
all of such property being contiguous to portions
of the city's southwesterly boundary.
3
4 Lebanon - Table of Special Ordinances
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
94-12 6-28-94 Annexation of land lying and contiguous to
portions of the city's northerly boundary and on
the east side of Kentucky Highway 55 (the
Springfield Road).
95-06 11-13-95 Annexation of 1.83 acres of land located on the
east side of St. Rose Pike lying on and
contiguous to portions of the city's northerly
boundary.
96-01 2-19-96 Annexation of land located on the north side of
the abandoned CSX Railroad right-of-way and
abutted on the west by the property of Richard
Moraja, lying on and contiguous to portions of
the city's northerly boundary.
96-10 7-8-96 Annexing two parcels of unincorporated territory
owned by Marion County Industrial Foundation,
Inc. Parcel 1 contains 70.501 acres and is located
on the east side of Old Ky 55 and south side of
Radio Station Road. Parcel 2 contains 0.185
acres and is located on the east side of Old Ky 55
right-of-way and corner to the property of
Edward Hill.
99-08 9-13-99 Annexation of three parcels located on the Old
Cavalry Pike leading from Lebanon to Cavalry
lying on and contiguous to portions of the city's
westerly boundary.
00-04 1-8-01 Annexation of property belonging to Joseph
Gerald Hamilton lying on and contiguous to the
city’s northern boundary and on the south side of
KY 49 (the Loretto Road).
01-02 5-7-01 Annexation of property belonging to the Marion
County Industrial Foundation and to William L.
and Nancy J. Tatum lying on and contiguous to
the city’s northerly boundary and adjacent to KY
49 (the Loretto Road).
2002 S-4
Annexations 4A
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
03-06 6-9-03 Annexing certain unincorporated territory
belonging to Higdon Land Company, LLC, and
to the Joseph Leon Thomas, Sr., Trust, lying on
and contiguous to portions of the city’s
southeasterly boundary and adjacent to Highland
Drive and Southland Subdivision.
04-03 5-10-04 Annexing certain unincorporated territory
belonging to Joseph D. Smith and Caroline L.
Smith, lying on and contiguous to portions of the
city’s southerly boundary.
05-06 4-15-05 Annexing certain unincorporated territory
belonging to the Todd Mattingly and Cindy
Mattingly, Kevin Mattingly and Amanda
Mattingly, Gootee and Mattingly Rosewood
Estate, LLC and William Michael Gootee and
Janet L. Gootee, lying on and contiguous to
portions of the city’s northerly boundary.
05-07 8-8-05 Annexing certain unincorporated territory
recently purchased by the city lying on and
contiguous to portions of the city’s southerly
boundary.
05-13 12-27-05 Annexing certain territory located along KY 68
and the city’s southwestern boundary.
06-01 3-2-06 Annexing certain territory located along KY 68
and adjacent to the city’s southwestern boundary.
08-05 6-13-08 Annexing certain territory consisting of
approximately 7.621 aggregate acres of land,
separately identified as Tract 1, Parcel A and
Parcel B of the Gray Caskey Farm Division, all
contiguous to the city’s southern boundary.
08-06 6-13-08 Annexing certain territory consisting of
approximately 6.13 acres of land, identified as
2155 Campbellsville Highway, contiguous to the
city’s southwestern boundary.
2008 S-9
4B Lebanon - Table of Special Ordinances
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
08-07 6-13-08 Annexing certain territory consisting of
approximately 0.4535 aggregate acres of land,
identified as Wal-Mart Stores East, LP Tracts I &
II (formerly owned by McCarty), and more
particularly identified as 2040 Campbellsville
Highway, contiguous to the city’s western
boundary.
08-15 12-22-08 Annexing certain territory consisting of
approximately 0.31 acres of land identified as
875 Bradfordsville Highway; approximately 0.23
acres of land identified as 909 Bradfordsville
Highway; approximately 0.942 acres of land
along the Park Side Drive/ Bradfordsville
Highway right-of-way; and approximately 0.684
acres of land along the Bradfordsville
Highway/Highway 49 right-of-way, Lebanon,
Kentucky.
08-16 12-22-08 Annexing certain territory consisting of
approximately 4.916 acres of land on West Main
Street in Lebanon, Kentucky, owned by Hilpp’s
Marion County Property, LLC, contiguous to the
City of Lebanon.
08-17 12-22-08 Annexing certain territory consisting of Tract No.
1A of the James “Spunk” Young, Jr., property
being approximately 2.809 acres of land, and
Tract No. 1B of the James “Spunk” Young, Jr.,
property being approximately 0.922 acres of
land, together located on Springfield Highway,
Lebanon, Kentucky.
2010-01 2-8-10 Annexing certain territory consisting of
approximately 11,986.8 square feet of land
identified as 935 Bradfordsville Highway, and
approximately 1,362 square feet of land along the
Bradfordsville Highway/Highway 49 right-ofway,
Lebanon, Kentucky.
2010 S-10
Annexations 4C
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
2010-08 8-9-10 Annexing territory consisting of approximately
0.763 acres located along the city’s southern
boundary and presently identified as tract #2 of
the Luckett Subdivision at the northwestern
intersection of Li’l Jody Drive and Country Club
Drive, Lebanon, Kentucky.
2011-03 5-9-11 Annexing territory located along the city’s
western boundary and presently identified as
1795 Campbellsville Highway, Lebanon,
Kentucky.
2011-11 1-9-12 Annexing territory located along the city’s
northern boundary and presently identified as
985 Bradfordsville Highway, Lebanon,
Kentucky.
2011-12 1-9-12 Annexing territory located along the city’s
northern boundary and presently identified as
915 Bradfordsville Highway, Lebanon,
Kentucky.
2011-13 1-9-12 Annexing territory located along the city’s
northern boundary and presently identified as
Highway 49 R.O.W., Lebanon, Ohio.
2012-03 6-25-12 Annexing territory located along the city’s
northwestern boundary and presently identified
as Tract 1of the Hardins Creek Subdivision,
consisting of approximately 50.011 acres, near
the Lebanon Bypass.
2012-04 6-25-12 Annexing territory located along the city’s
northwestern boundary and presently identified
as Tract 2 of the Hardins Creek Subdivision,
consisting of approximately 17.044 acres
fronting on the Lebanon Bypass.
2012-05 6-25-12 Annexing territory located along the city’s
northwestern boundary and presently identified
as Tract 3 of the Hardins Creek Subdivision,
consisting of approximately 6.291 acres fronting
on the Lebanon Bypass.
2013 S-13
4D Lebanon - Table of Special Ordinances
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
2015-02 6-8-15 Annexing territory located along the city's
eastern boundary and presently identified as 975
Bradfordsville Highway, consisting of
approximately 0.190 acres and approving zoning
classification as R-1.
2017-07 8-7-17 Annexing certain unincorporated territory
belonging to the Independent Stave Company,
Inc. lying on and contiguous to portions of the
city’s southeastern boundary and adjacent to the
intersection of Sulphur Springs Road and U.S.
Highway 68 (East Main Street).
2018-02 3-12-18 Annexing certain unincorporated territory
belonging to SNS Rentals, LLC, lying on and
contiguous to portions of the city’s present
boundaries surrounding County Club Drive on
the city’s southwestern limits.
2019 S-18
TABLE II: BOND ISSUES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
82-12 7-13-82 Authorizing the issuance and sale of not to
exceed $1,200,000 in principal amount industrial
revenue bonds (Jane and Linda Sportswear
Company Project), series 1982.
86-6 8-25-86 Issuance of city industrial building revenue
bonds (Plastic Products Company, Inc. Project),
series 1986, in the principal amount of
$3,000,000.
88-2 4-1-88 Authorizing the issuance of $1,400,000 worth of
city sewer revenue bonds, series 1988, for the
purpose of financing the cost of constructing
improvements to the waste water treatment
facility of the city's sewer system.
88-4 5-9-88 Issuance of industrial building refunding revenue
bonds (Plastic Products Company, Inc. Project),
in the principal amount of $2,833,000.
90-12 8-13-90 Authorizing the issuance of mortgage revenue
bonds, series 1990 (RHA/Bluegrass Hospitals,
Inc. Project) in the aggregate principal amount of
not to exceed $11,000,000.
91-9 8-28-91 Providing for the establishment of rules,
regulations and conditions for the issuance from
time to time by said city of waterworks revenue
bonds and providing for the collection,
segregation and distribution of the revenue of the
waterworks system.
5
6 Lebanon - Table of Special Ordinances
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
91-10 8-28-91 Authorizing and providing for the issuance of
$3,950,000 principal amount of city waterworks
revenue bonds, series 1991, for the purpose of
financing part of the cost of the construction of
extensions, additions and improvements to the
existing waterworks system of said city.
91-11 8-28-92 Authorizing and providing for the issuance of
$1,400,000 principal amount of city waterworks
revenue bonds, series 1992, for the purpose of
financing part of the cost of the construction of
extensions, additions and improvements to the
existing waterworks system of said city.
92-3 3-13-92 Providing for the issuance of the city's
waterworks revenue bond anticipation notes,
series 1992, to provide interim financing on a
temporary basis for a portion of the costs of
certain additions and improvements to its water
system.
94-01 3-16-94 Authorizing the issuance of up to $2,500,000
principal amount of city adjustable rate industrial
building revenue bonds, series 1994 (Kentucky
Wire and Cable, Inc. Project).
94-02 4-21-94 Authorizing the issuance and sale by the city of
not to exceed $10,000,000 industrial
development revenue bonds, series 1994
(Wallace Computer Services, Inc. Project) for the
purpose of financing the costs of acquiring,
constructing, equipping and installing a
manufacturing facility to be located in the city
for the benefit of Wallace Computer Services,
Inc.
94-15 11-8-94 Authorizing the issuance of up to $12,000,000
principal amount of city industrial building
revenue bonds, series 1994 (Worthington Custom
Plastics, Inc. Project), for the purpose of
financing an industrial building project.
Bond Issues 7
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
96-02 2-28-96 Authorizing the issuance of $875,000 (subject to
an adjustment upward or downward not to
exceed $85,000) principal amount of city sewer
system refunding revenue bonds, series 1996, for
the purpose of refinancing and currently
refunding the outstanding city sewer revenue
bonds, series 1988.
96-14 - -96 Providing for the issuance of the city's
waterworks revenue bond anticipation notes,
series 1996, to provide interim financing on a
temporary basis for a portion of the costs of
certain additions and improvements to the water
system.
96-15 11-11-96 Authorizing the issuance of $1,864,000 principal
amount of city waterworks revenue bonds, series
1997, for the purpose of financing part of the cost
of the construction of extensions, additions and
improvements to the existing waterworks system.
97-07 11-6-97 Authorizing and providing for the issuance of
$3,600,000 principal amount of city waterworks
refunding revenue bonds, series 1997A, for the
purpose of refunding certain outstanding
waterworks revenue bonds.
1998 S-1
8 Lebanon - Table of Special Ordinances
TABLE III: FRANCHISES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
85-9 9-12-85 Creation of a telephone and communications
franchise.
85-12 10-14-85 Acceptance of the bid of General Telephone
Company of Kentucky upon a telephone and
communications franchise enacted by Ordinance
85-9 and fixing the percentage of revenues to be
paid.
86-2 2-14-86 Providing for the sale of a franchise to operate
and maintain natural gas and artificial gas or a
mixture of said gases for public and private uses
for a period of 20 years.
89-14 8-7-89 Transferring a franchise to operate a community
antenna television system from Centel Cable
Television Company of Kentucky to Simmons
Cable TV of Kentucky-Indiana, Inc., a Delaware
corporation.
90-4 4-9-90 Granting a franchise to Simmons Cable TV of
Kentucky-Indiana, Inc., its successors and
assigns, to operate and maintain a cable
television system in the city.
94-03 5-9-94 Granting a franchise for the maintenance and
operation, in and through the city, a system of
works for the generation, transmission and
distribution of electrical energy, to the Kentucky
Utilities Company.
01-08 9-10-01 Granting a franchise to Fronterview Operating
Partnership, dba Adelphia Cable
Communications, for the construction, operation,
and maintenance of a cable television system in
the city.
2002 S-4 9
10 Lebanon - Table of Special Ordinances
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
05-10 11-14-05 Providing for the creation and sale of a franchise
to construct, transport, operate, maintain and
distribute natural gas along and under public
rights-of-way for a period of 20 years.
05-14 12-27-05 Confirming the sale and awarding a gas franchise
to Atmos Energy Corporation, for a term of 20
years for the construction, operation and
maintenance of a natural gas distribution system
along and under public right-of-way within the
city, in return for which franchise shall pay to the
city an annual sum equal to 1% of the gross
revenues derived.
07-08 5-7-07 Granting a franchise to Windstream Kentucky
East, Inc. to construct, operate, maintain and own
a telecommunications system in, upon, across,
above, over and under the public rights-of-way.
2014-02 3-10-14 Renewing a franchise for the erection, laying,
and maintenance of electric facilities and
appurtenant facilities and equipment in, along,
and across the public ways, roads, streets, alleys,
and other public places in the city for furnishing
and selling electricity by means of those facilities
and providing for the sale of the franchise.
2016-10 --- Creating a franchise to construct, erect, operate,
and maintain upon, through, along, under and
over the streets, alleys, avenues, public roads,
highways, bridges, viaducts, sidewalks and other
public ways of the city for the use and operation
of a telephone or communications system.
2017-11 12-11-17 Creating a non-exclusive franchise to use the
public rights-of-way for the operation and
maintenance of a telecommunications system.
2018 S-17
Franchises 10A
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
2018-01 3-21-18 Granting a non-exclusive franchise to Bluegrass
Network LLC to operate and maintain a
telecommunications system.
2019 S-18
10B Lebanon - Table of Special Ordinances
TABLE IV: INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
86-5 7-17-86 Approving a pooled lease program (the
“program”); authorizing the execution of the
interlocal cooperation agreement under which the
program will be organized and revenue bonds
(the “bonds”) for the financing thereof will be
issued; authorizing the execution of a lease under
which the city will lease the city's project under
the program for rental payments sufficient to pay
the city's pro rata share of debt service on the
bonds.
87-3 6-8-87 Approving a joint and cooperative program for
self-insurance, insurance and the investment of
public funds among various cities, urban-county
governments and other public agencies within the
Commonwealth of Kentucky; authorizing the
execution of the “interlocal cooperation
agreement to establish the Kentucky Municipal
Risk Management Association” (the “interlocal
agreement”) under which the program will be
organized and financed; authorizing the issuance
of revenue bonds under the terms and conditions
set forth in the interlocal agreement.
90-13 - -90 Authorizing the participation of the city in the
Kentucky Municipal League Pooled Lease
Financing Program, the financing by the city
through the program of wastewater treatment
plant—cost overrun, and the execution of a lease
purchase agreement between the Kentucky
Municipal Finance Corporation and the city.
11
12 Lebanon - Table of Special Ordinances
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
05-03 4-15-05 Approving a lease for the financing of a project;
providing for the payment and security of the
lease; creating a sinking fund; and authorizing
the execution of various documents related to
such lease.
06-06 7-12-06 Approving a lease for the financing of project;
providing for the payment and security of the
lease; creating a sinking fund; and authorizing
the execution of various documents related to
such lease.
2016-08 11-9-16 Approving a lease for the financing of a project;
to finance the cost of the acquisition,
development, and construction of a city hall
building to be used for a public purpose.
2017 S-16
TABLE V: ZONING MAP CHANGES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
98-2 4-1-98 Amending the zoning map by changing the
zoning classification of 21.14 acre tract of
property owned by Samuel L. Spalding and
Brenda B. Spalding, near and on the north side of
Metts Drive from R-1 (Single family residential)
to I-2 (Heavy industry).
99-02 3-8-99 Amending the zoning map by changing the
zoning classification of a 41.428 acre tract of the
John F. McMurtry estate property on the
northeast side of Teledyne Drive from I-2 (Heavy
Industry) to B-2 (Highway Business).
99-03 4-12-99 Amending the zoning map by changing the
zoning classification of Tract 1 of Lincoln Square
Shopping Center Subdivision from I-1 (Light
Industry) to B-2 (Highway Business).
99-04 4-12-99 Amending the zoning map by changing the
zoning classification of Lots 124 through 141 of
the Byrd Subdivision No. 3 from R-3 (Multi-
Family Residential) to B-2 (Highway Business).
01-04 7-9-01 Amending the zoning map by changing the
zoning classification of tracts 2 and 3 of Lincoln
Square Shopping Center Subdivision from I-1
(Light Industry) to B-2 (Highway Business).
02-05 12-9-02 Amending the zoning map by changing the
zoning classification of three tracts of land:
Tracts 4 and 5 of the Pebblebrook Estates from
R-1 (Single-Family Residential) to B-2 (Highway
Business);
13
2004 S-5
14 Lebanon - Table of Special Ordinances
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
02-05 (Cont’d) 12-9-02 Property owned by H.E. O’Daniel Sr., and J.
Francis O’Daniel from R-1 (Single-Family
Residential) to B-2 (Highway Business);
Shady Grove Trailer Park from I-1 (Light
Industrial) to B-2 (Highway Business).
07-01 2-15-07 Rezoning approximately 415 acres annexed by
Ord. 06-01, which includes the Southwest
Industrial park property, to R-1 (Single-Family
Residential), B-2 (General Business), B-3
(Highway Business) and I-1 (Light Industrial).
08-05 6-13-08 Providing zoning classification of R-1 (Single-
Family Residential) to previously unzoned land:
approximately 7.621 aggregate acres of land,
separately identified as Tract 1, Parcel A and
Parcel B of the Gray Caskey Farm Division.
08-06 6-13-08 Providing zoning classification of B-2 (General
Business) to previously unzoned land:
approximately 6.13 acres of land, identified as
2155 Campbellsville Highway.
08-07 6-13-08 Providing zoning classification of B-2 (General
Business) to previously unzoned land:
approximately 0.4535 aggregate acres of land,
identified as 2040 Campbellsville Highway.
2010-02 2-22-10 Changing the zoning classification of the
Rosewood Golf Course development from R-1
(Single-Family Residential) and conservation to
R-1 (Single-Family Residential) with a planned
unit development (PUD) overlay.
2010-08 8-9-10 Providing zoning classification of R-2 (One to
Four Family Residential) to previously unzoned
land: approximately 0.763 aggregate acres of
land, identified as tract #2 of the Luckett
Subdivision.
2011 S-11
Zoning Map Changes 15
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
2011-03 5-9-11 Proving zoning classification of B-2 (General
Business) to previously unzoned land: identified
as 1795 Campbellsville Highway.
2011-11 1-9-12 Providing zoning classification of R-1 (Single-
Family Residential) to previously unzoned land:
identified as 985 Bradfordsville Highway.
2011-12 1-9-12 Providing zoning classification of R-1 (Single-
Family Residential) to previously unzoned land:
identified as 915 Bradfordsville Highway.
2011-13 1-9-12 Providing zoning classification of R-1 (Single-
Family Residential) to previously unzoned land:
identified as Highway 49 R.O.W.
2013-03 6-10-13 Rezoning property off W. Main Street owned by
L. Smith from B-2 (General Business) to I-1
(Light Industrial).
2014-07 7-14-14 Rezoning property located on Corporate Drive
and owned by Michael and Robyn Howard from
B-2 (General Business) to I-2 (Heavy Industrial).
2014-13 12-8-14 Rezoning multiple properties constituting 47.459
acres in the aggregate owned by Community
Exchange Service, LLC, situated between
Woodlawn Avenue, Taylor Avenue, Linda
Avenue and the addition to Rolling Hills
Subdivision, each tract identified as follows:
1.232 acres labeled Parcel II located on
Woodlawn Avenue from R-2 (Two-to-fourfamily
Residential District) to I-2 (Heavy
Industrial)
1.774 acres labeled as Parcel I, Tract 1, located
directly on Woodlawn Avenue from R-3 (Multifamily
Residential District) to I-2 (Heavy
Industrial)
2015 S-15
16 Lebanon - Table of Special Ordinances
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
1.091 acres adjoining the prior parcel and
similarly labeled as Parcel I, Tract 1, from
existing Zone P (Public District) to I-2 (Heavy
Industrial)
11.265 acres labeled as Parcel III from existing
Zone P (Public District) to I-2 (Heavy Industrial)
15.705 acres labeled Parcel I, Tract No. 2 from
existing Zone P (Public District) to I-2 (Heavy
Industrial)
16.392 acres labeled as Parcel I, Tract No. 3
located off of Taylor Avenue and Whitton Lane
from existing Zone P (Public District) to I-2
(Heavy Industrial).
2015-07 8-10-15 Rezoning two properties located on S. Harrison
Street and owned by Mrs. Lois T. Leake, from R-
1 (Family Residential) to R-3 (Multifamily
Residential).
2016-05 8-8-16 Rezoning five properties located on N. Harrison
Street and owned by Clavis and Blenda Wilson
from B-2 (General Business) to R-2 (One to Four
Family Residential).
2016-09 1-9-17 Rezoning property located at 343 North
Woodlawn Avenue and owned by Hilpp’s
Central Industrial Property, LLC. from (R-2) to
(I-2).
2018-05 5-7-18 Rezoning property located at 709-715 East Main
Street from B-2 (General Business) and B-3
(Highway Business) to I-2 (Heavy Industrial).
2019 S-18
INDEX
1
2 Lebanon - Index
INDEX
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
Establishments, 118.02
Definitions, 118.01
Licenses, 118.03
Premises to furnish clear view, 118.04
Restrictions on advertisement, 118.05
ALARMS, 130.11
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Disorderly behavior, 116.26
Licensing
Application for license, 116.03
Definitions, 116.01
Hours sales prohibited, 116.06
License fees, 116.04
License required, 116.02
Reasons for denial of license, 116.05
Termination of license, 116.07
Outdoor Dining
City=s retention of sidewalks and pedestrian rights-of-way, 116.39
Location of permitted areas, 116.35
Packaging prohibition, 116.38
Permit agreement, Chapter 116, Appendix A
Permit agreement, alcoholic beverage sales, Chapter 116, Appendix B
Permit application, 116.37
Permit fee, 116.36
Penalty, 116.99
Regulations Concerning Minors
Aiding or assisting persons underage, 116.23
Definition, 116.20
Enforcement by State Alcoholic Beverage Control Board, 116.25
Gift card for alcoholic beverages to be redeemed only by persons 21 and older, 116.24
Sales to minors prohibited, 116.21
Unlawful acts by persons underage, 116.22
Retail premises not to be disorderly; acts constituting disorderly behavior, 116.26
2014 S-14 3
4 Lebanon - Index
ANIMALS AND LIVESTOCK
Cats
Control of all cats, 90.62
Duty of responsible cat owner, 90.61
Limitation on number of cats, 90.60
Control of Dogs and Cats
Annual license fee, 90.70
Destruction of impounded animals, 90.72
Maximum number of animals, 90.71
Definitions, 90.01
Dogs
Action for damages; destruction of offending dangerous dog, 90.49
Additional requirements for precautions to be taken by owners of dangerous dogs, 90.44
Barking dogs considered a nuisance, 90.42
Control of all dogs, 90.43
Custodial liability, 90.46
Dog fighting and harboring, 90.47
Duty of responsible dog owner, 90.40
Enforcement of restriction on dangerous dogs, 90.45
Insurance, 90.48
Limitation on number of dogs, 90.41
Penalty, 90.50
Enforcement
Confiscation of victimized animals, 90.81
Law enforcement animals, 90.82
Nuisance, 90.80
General Animal Control
Awarding of live animals as prizes prohibited, 90.11
Exotic animals, 90.13
Hitching or tying animals to public objects prohibited, 90.10
Removal of animal excreta required, 90.12
Livestock
Livestock prohibited within corporate limits, 90.27
Livestock running at large prohibited, 90.28
Penalty, 90.30
Poultry prohibited within corporate limits, 90.26
Rabbits limited within corporate limits, 90.28
Swine prohibited within corporate limits, 90.25
ANNEXATIONS, T.S.O., Table I
2015 S-15
Index 4A
BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES
Clinging to vehicles, 73.04
Operation of bicycles, 73.01
Operation of motorcycles and motorscooters, 73.02
Penalty, 73.99
Skating and coasting, 73.03
BOND ISSUES, T.S.O., Table II
BONFIRES IN PUBLIC STREET, 130.08
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Electrical Inspector
Creation of office, 150.15
Fees
Building permit fee, 150.25
Inspection fees, 150.26
Fire Hydrants and Access Roads
Building plans, 150.52
Construction, alteration or addition, 150.51
Definitions, 150.50
Fire hydrant and water main specifications, 150.53
Location of hydrants and water supply requirements, 150.54
Penalty, 150.99
Standard Codes
Adoption of Kentucky Building Code and Standards of Safety; enforcement agents, 150.01
Appeals, 150.03
Application, 150.02
Underground Utilities
Installation of cable television facilities, 150.40
CARNIVALS
Operation unlawful, 117.30
CITY ADMINISTRATOR, 31.37
CITY CLERK, 31.36
CITY COUNCIL
Members; election, qualifications, compensation, 32.01
2008 S-9
4B Lebanon - Index
CITY COUNCIL (Cont=d)
Ordinances
Additional requirements for adoption may be established by city, 32.44
Adoption of standard codes by reference, 32.40
Approval, disapproval by Mayor, 32.39
Form of amendment, 32.37
Indexing and maintenance requirements, 32.42
Introduction; enacting clause, 32.36
Legislative immunity, 32.48
2008 S-9
Index 5
CITY COUNCIL, (Cont'd)
Municipal orders, 32.46
Official city records, 32.41
One subject; title, 32.35
Periodic review required, 32.45
Proved by Clerk; received in evidence, 32.47
Publication requirements, 32.43
Reading requirement; exception for emergency, 32.38
Powers and duties, 32.03
Rules of Procedure
Mayor as Presiding Officer, 32.20
Meetings, 32.21
Quorum, 32.22
Vacancies, 32.02
CITY OFFICIALS
Compensation, 31.02
Elected Officials
Continuity of government, 31.23
Councilmembers, 31.22
Election procedure, 31.20
Mayor, 31.21
Non-elected City Officials
Assistant City Attorney, 31.37
City Clerk, 31.36
Establishment of non-elected city offices, 31.35
Oath; bond, 31.01
Removal from office, 31.03
CODE OF ETHICS
Definitions, 38.02
Ethics Commission, 38.06
Financial disclosure, 38.05
Nepotism, 38.04
Standards of conduct, 38.03
Title, 38.01
CODE OF ORDINANCES; RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
Amendments to code; amendatory language, 10.14
Computation of time, 10.04
Conflicting provisions, 10.15
Construction of section references, 10.10
Definitions, 10.02
Errors and omissions, 10.17
Historical and statutory references, 10.18
2004 S-5
6 Lebanon - Index
CODE OF ORDINANCES; RULES OF CONSTRUCTION, (Cont'd)
Majority may act for all; authorized agent, 10.05
Ordinances repealed, 10.11
Ordinances saved, 10.13
Ordinances unaffected, 10.12
Penalty, 10.99
Reference to offices, 10.16
Revivor, 10.08
Rights and liabilities accruing before repeal of ordinance, 10.09
Rules of construction, 10.03
Severability, 10.07
Short titles, 10.01
Writings and signatures, 10.06
COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS
Cooperation of city departments, 36.06
Creation; members, 36.03
Definitions, 36.02
Election of officers, 36.07
Expenditures, 36.08
Functions, 36.04
Office space, 36.09
Policy, 36.01
Powers and duties, 36.05
Relationship with Kentucky Commission on Human Rights, 36.10
CURFEW FOR MINORS; PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY, 130.01
ETHICS, (See CODE OF ETHICS)
FALSE FIRE ALARM, 130.09
FINANCE AND REVENUE
Financial Administration
Accounting records and financial reports, 33.02
Annual audit of city funds, 33.04
Annual budget ordinance, 33.03
Collection of delinquent city taxes, licenses, fees and other charges, 33.06
Definitions, 33.01
Official depositories; disbursement of city funds, 33.05
Improvements
Adoption of ordinance; notice to affected owners, 33.15
Affected owner may contest, 33.16
Apportionment of cost, 33.12
2004 S-5
Index 7
FINANCE AND REVENUE, (Cont'd)
Improvements, (Cont'd)
Comprehensive report required, 33.13
Definitions, 33.10
Effect of additional property or change in financing, 33.18
Financing of improvements, 33.11
Public hearing required, 33.14
When city may proceed; assessment constitutes lien, 33.17
FIRE DEPARTMENT
Establishment, 37.20
Fire Chief, 37.21
Members, 37.22
Rules and regulations, 37.23
FIREARMS AND SLINGSHOTS; USE OF, 130.04
FIRE PREVENTION
Blasting permit, 93.20
Penalty, 93.99
Storage of flammables and other matter, 93.21
FIREWORKS
Bond or liability insurance requirement, 93.04
Consumer fireworks; restrictions on sale, 93.03
Definitions; legality of items, 93.01
Exempted sales and uses, 93.05
Penalty, 93.99
Sale or disposal of seized fireworks, 93.06
Sale or use prohibited; exception for public display, 93.02
FLEA MARKETS AND YARD SALES
Definitions, 114.01
Penalty, 114.99
Regulation of flea markets, 114.02
Regulation of yard sales, 114.03
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Abrogation and greater restrictions, 151.10
Administration
Appeals and variance procedures, 151.28
Designation of Local Administrator, 151.25
Duties and responsibilities of the Local Administrator, 151.27
Establishment of development permit, 151.26
2012 S-12
8 Lebanon - Index
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION (Cont=d)
Basis for establishing the special flood hazard areas, 151.07
Compliance, 151.09
Definitions, 151.05
Establishment of development permit, 151.08
Findings of fact, 151.02
Interpretation, 151.11
Lands to which this chapter applies, 151.06
Objectives, 151.04
Penalty, 151.99
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
Critical facilities, 151.41
General construction standards, 151.35
Specific standards, 151.36
Standards for accessory structures in all zones beginning with the letter >A=, 151.40
Standards for shallow flooding zones, 151.38
Standards for streams without established base flood elevation (unnumbered A Zones)
and/or floodways, 151.37
Standards for subdivisions proposals, 151.39
Statement of purpose, 151.03
Statutory authorization, 151.01
Warning and disclaimer of liability, 151.12
FRANCHISES, T.S.O., Table III
HALLOWEEN ACTIVITIES; REGULATION OF, 130.02
HOODS OR MASKS; WEARING, 130.03
INSURANCE COMPANIES
Amount of fee for companies issuing life insurance, 113.02
Amount of fee for companies issuing policies other than life insurance, 113.03
Due date; interest, 113.04
Imposition of license fee, 113.01
Minimum fee, 113.06
Written breakdown of collections, 113.05
INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS, T.S.O., Table IV
ITINERANT MERCHANTS, (See PEDDLERS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS, AND SOLICITORS)
JUNKED APPLIANCES AND MOTOR VEHICLES
Abatement by city, 97.05
Conditions constituting public nuisance, 97.02
2010 S-10
Index 8A
JUNKED APPLIANCES AND MOTOR VEHICLES (Cont=d)
Definitions, 97.01
Hearing; appeal, 97.06
Notice to abate, 97.04
Penalty, 97.99
Regulations supplemental, 97.07
Right of entry of enforcement officials, 97.03
2010 S-10
8B Lebanon - Index
Index 9
LITTERING
Hauling loose material, 94.03
Litter on private property, 94.05
Penalty, 94.99
Sweeping litter into gutters, 94.04
Throwing litter from vehicle, 94.01
Tracking foreign matter on streets, 94.02
LIVESTOCK, (See ANIMALS AND LIVESTOCK)
MARION COUNTY COUNTRY HAM DAYS FESTIVAL
Bicycles, roller skates, skateboards and the like prohibited, 117.16
Marion County Country Ham Days, 117.15
MAYOR, 31.21
MAYOR-COUNCIL PLAN
Form of government, 30.01
Governing officers, 30.02
MISSILES; THROWING, 130.05
MOTORCYCLES, (See BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES)
NUISANCES
Abatement procedure, 92.04
Certain conditions declared a nuisance, 92.03
Common law and statutory nuisances, 92.02
Definition, 92.01
Nuisance created by others, 92.05
Penalty, 92.99
Pigeon roosting (See PIGEON ROOSTING)
Suspension of license, 92.06
OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAX
Administrative provisions, 110.10
Annual business license fee imposed, 110.14
Application and updates required, 110.02
Apportionment, 110.04
Definitions, 110.01
Employers to withhold, 110.05
Extensions and estimated payments, 110.07
Federal audit provisions, 110.09
Information to remain confidential, 110.11
2018 S-17
10 Lebanon - Index
OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAX (Cont=d)
Occupational License Tax payment required, 110.03
Penalties, 110.12
Refunds, 110.08
Returns required, 110.06
Use of Occupational License Tax, 110.13
OUTDOOR DINING, (See ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES)
PANHANDLING, 130.12
PARADES
Alternative permit, 71.46
Appeal procedure when permit denied, 71.45
Application for permit, 71.42
Contents of permit, 71.48
Definitions, 71.40
Duties of permittee, 71.49
Notice of rejection of permit, 71.44
Notice to city and other officials when permit issued, 71.47
Permit required, 71.41
Public conduct during parades, 71.50
Revocation of permit, 71.51
Standards for issuance of permit, 71.43
PARKING REGULATIONS
Display of parked vehicle for sale, 72.11
Establishment of parking zones, 72.13
Fire lanes, 72.14
Handicapped permit parking, Ch. 75, Schedule III
Impounding
Impoundment of vehicles authorized; redemption, 72.20
Required notice to owner, 72.21
Sale of vehicle, 72.22
Limitations of stopping and parking, 72.03
Manner of parking, 72.02
Obstructional parking; double parking, 72.01
Owner responsibility, 72.09
Parking in excess of certain number of hours prohibited; towing authorized, 72.06
Parking in parks, 72.10
Parking on off-street facility, 72.08
Parking on parade route, 72.07
Parking prohibited at all times, Ch. 75, Schedule I
2015 S-15
Index 11
PARKING REGULATIONS (Cont=d)
Parking restricted to allow street cleaning, 72.05
Parking time limited, Ch. 75, Schedule II
Parking with handicapped permits, 72.12
Penalty, 72.99
Restrictions and prohibitions on designated streets, 72.04
Snow Emergency
Announcement of snow emergency, 72.35
Snow emergency routes, 72.37
Termination of emergency, 72.36
PARKS AND RECREATION
Adopted by reference, 95.01
PAWNBROKERS
Bond, 112.02
Definitions, 112.01
Enforcement, 112.08
Maximum interest, resale price, 112.05
Penalty, 112.99
Prohibited activities, 112.07
Receipt to be given for each article; sale of article, 112.04
Receipt to be given for payment of loan, 112.06
Register to be kept; daily reports, 112.03
PEDDLERS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS, AND SOLICITORS
Appeal procedure, 111.07
Application procedure, 111.03
Definitions, 111.01
Exhibition of identification, 111.08
License requirement, 111.02
Penalty, 111.99
Revocation procedure, 111.05
Sale of food from motor vehicles, 111.09
Standards for issuance, 111.04
Standards for on-street solicitation, 111.10
Standards for revocation, 111.06
PERSONNEL
Controlled substances and alcohol use testing program, 39.02
PIGEON ROOSTING
Intervention, 92.22
Notification; remediation, 92.21
2015 S-15
12 Lebanon - Index
PIGEON ROOSTING (Cont=d)
Penalty, 92.99
Restrictions on pigeon roosts, 92.20
POLICE DEPARTMENT
Arrest fee, 37.05
City impoundment facility, 37.06
Creation, 37.01
Duties, 37.02
Longevity, shift differential and educational incentive pay, 37.04
Probationary period for appointees, 37.03
POLICE RADIOS IN VEHICLES, 130.07
POOL AND BILLIARDS
Hours of operation, 117.02
Location requirements, 117.01
PRECIOUS METALS
Articles to be kept separate; examination by Police Department, 115.03
Copy of register to be furnished to Chief of Police, 115.02
Dealers to keep daily register, 115.01
Exemptions, 115.06
Penalty, 115.99
Photograph of seller required, 115.04
Transactions with minors prohibited, 115.05
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ENFORCEMENT
Appeal process, 155.05
Appeal to District Court; final judgement, 155.10
Appointment of members: term of office: removal from office; liability, 155.06
Board hearing; notice; final order, 155.09
Citation fine schedule, 155.11
Definitions, 155.02
Demolition and demolition permits, 155.15
General powers of the Board, 155.07
Jurisdiction, 155.03
Lien; charges, costs, penalties, and fees, 155.12
Organization of Board; conduct of meetings and Board members; quorum, 155.08
Property maintenance code, 155.14
Property Maintenance Code Enforcement Officer(s); powers, responsibilities,
and procedures, 155.04
Title, 155.01
2010 S-10
Index 12A
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ENFORCEMENT (Cont=d)
Transfer of ownership, 155.13
Validity of existing liens previously filed, 155.16
PUBLIC RECORDS
Definitions, 34.01
Procedures for Requesting Public Records
Access to records relating to particular individual, 34.11
Concealing or destroying records prohibited, 34.10
Fees for copies, 34.13
Format of copies, 34.12
Initial request with immediate inspection, 34.05
Misstatement of purpose prohibited, 34.14
Notification of the Attorney General, 34.17
Online access to public records in electronic form, 34.15
Public records not immediately available, 34.07
Public records protected from disclosure, 34.16
Referral to proper custodian, 34.06
Refusal of unreasonable requests, 34.08
Time limitation; denial of inspection, 34.09
SEWERS
Building Sewers and Connections
Design and installations, 50.042
Grease traps, 50.044
Inspection, 50.043
Liability of city for damages, 50.045
Permits, 50.040
Prohibited connections, 50.041
Definitions and abbreviations, 50.002
Enforcement
Additional enforcement remedies, 50.114
Administrative orders, 50.112
General, 50.110
Notice of violation, 50.111
Remedies not exclusive, 50.115
Show cause hearing, 50.113
Fees
Charges and fees, 50.091
Purpose, 50.090
Penalty, 50.999
2018 S-17
12B Lebanon - Index
Index 13
SEWERS, (Cont'd)
Pollutant Discharge Limits
City's right of revision, 50.057
Dilution of wastewater discharge, 50.052
Federal categorical pretreatment standards, 50.058
General conditions, 50.050
Grease, oil, and sand interceptors, 50.053
Protection from accidental and slug discharges, 50.055
Restricted discharges, 50.051
Special industrial pretreatment requirements, 50.054
State requirements, 50.056
Powers and Authority of Inspectors
Access to easements, 50.102
Right to enter premises, 50.100
Right to obtain information regarding discharge, 50.101
Safety, 50.103
Pretreatment Program Administration
Alternative discharge limits, 50.069
Annual publication, 50.078
Compliance data reporting, 50.072
Confidential information, 50.080
Industrial wastewater discharge permits, 50.066
Inspection and sampling, 50.076
Monitoring, 50.075
Periodic compliance reports, 50.073
Permit conditions, 50.068
Permit duration, 50.070
Permit modifications, 50.067
Permit transfer, 50.071
Permit violations, 50.074
Pretreatment, 50.077
Signatory requirements, 50.081
Significant non-compliance, 50.079
Wastewater discharges, 50.065
Private Wastewater Disposal
Public sewer not available, 50.030
Requirements for installation, 50.031
Purpose and policy, 50.001
Sanitary Sewer Extensions
Application for extension, 50.022
Conditions for approval, 50.021
Exemptions, 50.023
Responsibility, 50.020
14 Lebanon - Index
SEWERS, (Cont'd)
Use of Public Sewers
Compliance with local, state, and federal laws, 50.012
Discharge of unpolluted waters into sewer, 50.013
Mandatory sewer connections, 50.010
Prohibited discharges, 50.014
Sewer maintenance, 50.015
Unlawful discharge to storm sewers or natural outlets, 50.011
SOLICITORS, (See PEDDLERS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS, AND SOLICITORS)
SOUND AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT, 130.06
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Excavations and Construction
Application and cash deposit, 91.02
Barriers around excavations, 91.04
Opening permit required, 91.01
Restoration of pavement, 91.03
Sidewalk construction, 91.06
Warning lights, 91.05
Lighting
Applicability, 91.65
Enforcement, 91.68
Overhead systems, 91.66
Specifications for installation, 91.67
Obstructions
Materials on street or sidewalk, 91.32
Removal of ice and snow, 91.33
Street and sidewalk obstruction, 91.31
Unloading on street or sidewalk, 91.30
Penalty, 91.99
Road and Bridge Projects
Exemptions from hearing requirement, 91.20
Hearing to be held prior to construction, 91.18
Notice requirements, 91.16
Public hearing required, 91.15
Public may testify; effect of testimony, 91.17
Separate hearing for each project not required, 91.19
Street Numbers
Assignment and posting of Ahouse@ numbers, 91.75
2007 S-8
Index 14A
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS, (Con=t)
Transporting Structures
Application and fee, 91.47
City Clerk to consult with Chief of Police, 91.48
Definitions, 91.45
Permit required, 91.46
Permit to be displayed on vehicle, 91.49
2007 S-8
14B Lebanon - Index
Index 15
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Advisory meeting with Planning Commission, 153.04
Authority and jurisdiction, 153.02
Definitions, 153.03
Enforcement, 153.98
Final Plat Approval
Final plat data, 153.41
General, 153.40
Procedure, 153.42
General Requirements and Minimum Design Standards
Blocks, 153.12
Easements, 153.15
General, 153.10
Lots, 153.13
Off-street loading and parking facilities, 153.14
Public sites and open spaces, 153.16
Streets, 153.11
Penalty, 153.99
Preliminary Plat Approval
Preliminary plat data, 153.20
Procedure, 153.21
Purpose, 153.01
Required Improvements Prerequisite to Final Approval
Completion of improvements prior to approval of final plat, 153.35
General, 153.30
Monuments, 153.31
Street name signs, 153.34
Streets, 153.32
Utilities, 153.33
Variances
Exceptional conditions, 153.50
Group housing developments, 153.51
Procedural variance, 153.52
TAXATION
Actions to enforce tax liens, 35.07
Ad valorem taxes on motor vehicles, 35.08
Assessment; mailing of tax bills, 35.01
Bank Franchise and Local Deposit Tax
City to have lien for taxes, 35.22
Delinquent payment, 35.23
Disposition of funds, 35.24
Imposition of tax, 35.20
Issuance of tax bills, 35.21
16 Lebanon - Index
TAXATION, (Cont'd)
City to have lien for taxes, 35.06
Disposition of funds, 35.09
Due date; payment and delinquency, 35.03
Levy; establishment of tax rate, 35.02
Penalty, 35.99
Publication of names of delinquent taxpayers, 35.04
Recording of delinquent tax bills, 35.05
Transient Room and Restaurant Tax
Audit of funds, 35.37
Delinquent payment, 35.36
Exemptions, 35.33
Imposition of restaurant tax, 35.32
Imposition of transient room tax, 35.30
Payment, due date of restaurant tax, 35.34
Payment, due date of transient room tax, 35.31
Taxpayer recordkeeping, 35.35
TOURIST AND CONVENTION COMMISSION
Budget; report, 36.28
Creation, 36.25
Members; appointment; terms, 36.26
Officers; duties, 36.27
TRAFFIC CODE, (See also TRAFFIC RULES)
Authority for enforcement, 70.04
Definitions, 70.01
One-way streets, Ch. 74, Schedule III
Penalty, 70.99
Powers and duties of Police Department, 70.03
Required obedience to traffic directions, 70.02
Speed limits, Ch. 74, Schedule I
Temporary regulations, 70.05
Through streets, Ch. 74, Schedule II
Traffic-Control Devices
Device to be legible and in proper position, 70.20
Establishment and maintenance of traffic-control devices, 70.16
Interference with signals, 70.18
Obedience to signals, 70.17
Signal legends, 70.15
Temporary disregard of devices by police officers, 70.21
Unauthorized signals or markings, 70.19
2004 S-5
Index 17
TRAFFIC RULES, (See also TRAFFIC CODE)
Accidents
Accident report, 71.16
Duty of operator, 71.15
Operation Generally
Backing vehicles, 71.03
Obstructing traffic, 71.01
Reverse or U turns, 71.02
Speed limits; unsafe speed, 71.05
Vehicles crossing sidewalks, 71.04
Parades, (See PARADES)
Penalty, 71.99
Prohibitions
Driving over fire hose, 71.26
Operator of vehicle to drive carefully, 71.25
Right-of-way of emergency vehicles; following emergency vehicles, 71.26
Smoke emission or other nuisance, 71.27
TREES
Arborists license and bond, 96.11
City Tree Board, 96.02
Dead or diseased tree removal on private property, 96.10
Definitions, 96.01
Distance from curbs, sidewalks and power lines, 96.05
Distance from street corners and fireplugs, 96.06
Interference with City Tree Board, 96.12
Penalty, 96.99
Pruning, corner clearance, 96.09
Public tree care, 96.07
Review by City Council, 96.13
Spacing of trees, 96.04
Street tree species to be planted, 96.03
Tree topping, 96.08
UNLAWFUL FIRES, 130.10
WATER
Water Rates
Rate schedule, 51.01
Water Shortage Regulations
Declaration of water shortage advisory, 51.17
Declaration of water shortage alert, 51.18
Declaration of water shortage emergency, 51.19
Definitions, 51.16
Purpose, 51.15
2004 S-5
18 Lebanon - Index
WATER, (Cont=d)
Water Shortage Regulations (Cont=d)
Regulations of Water Works Company, 51.20
Termination for violation; hearing, 51.21
YARD SALES, (See FLEA MARKETS AND YARD SALES)
ZONING MAP CHANGES, T.S.O., Table V
ZONING REGULATIONS
Agriculture District A
Off-street parking and loading/unloading, 154.085
Permitted residential unit types, 154.082
Property development standards, 154.083
Purpose and intent, 154.080
Signage, 154.084
Uses, 154.081
Authority, 154.002
Cellular Antenna Towers and Telecommunications Service Standards
Amendments, 154.367
Applicability, 154.362
Application process, 154.364
Application requirements, 154.363
Criteria, 154.366
Design standards, 154.365
General, 154.361
Guarantee, 154.368
Purpose and intent, 154.360
Central Business District (B-1)
B-1 property development standards, 154.178
Off-street parking and loading/unloading, 154.180
Permitted residential unit types, 154.177
Purpose and intent, 154.175
Signage, 154.179
Uses, 154.176
Conditional use permits, variances and appeals
Appeals, 154.433
Conditional use permits, 154.431
Conditional use permits, variances and appeals, 154.430
Variances, 154.432
Conflict with ordinances, private covenants, and deeds, 154.009
Conflict with subdivision regulations and other laws, regulations and rules, 154.008
Coordination with subdivision regulations, 154.007
2006 S-7
Index 19
ZONING REGULATIONS (Cont=d)
Definitions
Definitions, 154.021
General provisions, 154.020
Enforcement
Enforcement officer, 154.475
Fees
Fee payment, 154.461
Fee schedule, 154.460
General Business District (B-2)
B-2 property development standards, 154.193
Buffering, 154.196
Off-street parking and loading/unloading, 154.195
Permitted residential unit types, 154.192
Purpose and intent, 154.190
Signage, 154.194
Uses, 154.191
General Use Regulations
Flood plains, 154.068
General development requirements and standards, 154.066
Sinkholes, 154.067
Uses, 154.065
Heavy Industrial District (I-2)
I-2 property development standards, 154.262
Off-street parking and loading/unloading, 154.264
Performance standards, 154.265
Purpose and intent, 154.260
Signage, 154.263
Uses, 154.261
Highway Business District (B-3)
B-3 property development standards, 154.213
Buffering, 154.216
Off-street parking and loading/unloading, 154.215
Permitted residential unit types, 154.212
Purpose and intent, 154.210
Signage, 154.214
Uses, 154.211
Historic Overlay District (H)
Certificates of appropriateness (COAs), 154.334
Designation of landmarks and historic districts, 154.333
Emergency conditions and demolition by neglect, 154.335
Lebanon Historic Preservation Board, 154.331
National register of historic places nominations, 154.332
Purpose and intent, 154.330
2006 S-7
20 Lebanon - Index
ZONING REGULATIONS (Cont=d)
Interpretation, 154.006
Jurisdiction, 154.004
Light Industrial District (I-1)
I-1 property development standards, 154.247
Off-street parking and loading/unloading, 154.249
Performance standards, 154.250
Purpose and intent, 154.245
Signage, 154.248
Uses, 154.246
Manufactured and Mobile Home Standards
Permits, 154.348
Permitted placement of mobile homes, 154.347
Purpose and intent, 154.345
Standards, 154.346
Mobile Home Park District (MHP)
MHP property development standards, 154.162
Purpose and intent, 154.160
Uses, 154.161
Multi-Family Residential District (R-3)
Off-street parking and loading/unloading, 154.146
Permitted overlay districts, 154.143
Permitted residential unit types, 154.142
Purpose and intent, 154.140
R-3 property development standards, 154.144
Signage, 154.145
Uses, 154.141
Noncomformities
Intent, 154.445
Noncomforming lots of record, 154.449
Noncomforming structures, 154.446
Noncomforming uses of land, 154.447
Noncomforming use of structures or structure/premises, 154.448
Repairs and maintenance, 154.450
Office and Professional District (OP)
Buffering, 154.235
Off-street parking and loading/unloading, 154.234
OP property development standards, 154.232
Purpose and intent, 154.230
Signage, 154.233
Uses, 154.231
2006 S-7
Index 21
ZONING REGULATIONS (Cont=d)
Off-street and On-street parking and Loading/Unloading Standards
Off-street loading/unloading requirements, 154.401
Off-street parking requirements, 154.400
On-street parking and loading/unloading, 154.402
Penalty, 154.999
Permitted uses, Appendix A
Planned Unit Development (PUD)
Applicability, 154.291
Designation procedures, 154.293
Purpose and intent, 154.290
Standards, 154.292
Public District (P)
Off-street parking and loading/unloading, 154.279
P Property development standards, 154.277
Purpose and intent, 154.275
Signage, 154.278
Uses, 154.276
Purpose, 154.003
Residential Cluster Development (RCD) Overlay District
Amendments, 154.316
Application and processing, 154.307
Area requirements, 154.310
Common open safe/recreation areas, 154.314
Expiration, 154.317
Fences, walls and signs, 154.313
General, 154.306
Height, yard and setback requirements, 154.311
Off-street parking and loading and/or unloading area, 154.312
Public and semi-public uses, 154.309
Purpose and intent, 154.305
Residential uses and densities, 154.308
Utilities, 154.315
Review Bodies
Building Inspector, 154.037
Historic Preservation Board, 154.038
Lebanon Board of Adjustments, 154.036
Lebanon Planning Commission and Administrative Official, 154.035
Legislative body - Lebanon City Council, 154.039
Separability, 154.010
Signage Standards
Definitions, 154.381
Exempt signs, 154.384
General signage regulation, 154.383
Noncomforming signs, 154.390
Noncomforming signs and advertising structures, 154.389
2006 S-7
22 Lebanon - Index
ZONING REGULATIONS (Cont=d)
Signage Standards (Cont=d)
Permitted permanent signs by zone, 154.386
Prohibited permanent and temporary signs, 154.385
Purpose and intent, 154.380
Sign maintenance, 154.387
Signs requiring permit, 154.382
Violations, 154.388
Single Family Residential District (R-1)
Off-street parking and loading/unloading, 154.106
Permitted overlay districts, 154.103
Permitted residential unit types, 154.102
Purpose and intent, 154.100
R-1 property development standards, 154.104
Signage, 154.105
Uses, 154.101
Title, 154.001
Transitional provisions, 154.011
Two- to Four-Family Residential District (R-2)
Off-street parking and loading/unloading, 154.126
Permitted overlay districts, 154.123
Permitted residential unit types, 154.122
Purpose and intent, 154.120
R-2 property development standards, 154.124
Signage, 154.125
Uses, 154.121
Zoning affects every structure or use, 154.005
Zoning districts
Establishing of districts, 154.050
Official zoning map, 154.051
Zoning ordinance text and zoning map amendments
Zoning map amendment procedures, 154.417
Zoning ordinance and zoning map amendments, 154.415
Zoning ordinance text amendment procedures, 154.416
2006 S-7
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Kentucky Revised Statutes
References to Ordinances
1
2 Lebanon - Parallel References
REFERENCES TO KENTUCKY REVISED STATUTES
KRS Cite Code Section
6.050 32.48
6.955 - 6.975 33.04
Chapter 13B 93.06
15.520 37.03
Chapter 18A 113.03
18A.225(2) 113.03
41.240(4) 33.05
42.450 - 42.495 33.04
43.050 33.04
Chapter 45A 34.16
Chapter 56 34.16
Chapter 61 32.21
61.870 34.01
61.870 - 61.884 34.17
61.870 - 61.882 31.36
61.872(4) 34.06
61.872(5) 34.07
61.872(6) 34.08
61.874(1) - (3) 34.12
61.874(3) 34.13
61.874(4) 34.13
61.874(5) 34.14
61.874(6) 34.15
61.878 34.01, 34.16
61.878(1) 34.16
61.880 34.09, 34.16
61.884 34.11
62.060 31.01
64.060 37.05
65.007 36.26
65.120 Ch. 72
65.8840 92.04
65.8840(3) 92.04
65.8840(8) 92.04
65.8840(9) 92.04
65.8840(10) 92.04
66.660 91.06
82.082 151.01
2019 S-18 3
4 Lebanon - Parallel References
KRS Cite Code Section
Chapter 83A 31.20
83A.010(5) 10.02
83A.010(6) 10.02
83A.010(8) 10.02
83A.030(1) 30.02
83A.040 31.23
83A.040(1) 31.21
83A.040(2) 31.21
83A.040(2)(c) 31.21
83A.040(3) 31.21
83A.040(4) 32.01
83A.040(5) 32.02
83A.040(6) 31.21, 32.02
83A.040(7) 31.21, 32.02
83A.040(8) 31.21, 32.02
83A.040(9) 31.03
83A.045(2)(b) 31.20
83A.050 31.20
83A.060(1) 32.35
83A.060(2) 32.36
83A.060(3) 32.37
83A.060(4) 32.38
83A.060(5) 32.40
83A.060(6) 32.22
83A.060(7) 32.38
83A.060(8) 32.41, 32.42
83A.060(9) 32.43
83A.060(10) 32.44
83A.060(11) 32.45
83A.060(13) 32.46
83A.060(12) 32.46
83A.060(14) 32.47
83A.060(15) 32.48
83A.070 31.02
83A.075 31.02
83A.080 38.03
83A.080(1) 31.35
83A.080(2) 31.03, 31.35
83A.080(3) 31.20, 31.35
83A.080(4) 31.20
83A.085 31.36
2010 S-10
References to Kentucky Revised Statutes 5
KRS Cite Code Section
83A.130(1) 30.01
83A.130(2) 30.02
83A.130(3) 31.21
83A.130(4) 31.21
83A.130(5) 32.20
83A.130(6) 32.39
83A.130(7) 31.21, 31.23
83A.130(8) 31.21
83A.130(9) 31.21
83A.130(10) 31.21
83A.130(11) 31.23, 32.03, 32.21
83A.130(12) 32.03
83A.130(13) 32.03
83A.170 31.20
83A.175 32.02
91A.010 33.01
91A.010(8) 10.02
91A.020 33.02
91A.030 33.03
91A.040 33.04
91A.050 33.04
91A.060 33.05
91A.080 110.03
91A.080(2) 113.02
91A.080(3) 113.03
91A.080(8) 113.04, 113.05
91A.200 33.11
91A.210 33.10
91A.220 33.11
91A.230 33.12
91A.240 33.13
91A.250 33.14
91A.260 33.15
91A.270 33.16
91A.280 33.17
91A.290 33.18
91A.350 - 91A.390 36.27
91A.350(2) 36.25
91A.360 36.26
91A.360(5) 35.37
95.700 37.03
2010 S-10
6 Lebanon - Parallel References
KRS Cite Code Section
Chapter 100 154.020, 154.021, 154.035, 154.036,
154.050, 154.051, 154.317, 154.333,
154.334, 154.415 - 154.417, 154.430 -
154.432, 154.475, 154.999
100.133 - 100.182 154.035
100.201 154.002
100.201 - 100.347 154.999
100.209 154.417
100.212(2) 154.417
100.212(3) 154.417
100.213 154.417
100.217 154.035
100.217 - 100.271 154.036
100.253 154.036
100.271 154.035
100.3681 - 100.3684 154.999
100.610 - 100.630 153.02
100.720 - 100.780 153.02
100.730 153.98
100.760 153.98
100.760(1) 153.98
100.770 153.98
100.980(4) 153.99
100.982 154.021
100.990(5) 153.99
100.990(6) 153.99
100.991 154.999
Chapter 107 33.11
Chapters 116 - 121 31.20
118.105 38.02
118.115 38.02
118.325 38.02
118.760 38.02
131.010(6) 113.04
134.420 35.22
134.800 35.08
134.810 35.08
Chapter 136 35.20
136.120 110.03
139.200 93.03
Chapter 151 151.05
151.250 151.06
2012 S-12
References to Kentucky Revised Statutes 7
KRS Cite Code Section
Chapter 154 34.16
154.20-250 - 154.20-284 110.03
174.100 91.15
174.100(1) 91.16
174.100(2) 91.17
174.100(3) 91.17
174.100(4) 91.18
174.100(5) 91.19
174.100(6) 91.20
174.100(7) 91.20
178.290 91.06
186A.190 72.22
189.020 71.27
189.285 73.02
189.287 73.01
189.290 71.25
189.330(8) 71.02
189.338 70.15
189.450(5) 72.03
189.450(6) 72.03
189.580 71.15
189.725 72.08
189.930 71.26
189.990(1) 72.99
189.993(8) 71.99
Chapter 198B 150.03
198B.070 150.03
198B.990(1) 150.99
207.130 - 207.260 Ch. 36
218A.010 90.82
224.868 154.021
226.010 112.01
226.020 112.02
226.030 112.07
226.040 112.03
226.050 112.04
226.060 112.08
226.070 112.03
226.080 112.05
226.090 112.06
226.100 112.08
226.990(1) 112.99
2015 S-15
8 Lebanon - Parallel References
KRS Cite Code Section
226.990(3) 112.99
227.330(6) 93.03
227.550 92.04, 154.021, 154.346
227.570 154.346
227.700 93.01
227.700 - 227.750 93.06
227.702 93.01
227.704 93.01
227.706 93.01
227.708 93.01
227.710 93.02
227.715 93.03
227.720 93.04
227.730 93.05
227.750 93.06
227.990(1) 150.99
227.990(4) 93.99
Chapter 241 - 244 116.01
241.010 116.20
Chapter 242 116.01
242.1244 116.01
Chapter 243 110.03
243.030 116.04, 116.24
243.0305 116.01
Chapter 243.0305 - 243.355 116.03
243.040 116.04, 116.24
243.084 116.06
Chapter 244 116.37
244.085(6)(d) 116.22
244.087 116.22
244.090 116.22
244.290 116.06 244.480 116.06
278.020 154.021
Chapter 281 72.21
318.990 150.99
344.010 - 344.990 Ch. 36
Chapter 350 151.05
Chapter 351 154.250, 154.265
Chapter 352 154.250, 154.265
376.275(1) 72.21
376.275(2) 72.21
2017 S-16
References to Kentucky Revised Statutes 9
KRS Cite Code Section
376.275(3) 72.22
376.275(4) 72.22
381.805 et seq. 154.021, 154.291
411.500 - 411.570 Ch. 92
Chapter 424 32.43, 33.04, 33.06, 33.14, 33.15, 35.04,
154.333, 154.334, 154.416, 154.417,
154.431 - 154.433
424.220 33.04
431.015 154.475
446.010(1) 10.02
446.010(2) 10.02
446.010(8) 10.02
446.010(10) 10.02
446.010(11) 10.02
446.010(13) 10.02
446.010(14) 10.02
446.010(15) 10.02
446.010(16) 10.02
446.010(18) 10.02
446.010(19) 10.02
446.010(24) 10.02
446.010(26) 10.02
446.010(27) 10.02
446.010(28) 10.02
446.010(31) 10.02
446.010(33) 10.02
446.010(37) 10.02
446.010(39) 10.02
446.010(43) 10.02
446.010(46) 10.02
446.010(47) 10.02
446.010(49) 10.02
2017 S-16
10 Lebanon - Parallel References
KRS Cite Code Section
446.010(55) 10.02
446.020(1) 10.03
446.020(2) 10.03
446.030 10.04
446.050 10.05
446.060 10.06
446.080(1) 10.03
446.080(3) 10.03
446.080(4) 10.03
446.090 10.07
446.100 10.08
446.110 10.09
446.140 10.01
Ch. 507 118.03
Ch. 508 118.03
508.050 130.12
Ch. 525 118.03
Ch. 530 118.03
2015 S-15
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
420.1 8-3-48 111.09
1020.1 5-3-49 117.30, 117.99
430.1 10-4-49 117.01, 117.99
1020.2 3-9-51 130.06, 130.99
430.2 6-3-52 117.02, 117.99
1020.3 1-12-59 116.20 - 116.23, 116.25, 116.99
A-20.1 7-8-63 150.99
1020.4 6-20-69 130.04, 130.99
150.1 11-10-69 36.01 - 36.10
610.1 4-10-72 51.01
430.3 4-19-76 117.15, 117.99
1020.5 4-19-76 130.05 - 130.09, 130.99
120.1 6-12-78 30.02
310.1 6-12-78 37.20 - 37.23
320.1 6-12-78 37.01, 37.02
78-3 6-12-78 32.21
79-4 - -79 Ch. 74, Sched. III
79-11 9-18-79 37.05
80-3 6-9-80 Ch. 74, Sched. II
80-13 12-8-80 130.03, 130.99
80-16 1-12-81 37.03
81-1 2-9-81 37.03
81-3 2-9-81 115.01 - 115.06, 115.99
81-14 9-15-81 117.16
81-15 11-9-81 150.01, 150.02, 150.15, 150.25, 150.26
82-2 1-11-82 31.21
82-3 3- -82 71.05, 71.99, Ch. 74, Sched. I
82-12 7-13-82 T.S.O., Table II
82-18 1-10-83 37.06
83-5 6-29-83 35.01 - 35.07
83-6 6-29-83 33.06
84-1 1-16-84 91.45 - 91.49, 91.99
84-9 9-10-84 72.14
11
2014 S-14
12 Lebanon - Parallel References
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
84-12 10-24-84 113.01 - 113.06
85-4 6-24-85 110.01 - 110.06, 110.11 - 110.14
85-7 7-22-85 Ch. 74, Sched. I
85-9 9-12-85 T.S.O., Table III
85-12 10-14-85 T.S.O., Table III
86-1 1-16-86 T.S.O., Table I
86-2 2-14-86 T.S.O., Table III
86-5 7-17-86 T.S.O., Table IV
86-6 8-25-86 T.S.O., Table II
86-9 9-9-86 Ch. 74, Sched. I
87-2 2-9-87 31.20
87-3 6-8-87 T.S.O., Table IV
87-11 11-13-87 51.15 - 51.21
88-1 3-8-88 113.02, 113.03
88-2 4-1-88 T.S.O., Table II
88-4 5-9-88 T.S.O., Table II
88-7 7-11-88 31.02
88-8 8-8-88 31.35, 31.36
88-9 8-8-88 37.04
88-11 8-8-88 116.01 - 116.07, 116.99
88-12 9-12-88 T.S.O., Table I
89-1 1-30-89 31.20
89-3 2-27-89 T.S.O., Table I
89-8 6-19-89 97.01 - 97.07, 97.99
89-12 8-7-89 113.03
89-14 8-7-89 T.S.O., Table III
89-15 10-9-89 91.06
90-1 4-9-90 113.02, 113.03
90-3 5-7-90 T.S.O., Table I
90-4 4-9-90 T.S.O., Table III
90-5 4-9-90 150.40
90-12 8-13-90 T.S.O., Table II
90-13 - -90 T.S.O., Table IV
91-8 8-28-91 51.01
91-9 8-28-91 T.S.O., Table II
91-10 8-28-91 T.S.O., Table II
91-11 8-28-92 T.S.O., Table II
91-16 1-13-92 130.02, 130.99
91-17 1-13-92 72.03, 72.13, Ch. 75, Sched. I and II
92-2 3-9-92 96.01 - 96.13, 96.99
92-3 3-13-92 T.S.O., Table II
2008 S-9
References to Ordinances 13
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
92-4 5-11-92 114.01 - 114.03, 114.99
93-07 8-16-93 T.S.O., Table I
93-09 10-6-93 T.S.O., Table I
94-01 3-16-94 T.S.O., Table II
94-02 4-21-94 T.S.O., Table II
94-03 5-9-94 T.S.O., Table III
94-09 6-14-94 110.03
94-12 6-28-94 T.S.O., Table I
94-13 8-9-94 130.01, 130.99
94-15 11-8-94 T.S.O., Table II
94-16 12-19-94 38.01 - 38.06
95-06 11-13-95 T.S.O., Table I
96-01 2-19-96 T.S.O., Table I
96-02 2-28-96 T.S.O., Table II
96-03 3-11-96 50.001, 50.002, 50.010 - 50.015, 50.020 -
50.023, 50.030, 50.031, 50.040 - 50.044,
50.050 - 50.058, 50.065 - 50.081, 50.090,
50.091, 50.100 - 50.103, 50.110 - 50.114,
50.999
96-04 4-8-96 39.02
96-05 5-13-96 39.02
96-07 6-10-96 50.042, 50.051
96-10 7-8-96 T.S.O., Table I
96-11 8-12-96 35.20 - 35.24
96-12 9-9-96 72.14, 72.99
— 9-9-96 95.01
96-14 - -96 T.S.O., Table II
96-15 11-11-96 T.S.O., Table II
96-16 1-13-96 51.01
2010 S-10
14 Lebanon - Parallel References
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
— 1-21-97 153.01 - 153.04, 153.10 - 153.16, 153.20,
153.21, 153.30 - 153.35, 153.40 - 153.42,
153.50 - 153.52, 153.98, 153.99
97-01 3-10-97 Adopting Ordinance
97-05 11-10-97 Ch. 90
97-06 11-10-97 116.03, 116.05
97-07 11-6-97 T.S.O., Table II
98-01 3-9-98 Adopting Ordinance
98-02 4-1-98 T.S.O., Table V
98-05 8-10-98 Ch. 118
98-06 10-12-98 116.04
99-01 2-8-99 Adopting Ordinance
99-02 3-8-99 T.S.O. V
99-03 4-12-99 T.S.O. V
99-04 4-12-99 T.S.O. V
99-08 9-13-99 T.S.O. I
00-04 1-8-01 T.S.O. I
20-01 3-13-00 130.04
01-02 5-7-01 T.S.O. I
01-03 7-9-01 50.051
01-04 7-9-01 T.S.O. V
01-07 6-28-01 92.20 - 92.22, 92.99
01-08 9-10-01 T.S.O. III
02-04 12-9-02 130.10, 130.99
02-05 12-9-02 T.S.O. V
03-02 2-10-03 31.37
03-03 3-10-03 35.30 - 35.37, 35.99, 36.25 - 36.28
03-04 6-9-03 130.99
03-05 5-12-03 35.31 - 35.34
03-06 6-9-03 T.S.O. I
03-11 12-8-03 31.23
04-01 2-9-04 36.01 - 36.10
04-02 5-10-04 111.10, 111.99
04-03 5-10-04 T.S.O. I
05-02 4-15-05 T.S.O. I
05-03 4-15-05 T.S.O. IV
05-06 8-8-05 150.50 - 150.54
05-07 8-8-05 T.S.O. I
05-09 12-12-05 Ch. 75, Sched. I
2015 S-15
References to Ordinances 15
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
05-10 11-14-05 T.S.O. III
05-11 12-12-05 154.001 - 154.011, 154.020, 154.021,
154.035 - 154.039, 154.050, 154.051,
154.065 - 154.068, 154.080 - 154.085,
154.100 - 154.106, 154.120 - 154.126,
154.140 - 154.146, 154.160 - 154.162,
154.175 - 154.180, 154.190 - 154.196,
154.210 - 154.216, 154.230 - 154.235,
154.245 - 154.250, 154.260 - 154.265,
154.275 - 154.279, 154.290 - 154.293,
154.305 - 154.317, 154.330 - 154.335,
154.345 - 154.348, 154.360 - 154.368,
154.380 - 154.390, 154.400 - 154.402,
154.415 - 154.417, 154.430 - 154.433,
154.445 - 154.450, 154.460, 154.461,
154.475, 154.999, Ch. 154, Appendix A
05-13 12-27-05 T.S.O. I
05-14 12-27-05 T.S.O. III
06-01 3-2-06 T.S.O. I
06-04 7-12-06 130.11, 130.99
06-05 7-12-06 91.65 - 91.68, 91.99
06-06 7-12-06 T.S.O. IV
06-07 7-12-06 154.415 - 154.417
06-08 11-16-06 Adopting Ordinance
06-09 11-16-06 116.06
07-01 2-15-07 T.S.O. V
07-03 2-15-07 116.06
07-04 2-15-07 51.01
07-05 4-9-07 Ch. 75, Sched. I
07-08 5-7-07 T.S.O. III
07-09 6-18-07 91.75, 91.99
07-10 6-18-07 116.35 - 116.39, Ch. 116, Appendices A
and B
07-13 9-10-07 116.38, Ch. 116, Appendix B
07-15 10-8-07 Ch. 75, Sch. III
07-16 11-12-07 Adopting Ordinance
07-17 11-19-07 110.01 - 110.14
08-01 9-8-08 90.01, 90.10 - 90.13, 90.25 - 90.30, 90.40 -
90.50, 90.60 - 90.62, 90.70 - 90.72, 90.80,
90.81
2008 S-9
16 Lebanon - Parallel References
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
08-05 6-13-08 T.S.O., Tables I and V
08-06 6-13-08 T.S.O., Tables I and V
08-07 6-13-08 T.S.O., Tables I and V
— 9-8-08 154.380 - 154.390
08-14 12-8-08 Adopting Ordinance
08-15 12-22-08 T.S.O., Table I
08-16 12-22-08 T.S.O., Table I
08-17 12-22-08 T.S.O., Table I
08-18 12-22-08 116.06
09-01 1-2-09 116.04
09-02 3-9-09 Ch. 75, Sch. II
09-03 7-13-09 72.02
09-06 7-15-09 116.06
09-08 10-16-09 Ch. 75, Sch. II
09-09 11-9-09 151.01 - 151.12, 151.25 - 151.28, 151.35 -
151.41, 151.99
09-11 12-7-09 155.01 - 155.16
2010-01 2-8-10 T.S.O., Table I
2010-02 2-22-10 T.S.O., Table V
2010-04 5-27-10 Adopting Ordinance
2010-08 8-9-10 T.S.O., Tables I and V
2010-09 9-13-10 Ch. 75, Sch. III
2010-10 9-13-10 Ch. 75, Sch. III
2010-12 1-10-11 155.14
2011-03 5-9-11 T.S.O., Tables I and V
2011-05 5-9-11 Adopting Ordinance
2011-06 8-8-11 Ch. 75, Sch. I
2011-10 10-10-11 Ch. 75, Sch. I
2011-11 1-9-12 T.S.O., Tables I and V
2011-12 1-9-12 T.S.O., Tables I and V
2011-13 1-9-12 T.S.O., Tables I and V
2012-01 3-12-12 50.002, 50.014, 50.040, 50.051, 50.066 -
50.068, 50.072, 50.073, 50.078, 50.079,
50.081, 50.115
2012-02 5-7-12 Adopting Ordinance
2012-03 6-25-12 T.S.O., Table I
2012-04 6-25-12 T.S.O., Table I
2012-05 6-25-12 T.S.O., Table I
2013-01 2-11-13 116.06
2013 S-13
References to Ordinances 17
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
2013-02 4-17-13 51.01
2013-03 6-10-13 T.S.O. V
2013-08 12-9-13 130.04
2013-09 12-12-13 116.01 - 116.07, 116.20 - 116.26, 116.35 -
116.39, 116.99
2014-01 3-20-14 116.04
2014-02 3-10-14 T.S.O. III
2014-03 7-7-14 Adopting Ordinance
2014-06 7-11-14 Ch. 75, Sch. II
2014-07 7-14-14 T.S.O. V
2014-08 9-8-14 155.14
2014-09 9-8-14 130.12
2014-12 9-10-14 90.82
2014-13 12-8-14 T.S.O. V
2014-14 12-8-14 Ch. 75, Sch. II
2015-02 6-8-15 T.S.O. I
2015-03 6-8-15 Ch. 75, Sch. III
2015-07 8-10-15 T.S.O. V
2015-09 11-9-15 Ch. 75, Sch. III
2015-10 1-11-16 Adopting Ordinance
2015-11 1-11-16 50.051
2016-05 8-8-16 T.S.O. V
2016-07 11-7-16 Ch. 75, Sch. III
2016-08 11-9-16 T.S.O. IV
2016-09 1-9-17 T.S.O. V
2016-10 -- T.S.O. III
2017-01 3-13-17 Adopting Ordinance
2017-02 4-28-17 116.04
2017-03 6-20-17 117.15, 117.16
2017-06 9-11-17 51.01
2017-07 8-7-17 T.S.O. I
2017-09 10-9-17 50.013, 50.014, 50.045
2017-11 12-11-17 T.S.O. III
2018-01 3-21-18 T.S.O. III
2018-02 3-12-18 T.S.O. I
2018-03 4-9-18 Adopting Ordinance
2018-05 5-7-18 T.S.O. V
2018-06 6-11-18 Ch. 75, Sch. I
2019 S-18
18 Lebanon - Parallel References
P = Permitted Use
C = Conditional Use
HO = Home Occupation
A = Accessory use
*= Not permitted
Use by use category
A
R-1
R-2
R-3
MHP
B-1
B-2
B-3
OP
I-
1
I-
2
P
PUD
RCD
Agriculture, forestry and
fishing: agricultural
production and livestock
and animal specialities
Animal and livestock
breeding, raising,
training, and grazing
P
Apiary
P
Cattle shed
P
Chicken/poultry farm
P
Fur farm
P
Stable
P
C
C
Agriculture, forestry and
fishing: agricultural
services
Agricultural contractors
C
C
Animal boarding
P
P
P
Crop dusting
P
Dog pound and humane
society
P
Use by use category
A
R-1
R-2
R-3
MHP
B-1
B-2
B-3
OP
I-
1
I-
2
P
PUD
RCD
Kennel, commercial
P
C
P
Landscaping display,
sales, nurseries, and
greenhouses
P
P
P
Lawn and garden services
P
P
P
Livery stable
P
C
C
Livestock sales and
shipping
P
C
Livestock supplies
P
P
P
Veterinarian office and
hospital
P
C
P
P
Construction: building
contraction general
contractors and operative
builders
Building contractor
equipment and material
storage
P
P
C
C
Building contractor
P
P
P
P
offices
Roofing contractor office
P
P
P
P
Swimming pool
installation
P
P
Construction:
construction special
trades contractors
Carpentry equipment
storage
P
C
Sheet metal shop
P
P
Construction: heavy
construction, other than
construction contractors
Use by use category
A
R-1
R-2
R-3
MHP
B-1
B-2
B-3
OP
I-
1
I-
2
P
PUD
RCD
Heavy construction
contractors, except
building
C
P
Paving contractor
equipment and storage
C
P
Road building equipment
storage yard
C
P
Construction: special
trade contractors
Drilling company
P
P
Septic tank contractor
P
Finance, insurance and
real estate: depository
institutions
Banks and financial
institutions
P
P
P
P
P
Savings and loan
associations
P
P
P
P
Finance, insurance and
real estate: insurance
agents, brokers and
service
Appraisers services
P
P
P
P
Auctioneers and realtors
services and office
P
P
P
P
P
Insurance office
P
P
P
P
P
Finance, insurance and
real estate:
non-depository credit
institutions
Loan company
P
P
P
P
Use by use category
A
R-1
R-2
R-3
MHP
B-1
B-2
B-3
OP
I-
1
I-
2
P
PUD
RCD
Finance, insurance and
real estate: real estate
Adjusters services and
office
P
P
P
P
Auctioneers and realtors
services and office
P P P P
Cap and hat manufacturing
P
P
Clothing manufacturing
P
P
Garment manufacturing
P
P
Hosiery manufacturing
P
P
Knit goods manufacturing
P
P
Shirt factory
P
P
Woven goods manufacturing
P
P
Manufacturing: chemicals
and allied products,
Acetylene manufacturing
C
Ammonia manufacturing and
storage
C
Bleaching compound
manufacturing
C
Bottled gas manufacturing
C
Cellulose manufacturing
P
Charcoal manufacturing
P
Cosmetic manufacturing
P
P
Use by use category
A
R-1
R-2
R-3
MHP
B-1
B-2
B-3
OP
I-
1
I-
2
P
PUD
RCD
Explosives manufacturing
*
Fertilizer manufacturing
C
C
Gunpowder manufacturing
C
Hazardous chemical
manufacturing *
Insecticides
manufacturing
C
Lead oxide manufacturing
*
Lime manufacturing and
storage
P
P
Paint manufacturing
C
Soap and detergent
manufacturing
C
C
Manufacturing: electronic
and other electrical
equipment and components
Battery manufacturing *
Business machines
manufacturing, except
computer equipment
P
P
Business machine
manufacturing
P
P
Meter manufacturing
P
P
Office equipment
P
P
manufacturing, except
computers
Use by use category
A
R-1
R-2
R-3
MHP
B-1
B-2
B-3
OP
I-
1
I-
2
P
PUD
RCD
Manufacturing: fabricated
metal products, except
machinery and
transportation equipment
Boiler manufacturing
P
Bolts and nuts
manufacturing
P
P
Firearms manufacturing
P
P
Furnace manufacturing
P
P
HVAC equipment
manufacturing
C
C
Septic tank construction
P
P
Tower and antenna
manufacturing
P
P
Manufacturing: food and
kindred products
Bakery, industrial
C
P
P
Bakery, retail
P
P
P
Beer distribution
manufacturing
P
P
Beverage manufacturing
P
P
Butter and cheese
manufacturing
P
P
Candy manufacturing
P
P
P
P
Use by use category
A
R-1
R-2
R-3
MHP
B-1
B-2
B-3
OP
I-
1
I-
2
P
PUD
RCD
Cider and vinegar
manufacturing
P
P
Dairy and creamery
P
P
Distillery
C
P
Flour mill
P
Food processor
P
P
Gelatin manufacturing
P
P
Grease and tallow
manufacturing
C
Grist mill
P
P
Hide and tallow
manufacturing
C
Horse radish
manufacturing
P
P
Ice cream manufacturing
P
P
Ice plant
P
P
Lindseed oil
manufacturing
P
Meat packing plants
C
Milk bottling plant
P
P
Molasses manufacturing
P
Noodle manufacturing
P
P
Sausage manufacturing
P
Use by use category
A
R-1
R-2
R-3
MHP
B-1
B-2
B-3
OP
I-
1
I-
2
P
PUD
RCD
Slaughterhouse
C
C
Slaughtering plants
C
Soft drink bottling
P
P
Manufacturing: furniture
and fixtures
Bathroom accessories
manufacturing
P
P
Bedding/mattress
manufacturing
P
P
Cabinetry manufacturing
C
C
P
P
Door and window screen
manufacturing
P
P
Furniture manufacturing
P
P
Mattress manufacturing
P
P
Manufacturing; industrial
and commercial machinery
and computer equipment
Advertising display
office and agency
P
P
P
P
Agricultural implements
manufacturing
P
P
Computer equipment
manufacturing
P
P
Machine shop and tool and
die
C
P
Use by use category
A
R-1
R-2
R-3
MHP
B-1
B-2
B-3
OP
I-
1
I-
2
P
PUD
RCD
Tool and die
C
P
Manufacturing leather and
leather products
Leather fabrication
P
P
Tannery
C
Manufacturing: lumber and
wood products, except
furniture
Creosote manufacturing *
Deck manufacturing
P
P
Door (wood) manufacturing
P
P
Lumber processing P P
Manufactured home
manufacturing
P
Millwork and planing
P
Mobile home manufacturing
P
Modular home
manufacturing
P
Sash and trim (wood)
manufacturing
P
P
Sawmill
P
P
Wood barrel manufacturing
P
P
Woodworking
C
C
P
P
Use by use category
A
R-1
R-2
R-3
MHP
B-1
B-2
B-3
OP
I-
1
I-
2
P
PUD
RCD
Manufacturing: measuring,
analyzing, and
controlling instruments;
photographic, medical,
and optical goods;
watches and clocks
Artificial limb
manufacturing
P
P
Medical appliance
manufacturing
P
P
Optical display and sales
P
P
P
P
Manufacturing:
miscellaneous
manufacturing industries
Brush manufacturing and
sales
P
P
Acoustical material
manufacturing
P
Acoustical material
storage
P
P
P
Advertising display
manufacturing
P
P
Athletic equipment
manufacturing
P
Broom manufacturing
P
P
Candle manufacturing
P
P
Casket manufacturing
P
Chalk manufacturing
P
P
Clock factory
P
P
Use by use category
A
R-1
R-2
R-3
MHP
B-1
B-2
B-3
OP
I-
1
I-
2
P
PUD
RCD
Luggage manufacturing
P
P
Organ and piano
manufacturing
P
P
Pencil factory
P
P
Sign and display
manufacturing
P
P
Sign painting shop
C
P
P
Toys and games
manufacturing
P
P
Manufacturing: paper and
allied products
Box assembly
P
P
Paper bag manufacturing *
Paper products
manufacturing *
Manufacturing: petroleum
refining and related
industries
Asphalt plants and
products
P
P
Fuel distribution
station, bulk plant
C
C
P
Kerosene manufacturing
C
Oil refinery
C
Oil storage
P
P
Petroleum refining and
storage
C
IIUse
by use category A R-1 R-2 R-3 MHP B-1 B-2 B-3 OP 1 2 P PUD RCD
Manufacturing: primary
metal industries
Blast furnaces
C
Forge plants
C
C
Foundry product
manufacturing
P
P
Iron and steel
fabrication
P
Metal casting and foundry
P
Manufacturing: printing,
publishing, and allied
industries
Lithography
P
P
P
P
P
Newspaper printing and
publishing
P
P
P
Manufacturing: rubber and
miscellaneous plastics
products
Hose manufacturing
P
P
Plastic molding
manufacturing
P
P
Rubber products
manufacturing
P
P
Manufacturing: stone,
clay, glass and concrete
products
Bottle manufacturing
P
P
Brick kilns
P
P
Use by use category
A
R-1
R-2
R-3
MHP
B-1
B-2
B-3
OP
I-
1
I-
2
P
PUD
RCD
Concrete manufacturing
P
P
Glass manufacturing
P
P
Graphite manufacturing
P
P
Gypsum board
manufacturing
P
P
Marble processing
P
P
Monument manufacturing
P
Mortar preparation
P
P
Sandpaper manufacturing
P
P
Shingle manufacturing
P
P
Stone processing
C
C
C
Manufacturing: textile
mill products
Burlap bag manufacturing
P
Burlap processing
P
Rope manufacturing
P
P
Textile mill P P
Wool processing
P
P
Manufacturing tobacco
products
Cigarette manufacturing
P
P
Use by use category
A
R-1
R-2
R-3
MHP
B-1
B-2
B-3
OP
I-
1
I-
2
P
PUD
RCD
Snuff manufacturing
P
P
Tobacco curing
P
P
Tobacco manufacturing
P
P
Tobacco warehouse and
sales
P
Manufacturing:
transportation equipment
Automobile assembly
P
P
Automobile parts
manufacturing
P
P
Ball bearings
manufacturing
P
P
Boat manufacturing
P
Brake lining
manufacturing *
Motor test, internal
C
C
combustion
Tire manufacturing *
Mining: coal mining
Rock crushing and rock
quarry
C
P
Sand and gravel
extraction
C
P
Oil and gas extraction
C
C
Private households
Condominiums
P
P
C
C
C
P
P
Single-family residential
P
P
P
P
P
P
Use by use category
A
R-1
R-2
R-3
MHP
B-1
B-2
B-3
OP
I-
1
I-
2
P
PUD
RCD
Two-family residential
P
P
C
C
C
P
Three-family residential
P
P
C
C
C
P
Four-family residential
P
P
C
C
C
P
Multi-family (5 units or
more)
P
C
P
Parish house
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Private garage
(accessory)
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
Private swimming pool
(accessory)
A
A
A
A
A
A
Retail trade: automotive
dealers and gasoline
service stations
Service station
P
P
Retail trade: apparel and
accessory stores
Cap and hat sales
P
P
P
P
Children and infant
clothing
P
P
P
P
Clothing stores
P
P
P
P
Dress shop sales
P
P
P
P
Fur sales
P
P
P
P
Hosiery sales
P
P
P
P
Military surplus store
C
P
P
Shoe store
P
P
P
P
Use by use category
A
R-1
R-2
R-3
MHP
B-1
B-2
B-3
OP
I-
1
I-
2
P
PUD
RCD
Uniform rental
P
P
P
Retail trade: automotive
dealers and gasoline
service stations
Automobile parts dealers,
retail
P
P
Automobile sales lot
C
P
P
Convenience stores with
gasoline
P P
Filling stations
P
P
P
New car sales
P
P
Used car sales
P
P
Retail trade: building
materials, hardware,
garden supply, and mobile
home dealers
Garden seed retail
P
P
P
Glass sales and repair
P
P
P
Hardware store
P
P
P
P
Manufactured home sales,
display and storage
C
C
Paint and varnish display
and sales
P
P
P
Paint store
P
P
P
P
Use by use category
A
R-1
R-2
R-3
MHP
B-1
B-2
B-3
OP
I-
1
I-
2
P
PUD
RCD
Plumbing and heating
store
P
P
Roofing material storage
and sales
P
Retail trade: eating and
drinking places
Barbecue stand/restaurant
P
P
P
Bars and lounges
P
P
P
Café and restaurant
P
P
P
P
Catering (food
preparation)
P
P
P
Ice cream shop
P
P
P
P
Night club and lounge
P
P
P
Restaurant
P
P
P
P
Tavern, bar, saloon, and
lounge
P
P
P
Retail trade: food stores
Butcher and meat shop
P
P
P
P
Convenience stores
without gasoline
P
P
P
P
Drive-in market
P
P
Food and agricultural
products roadside stand
C
P
P
Food and drink roadside
stand
C
P
P
Use by use category
A
R-1
R-2
R-3
MHP
B-1
B-2
B-3
OP
I-
1
I-
2
P
PUD
RCD
Fruit store
P
P
P
P
Grocery, retail P P P P
Health food products and
sales
P
P
P
P
Meat and fish store
P
P
P
Retail trade: general
merchandise stores
Department store
P
P
P
Variety store, retail
P
P
P
P
Retail trade: home
furniture, furnishings
and equipment stores
Appliance display and
sales
P
P
P
Bathroom acessories
display and sales
P
P
P
Carpet and rugs retail
sales
P
P
P
Ceramic shop and sales
P
P
P
Deck sales
P
P
Furniture display and
sales
P
P
P
Home furnishings
P
P
P
Interior design display
and storage
P
P
P
Use by use category
A
R-1
R-2
R-3
MHP
B-1
B-2
B-3
OP
I-
1
I-
2
P
PUD
RCD
Lawn mowers sales and
service
P
P
Linen display and sales
P
P
P
Outdoor furniture sales
P
P
P
Washing machine sales and
display
P
P
P
Retail trade:
miscellaneous
retail stores
Adult bookstore
C
Adult novelty store
C
Adult video store
C
Auction house
C
P
P
Antiques display and
sales
P
P
P
Bicycle sales and service
P
P
P
Bookstore and bookseller
P
P
P
Bottled gas distribution
and sales
P
P
Camera shop
P
P
P
Candy store
P
P
P
Cigar and cigarette store P P P
Cigarette vending sales
and service
P
P
P
Coin dealer
P
P
P
Use by use category
A
R-1
R-2
R-3
MHP
B-1
B-2
B-3
OP
I-
1
I-
2
P
PUD
RCD
Computer equipment
display and sales
P
P
P
Costume rental
P
P
P
Dress pattern shop
P
P
P
P
Drugstores (with
drive-through)
P
P
P
Drugstores (without
drive-through)
P
P
P
P
Florist
P
P
P
Gift shop
P
P
P
Gun sales
P
P
P
Harness and saddle shop
P
P
P
Herb production and sales
P
P
P
Imported goods sales
P
P
P
Jewelry store
P
P
P
Leather display and sales
P
P
P
Liquor store
P
P
P
Loan and pawn shop
C
P
P
Magazine sales and
newstand
P
P
P
Monument sales and
display
P
P
P
Musical instrument sales
and repair
P
P
P
Use by use category
A
R-1
R-2
R-3
MHP
B-1
B-2
B-3
OP
I-
1
I-
2
P
PUD
RCD
Newspaper dealers
P
P
P
Newspaper stands
P
P
P
Notions display and sales
HO
HO
HO
HO
P
P
P
Novelties display and
sales
P
P
P
Office equipment display
and sales
P
P
P
Orthopedic display and
sales
P
P
P
C
Package liquor store
(with drive-through)
P
P
P
Pawn shop
P
P
P
Pet shops
P
P
P
Photographic shops
P
P
P
Retail store and shop
P
P
P
Sewing machine sales and
repair
P
P
P
Sound system retail and
service
P
P
P
Souvenirs roadside stand
P
P
P
Specialities shop
C
P
P
Sporting goods store
P
P
P
Stamp dealer shops
P
P
P
Taxidermist
P
P
P
Use by use category
A
R-1
R-2
R-3
MHP
B-1
B-2
B-3
OP
I-
1
I-
2
P
PUD
RCD
Used bookstore
P
P
P
Vacuum cleaner sales and
services
P
P
P
Services: amusement and
recreation services
Adult cabaret
C
Amusement park
C
Arcade
P
P
P
Athletic fields, private
and public
C
C
C
C
P
P
C
P
P
P
Auditorium
P
P
P
P
Billiard parlors and pool
P
P
P
halls
Bowling alley
P
P
P
Carnival *
Circus *
Country club
C
P
P
P
P
P
Dance hall
P
P
P
Dancing school
P
P
P
Golf course, private
C
P
P
P
Golf course, public
C
P
P
P
Golf driving range
C
P
C
C
Gymnasium
P
P
P
C
Use by use category
A
R-1
R-2
R-3
MHP
B-1
B-2
B-3
OP
I-
1
I-
2
P
PUD
RCD
Health and fitness center
P
P
P
P
Health spa
P
P
P
Horse racing track *
Ice skating rink
P
P
P
Miniature golf
C
P
P
P
Parks and playgrounds
P
C
C
C
C
C
C
P
P
P
Race track *
Riding school and academy
P
P
Rifle, pistol and skeet
range
C P
Roller skating rink
P
P
P
Shooting gallery
P
Shooting range
C
P
Skating rink
P
P
P
Sporting arenas
C
C
C
Tennis court, private
A
A
A
A
P
P
P
P
P
P
Tennis court, public
C
C
C
P
P
P
P
P
P
YMCA/YWCA
P
P
P
Services: automotive
repair, services, and
parking
Automobile paint and body
shop
C
P
P
Use by use category
A
R-1
R-2
R-3
MHP
B-1
B-2
B-3
OP
I-
1
I-
2
P
PUD
RCD
Automobile repair
C
P
P
Automobile wash
P
P
Diesel engine service
P
C
Motorcycle repair and
sales
P
P
Parking lots, commercial
P
P
P
Parking lots, public P P P P
Public parking garage
P
P
P
Tire recapping
P
P
Tire sales and repair
P
P
P
Wrecker services and
yards
P
Services; business
services
Billboard and outdoor
advertising service
P
P
P
Blueprinting
P
P
P
Book publisher
P
P
P
P
Business machines sales
and service
P
P
P
Collection agency
P
P
P
Newspaper offices
P
P
P
Newspaper service
P
P
P
Oxygen equipment rental
and sales
P
P
P
Use by use category
A
R-1
R-2
R-3
MHP
B-1
B-2
B-3
OP
I-
1
I-
2
P
PUD
RCD
Printing and lithographic
store
P
P
P
P
P
Termite control office P P P
Vending machine
distribution and repair
P
P
P
Window glass installation
P
P
P
Services: educational
services
Art school (greater than
15 students
simultaneously)
P
P
P
P
Art school (less than 15
students simultaneously)
HO
HO
HO
HO
P
P
P
P
P
P
Barber school
P
P
P
P
Barber shop
HO
HO
HO
HO
P
P
P
P
Beauty school
P
P
P
P
Beauty shop
HO
HO
HO
HO
P
P
P
P
Business college
P
P
P
Business school
P
P
P
P
College or university
P
P
P
Dancing school (greater
than 15 students
simultaneously)
HO
HO
HO
HO
P
P
P
P
Dancing school (less than
15 students
simultaneously)
HO
HO
HO
HO
P
P
P
P
Health school P P P P
Industrial school
P
C
P
Use by use category
A
R-1
R-2
R-3
MHP
B-1
B-2
B-3
OP
I-
1
I-
2
P
PUD
RCD
Kindergarten
P
P
P
P
Library, public
P
P
P
C
P
P
P
P
P
P
Modeling school
P
P
P
P
Music instruction
(greater than 15 students
simultaneously)
HO
HO
HO
HO
P
P
P
P
Music instruction (less
than 15 students
simultaneously)
HO
HO
HO
HO
P
P
P
P
Nursery school
C
C
C
C
P
P
P
P
School, private
C
C
C
C
P
P
P
P
P
P
School, public
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Seminary and bible
institute
C
P
P
P
Trade school
P
P
Vocational school
P
P
Vocal school (greater
than 15 students
simultaneously)
P
P
P
P
Vocal school (less than
HO
HO
HO
P
P
P
P
15 students
simultaneously)
Services: engineering,
accounting, research,
management, and related
services
Accounting services and
office
HO
HO
HO
P
P
P
P
P
Architectural office
HO
HO
HO
P
P
P
P
P
Use by use category
A
R-1
R-2
R-3
MHP
B-1
B-2
B-3
OP
I-
1
I-
2
P
PUD
RCD
Interior design office
HO
HO
HO
P
P
P
P
P
Land surveying office
HO
HO
HO
P
P
P
P
P
Landscape architectural
offices
HO
HO
HO
P
P
P
P
P
Research and experimental
laboratory
P
C
Services: health services
Blood bank
C
P
C
P
Chiropodist
P
P
P
Chiropractor
C
P
P
P
Disabled and development
disabled group home
C
C
C
C
P
Dentist office
HO
HO
HO
HO
P
P
C
P
P
P
Doctor's office
HO
HO
HO
HO
P
P
C
P
P
P
Hospital, private
C
C
C
C
C
P
P
P
Hospital, public
C
C
C
C
C
C
P
P
P
Infirmary, private
C
P
P
P
Medical clinic
P
P
P
P
P
Medical offices
P
P
P
P
P
Mental hospital
P
P
P
P
P
Nursing home
C
C
C
P
P
Sanatorium
P
P
P
P
P
Use by use category
A
R-1
R-2
R-3
MHP
B-1
B-2
B-3
OP
I-
1
I-
2
P
PUD
RCD
Wheelchair rental
P
P
P
P
Services: hotels, rooming
houses, camps, and other
lodging places
Bed and breakfast
C
C
C
C
P
P
P
Boarding house
C
C
C
P
Campground
P
Hotel and motel
P
P
P
Manufactured home park
P
Mobile home park
P
Services: legal services
Attorney and lawyer
office
HO
HO
HO
HO
P
P
P
P
Services: membership
organizations
Association, clubs, and
lodge
P
P
P
Christian science reading
and practitioner
C
C
C
C
C
C
Christian science rooms
C
C
C
C
C
C
Church
P
P
P
P
C
C
C
C
P
P
Club, association, and
lodge
C
C
C
C
P
P
P
Mission, religion
C
C
C
C
P
P
Use by use category
A
R-1
R-2
R-3
MHP
B-1
B-2
B-3
OP
I-
1
I-
2
P
PUD
RCD
Services: miscellaneous
repair services
Agricultural implements
repair and service
C
P
P
P
Furnace cleaning and
storage
P
C
Furniture refinishing
P
C
Gunsmith
P
P
P
Harness repair
P
P
P
Hvac equipment
installation and repairs
C
P
P
Key shop
P
P
P
Leather repair
P
P
P
Locksmith shop
P
P
P
Machine shop equipment
repair
C
C
P
Septic tank service and
cleaning equipment
P
Upholstery
P
P
P
Vacuum cleaner service
P
P
P
Watch repair
P
P
P
Welding shop
C
P
P
P
Services: motion pictures
Use by use category
A
R-1
R-2
R-3
MHP
B-1
B-2
B-3
OP
I-
1
I-
2
P
PUD
RCD
Adult indoor and outdoor
motion picture theater
C
Adult mini motion picture
theater
C
Cinema and indoor motion
picture theater
P
P
P
Outdoor theater or
drive-in
C
P
Services: museums, art
galleries, and botanical
and zoological gardens
Art gallery, commercial
sales
P
P
P
Art museum, private
P
P
P
P
Art studio
HO
HO
HO
HO
P
P
P
Botanical garden
P
P
Glass blowing studio
P
P
P
Museum
P
P
P
P
Zoo
C
P
Services: personal
services
Adult bathhouse
C
Adult body painting
studio
C
Adult massage parlor
C
Adult modeling studio
C
Use by use category
A
R-1
R-2
R-3
MHP
B-1
B-2
B-3
OP
I-
1
I-
2
P
PUD
RCD
Barber shop
P
P
P
Carpet and rugs cleaning
P
P
Cemetery
P
Diaper supply service
P
P
P
Dry cleaners
P
P
P
C
P
Full-service laundry
P
P
P
Funeral home and parlor
P
P
P
Hem stitching
HO
HO
HO
HO
P
P
P
Massage therapy
P
P
P
P
Mausoleums
C
Millinery and dress
making
HO
HO
HO
HO
P
P
P
Mortuary
P
P
Palmistry
HO
HO
HO
HO
P
P
Photographic studios,
portrait
HO
HO
HO
HO
P
P
P
P
Rug cleaners
P
P
Self-service laundry
P
P
P
P
Shoe repair
P
P
P
P
Tailor shop
HO
HO
HO
HO
P
P
P
Tattoo and body piercing
parlor
C
P
Tax return preparation
HO
HO
HO
HO
P
P
P
P
Use by use category
A
R-1
R-2
R-3
MHP
B-1
B-2
B-3
OP
I-
1
I-
2
P
PUD
RCD
Undertaker
P
P
P
Services: social services
Assisted living
facilities
C
C
C
P
Child and day care center
(less than 15 children
simultaneously)
HO
HO
HO
HO
P
P
Child and day care center
(greater than 15 children
simultaneously)
C
C
C
C
C
P
P
C
C
Children's group home
C
C
Community center
C
C
C
C
C
P
P
Group home
C
C
Halfway house
C
C
Salvation army and
goodwill
P
P
P
Transportation,
communication, electric,
gas and sanitary service:
air transportation
Heliport
P
P
C
C
P
Transportation,
communication, electric,
gas and sanitary service:
communications
Broadcasting station
P
P
P
Use by use category
A
R-1
R-2
R-3
MHP
B-1
B-2
B-3
OP
I-
1
I-
2
P
PUD
RCD
Cellular
telecommunication
tower
C
C
C
P
P
Radio tower and
antenna
C
C
C
P
P
Telecommunications
tower
C
C
C
P
P
Tower and antenna
display and service
P
P
Transportation,
communication,
electric, gas and
sanitary services:
electric, gas, and
sanitary services
Animal incineration
C
Ash dumps
C
Automobile salvage
P
P
Electric power
generation and
C
C
substation plant
Garbage incineration *
Junkyard *
Sanitary landfill and
dump *
Sewage disposal plants
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
Utility offices
P
P
P
P
Utility substation
P
P
Use by use category
A
R-1
R-2
R-3
MHP
B-1
B-2
B-3
OP
I-
1
I-
2
P
PUD
RCD
Transportation,
communication,
electric, gas and
sanitary service:
local/ suburban
transit and interurban
highway passenger
transportation
Ambulance service
C
P
P
Public transportation
terminal
C
P
P
P
Transportation,
communication,
electric, gas and
sanitary service:
motor freight
transportation and
warehousing
House movers office
P
P
C
Imported goods
warehousing
P
P
Refrigerator and food
locker storage
P
Cold storage
P
P
Department store,
warehousing
P
C
Freight depot
C
P
P
Fur warehouse
P
C
Gas bulk storage
C
C
P
Grocery, warehouse
P
C
Use by use category
AP
R-1
R-2
R-3
MHP
B-1
B-2
B-3
OP
I-
1
I-
2
P
PUD
RCD
Moving garage
P
P
Moving warehouse
P
P
Self-storage
warehousing
C
P
P
P
C
Storage and
warehousing
P
P
P
Stockyard *
Transportation,
communications,
electric, gas and
sanitary services:
transportation
services
Bus depot
P
P
Bus shop, garage and
repair
P
C
Taxi service
P
P
P
Trucking company
C
P
Wall boards wholesale
and storage
P
P
Wood storage yard
P
P
Wholesale trade:
durable goods
Agricultural
implements sales
C
P
Automobile parts
dealers, wholesale
P
P
P
Use by use category
A
R-1
R-2
R-3
MHP
B-1
B-2
B-3
OP
I-
1
I-
2
P
PUD
RCD
Ball bearings display
and sales
P
P
Barber shop equipment
and supplies
P P
Boiler sales and
service
P
Bolts and nuts storage
P
P
P
Building contractor
equipment and material
sales and service
C
P
P
Building materials
wholesale and storage
C
P
C
Carpet and rugs
wholesale sales
C
P
C
Clothing wholesale and
distributing
P
C
Electrical supply
store
P
P
HVAC equipment sales
P
P
C
Irrigation sales and
equipment
P
P
Lumber storage yard
C
P
P
Milling equipment
sales
C
P
Mining machinery
supplies
P
P
Mining machinery
P
wholesale and storage
Use by use category
A
R-1
R-2
R-3
MHP
B-1
B-2
B-3
OP
I-
1
I-
2
P
PUD
RCD
Road building
equipment sales
P
P
Woodworking equipment
display and sales
P
Wholesale trade:
non-durable goods
Beer distribution and
wholesale
C
P
P
Beverage distribution
and wholesale
C
P
P
Box sales
P
P
P
Distillery
distribution and
wholesale
C
P
C
C
Garden seed wholesale
P
Grocery, wholesale
P
C
Ice sales
P
P
C
Meat storage and
wholesale
P
C
Milk distribution
center
P
P
Mineral water
distribution
P P
Notions wholesale
P
P
Novelties wholesale
P
P
Office supplies
P
P
P
Paint and varnish
wholesale
C
P
Use by use category
A
R-1
R-2
R-3
MHP
B-1
B-2
B-3
OP
I-
1
I-
2
P
PUD
RCD
School equipment and
sales
P
P
Soft drink
distribution
C
P
P
P
Tobacco wholesale and
storage
C
P
P
Wholesale house and
distribution
C
P
C