CITY OF RADCLIFF, KENTUCKY
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2017 S-5 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance 17-10-1213, passed 10-17-2017; and
State legislation current through 2017 KRS Pamphlet
Published by:
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING CORPORATION
One West Fourth Street ? 3rd Floor ? Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 ? www.amlegal.com
RADCLIFF, KENTUCKY
CODE OF ORDINANCES
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter
1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
2. ADMINISTRATION
2.1. HARDIN COUNTY CODE OF ETHICS
2.5. ALARM SYSTEMS
3. ANIMALS AND FOWL
4. BUILDING, FIRE, HOUSING AND SAFETY STANDARDS
4.1. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
5. CIVIL DEFENSE AND CIVIL EMERGENCIES
6. RESERVED
7. EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING
7.5. FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
8. GARBAGE AND TRASH
9. HEALTH CLUBS, MASSAGE SALONS AND THE LIKE
10. LICENSES AND TAXATION
11. MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
12. MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
13. NUISANCES
14. OFFENSES-MISCELLANEOUS
14.1. PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
15. RESERVED
1
2 Radcliff - Table of Contents
16. POLICE DEPARTMENT
17. RESERVED
17.5. STORM WATER UTILITY AND MANAGEMENT
18. STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
19. SUBDIVISIONS
20. ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ACTIVITIES
21. PAWN SHOPS, JUNK, SECOND HAND, AND SCRAP DEALERS
22. HAZARDOUS MATERIAL
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Kentucky Revised Statutes
References to Ordinances
INDEX
2015 S-2
09-06-1060
ENACTING AS AN ORDINANCE, A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF
RADCLIFF, REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING, AND COMPILING
CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY DEALING WITH
SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN THE CODE
WHEREAS, the present general ordinances of the City of Radcliff, Kentucky are incomplete and
inadequate and the manner of arrangement, classification and indexing thereof is insufficient to meet the
immediate needs of the City; and
WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the Commonwealth of Kentucky empower and authorize the
Legislative Body of this City to revise, amend, restate, codify and to compile any existing ordinance or
ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted or published and to incorporate the ordinances
into one ordinance in book form; and
WHEREAS, the Legislative Body of the City of Radcliff has authorized a general compilation, revision and
codification of the ordinances of the City of a general and permanent nature and publication of such
ordinances in book form;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Legislative Body of the City of Radcliff that:
Section 1. The general ordinances of the City of Radcliff as herein revised, amended, restated, codified, and
compiled in book form are adopted as and shall constitute the ACode of Ordinances of the City of Radcliff.@
Section 2. The Code as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of the following titles:
1. General Provisions
2. Administration
2.1 Hardin County Code of Ethics
2.5 Alarm Systems
3. Animals and Fowl
4. Building, Fire, Housing and Safety Standards
5. Civil Defense and Civil Emergencies
6. Detective and Security Agencies
7. Explosives and Blasting
7.5 Flood Damage Prevention
8. Garbage and Trash
9. Health Clubs, Massage Salons and the Like
10. Licenses and Taxation
11. Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks
12. Motor Vehicles and Traffic
13. Nuisances
14. Offenses-Miscellaneous
14.1 Planning and Development
1
2 Radcliff - Adopting Ordinance
15. Reserved
16. Police Department
17. Sewers and Sewage Disposal
17.5 Storm Water Utility and Management
18. Streets and Sidewalks
19. Subdivisions
20. Adult Entertainment Activities
Section 3. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in the Code shall be deemed repealed from
and after the effective date of the Code, except as they are included and reordained in whole or in part in the
Code; provided that such repeal shall not affect any offense committed or penalty incurred or any right
established prior to the effective date of the Code, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances
levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory, establishing franchises or granting
special rights to certain persons, authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or
borrowing of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property, granting or accepting
easements or plats, accepting dedications of land to public use, vacating or setting the boundaries of streets
or other public places; nor shall such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or
pertaining to subject not contained in or covered by the Code.
Section 4. The Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption and approval by the City
Legislative Body and the Clerk of the City of Radcliff is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of the
Code in the Office of the City Clerk.
Section 5. The Code shall be in full force and effect from and after its date of passage, approval and
publication as required by law. The Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the
ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and regulations therein contained, and the date of passage,
and that the same is properly signed, attested, recorded and approved, and that any public hearings and
notices thereof as required by law have been given.
Read at a meeting of the Radcliff City Council on the 8th day of June, 2009; a second reading was held on
the 16th day of June, 2009; said Ordinance was READ, PASSED and APPROVED on the 16th day of
June, 2009.
Sheila C. Enyart /s/
Sheila C. Enyart
Mayor, City of Radcliff
ATTEST:
Barbara A. Wilkins, City Clerk /s/
Barbara A. Wilkins, City Clerk
10-04-1085
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING REPLACEMENT PAGES
TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF RADCLIFF, KENTUCKY
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio has completed the 2010
First Edition Replacement Pages to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Radcliff, Kentucky, which
contains numerous revisions and ordinances of a general nature enacted since the Code of Ordinances of
this municipality; and
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision or addition of
certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or make references to sections of the
Kentucky Revised Statutes;
WHEREAS, it is the intent of Council to accept these updated sections in accordance with the changes
of the law of the Commonwealth of Kentucky;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City of Radcliff:
SECTION 1. That the 2010 First Edition Replacement Pages to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Radcliff, Kentucky, as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, and as attached
hereto, are hereby adopted by reference as if set out in entirety.
SECTION 2. That this ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its date of passage,
approval and publication as required by law.
Read at a meeting of the Radcliff City Council on the 16th day of March, 2010; a second reading was
held on the 12th day of April, 2010; said Ordinance was READ and APPROVED on the 12th day of April,
2010.
Sheila C. Enyart /s/
Sheila C. Enyart
Mayor, City of Radcliff
ATTEST:
Barbara A. Wilkins, City Clerk /s/
Barbara A. Wilkins, City Clerk
3
2011 S-1
4 Radcliff - Adopting Ordinance
15-06-1171
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING
REPLACEMENT PAGES TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES
OF THE CITY OF RADCLIFF, KENTUCKY
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio has completed the 2012 and
2013 First Edition Replacement Pages to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Radcliff, Kentucky, which
contain numerous revisions and ordinances of a general nature enacted since the Code of Ordinances of this
municipality; and
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision or addition of
certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or make references to sections of the
Kentucky Revised Statutes;
WHEREAS, it is the intent of Council to accept these updated sections in accordance with the changes
of the law of the Commonwealth of Kentucky;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY OF RADCLIFF, KENTUCKY:
SECTION 1. That the 2012 and 2013 First Edition Replacement Pages to the Code of Ordinances of
the City of Radcliff, Kentucky, as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, and
as attached hereto, are hereby adopted by reference as if set out in entirety.
SECTION 2. That this ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its date of passage,
approval and publication as required by law.
Read at a meeting of the Radcliff City Council on the 19th day of May, 2015; a second reading was
held on the 8th day of June, 2015; said Ordinance was READ and APPROVED on the 8th day of June,
2015.
J. Michael Weaver /s/
J. MICHAEL WEAVER
MAYOR, CITY OF RADCLIFF
ATTEST:
Julie Aldridge /s/
Julie Aldridge, City Clerk
5
2015 S-3
6 Radcliff - Adopting Ordinance
16-02-1181
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING
REPLACEMENT PAGES TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES
OF THE CITY OF RADCLIFF, KENTUCKY
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio has completed the 2014
and 2015 First Edition Replacement Pages to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Radcliff,
Kentucky, which contain numerous revisions and ordinances of a general nature enacted since the
Code of Ordinances of this municipality; and
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision or addition
of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or make references to sections
of the Kentucky Revised Statutes; and
WHEREAS, it is the intent of Council to accept these updated sections in accordance with the
changes of the law of the Commonwealth of Kentucky;
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY OF RADCLIFF, KENTUCKY:
SECTION 1. That the 2014 and 2015 First Edition Replacement Pages to the Code of Ordinances
of the City of Radcliff, Kentucky, as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio and as attached hereto, are hereby adopted by reference as if set out in entirety.
SECTION 2. That this ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its date of
passage, approval and publication as required by law.
Read at a meeting of the Radcliff City Council on the 19th day of January, 2016; a second
reading was held on the 16th day of February, 2016; said Ordinance was READ and APPROVED on
the 16th day of February, 2016.
/s/ J. Michael Weaver
J. MICHAEL WEAVER
MAYOR, CITY OF RADCLIFF
ATTEST:
/s/ Julie Aldridge
Julie Aldridge, City Clerk
7
2017 S-4
8 Radcliff - Adopting Ordinance
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING
REPLACEMENT PAGES TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES
OF THE CITY OF RADCLIFF, KENTUCKY
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio has completed the 2016
Fourth Edition Replacement Pages to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Radcliff, Kentucky,
which contain numerous revisions and ordinances of a general nature enacted since the Code of
Ordinances of this municipality; and
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision or addition
of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or make references to sections
of the Kentucky Revised Statutes; and
WHEREAS, it is the intent of Council to accept these updated sections in accordance with the
changes of the law of the Commonwealth of Kentucky;
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY OF RADCLIFF, KENTUCKY:
SECTION 1. That the 2016 Fourth Edition Replacement Pages to the Code of Ordinances of the City
of Radcliff, Kentucky, as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio,
are hereby adopted by reference as if set out in entirety.
SECTION 2. That this ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its date of passage,
approval and publication as required by law.
Read at a meeting of the City Council on the 21st day of March, 2017, second reading was held
on the 18th day of April, 2017; and said Ordinance was READ, PASSED, and APPROVED at a
meeting of the Radcliff City Council on the 18th day of April, 2017.
/s/ J. Michael Weaver
J. MICHAEL WEAVER
MAYOR, CITY OF RADCLIFF
ATTEST:
/s/ Julie Aldridge
Julie Aldridge, City Clerk
9
2017 S-5
10 Radcliff - Adopting Ordinance
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
1
2 Radcliff - General Provisions
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
1-1. How code designated and cited
1-2. Definitions; rules of construction
1-3. Headings and notes
1-4. Effect of repeal of an ordinance
1-5. Severability
1-6. Amendments to code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language
1-7. Altering code
1-8. General penalty; continuing violations
1-9. Officers and employees not punishable for failure to perform duty
' 1-1 HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED.
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as
the ACode of Ordinances of the City of Radcliff, Kentucky@, and may be so cited.
' 1-2 DEFINITIONS; RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
(A) Generally.
(1) This code and all ordinances of the city shall be liberally construed with a view to promote
their objects and carry out the intent of the Council.
(2) In the interpretation and application of any provision of this code, it shall be held to be the
minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and
general welfare.
(3) Where any provision of the code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the
general provisions imposed by the code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be
deemed to be controlling.
3
4 Radcliff - General Provisions
(B) Definitions. All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved
usage of language, but technical words and phrases, and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and
appropriate meaning in the law, shall be construed according to that meaning.
CITY. The City of Radcliff, Kentucky.
COMPUTATION OF TIME.
(a) In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by order of court, or by any
applicable ordinance or regulation, the day of the act, event or default after which the designated period of
time begins to run is not to be included. The last day of the period so computed is to be included, unless it
is a Saturday, a Sunday, a legal holiday or a day on which the public office in which a document is required
to be filed is actually and legally closed, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day which
is not one of the days just mentioned. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven
days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation.
(b) When an ordinance, regulation or order of court requires an act to be done either a certain
time before an event or a certain time before the day on which an event occurs, the day of the event shall be
excluded in computing the time. If the day thereby computed on which or by which the act is required to be
done falls on a Saturday, Sunday, legal holiday or a day on which the public office in which the act is
required to be completed is actually and legally closed, the act may be done on the next day which is none
of the days just mentioned.
(c) If any proceeding is directed by law to take place, or any act is directed to be done, on a
particular day of a month and that day is Sunday, the proceeding shall take place, or the act shall be done,
on the next day that is not a legal holiday.
(KRS 446.030(2))
(d) In all cases where the law requires any act to be done in a reasonable time or reasonable
notice to be given, reasonable time or notice shall mean the time only as may be necessary for the prompt
performance of the duty or compliance with the notice.
COUNCIL or CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of Radcliff, Kentucky.
COUNTY. The County of Hardin, Kentucky.
DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY. Whenever a provision appears requiring an officer or head of
a department of the city to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the
officer or head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required
act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise.
General Provisions 5
GENDER. A word importing the masculine gender only may extend and be applied to females as
well as males.
(KRS 446.020)
JOINT AUTHORITY. Words giving authority to three or more officers or other persons shall be
construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons.
(KRS 446.050)
LAND or REAL ESTATE. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments and all rights thereto and
interest therein, other than chattel interest.
(KRS 446.010(24))
MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
(KRS 446.010(26))
MONTH. Calendar month.
(KRS 446.010(27))
NAME OR TITLE OF OFFICER, BOARD, COMMISSION OR AGENCY. The name or title of
any officer, board, commission or agency, when appearing alone herein, shall be construed as if the words
Aof Radcliff, Kentucky@, followed it.
NUMBER. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several
persons or things, as well as to one person or thing, and a word importing the plural number only may
extend and be applied to one person or thing as well as to several persons or things.
(KRS 446.020)
OATH. Includes Aaffirmation@ in all cases in which an affirmation may be substituted for an oath.
(KRS 446.010(28))
OWNER. Applied to personal or real property, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in
common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of the property.
PERSON. Bodies politic and corporate, societies, communities, the public generally, individuals,
partnerships, joint stock companies, and limited liability companies.
(KRS 446.010(33))
PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidence of debt.
PROPERTY. Includes both real and personal property.
2015 S-2
6 Radcliff - General Provisions
PUBLIC PLACE. Any public way, park, cemetery, school yard or open space adjacent thereto;
any public lake or stream and any place or business open to the use of the public in general.
SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
(KRS 446.010(39))
SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark, the name being written or near the mark and
witnessed.
STATE. The Commonwealth of Kentucky.
STREET. Any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, lane,
viaduct, bridge and the approaches thereto within the city.
SWORN. Includes Aaffirmed@ in all cases in which an affirmation may be substituted for an oath.
(KRS 446.010(43))
TENANT and OCCUPANT. Applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies the
whole or a part of the building or land, whether alone or with others.
TENSE. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present.
WRITING and WRITTEN. Includes printing, typewriting, engraving, lithography and any other
mode of representing words and letters.
YEAR. Calendar year.
' 1-3 HEADINGS AND NOTES.
Chapter headings, article, division and section heads or titles, and explanatory notes and state law or
cross-references, in this code do not constitute any part of the law, except as otherwise expressly provided.
Statutory reference:
Similar provisions, see KRS 446.140
' 1-4 EFFECT OF REPEAL OF AN ORDINANCE.
(A) The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the
ordinance repealed took effect.
2015 S-2
General Provisions 7
(B) The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal
took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense
committed under the ordinance repealed.
Statutory reference:
Similar provisions, see KRS 446.100
' 1-5 SEVERABILITY.
It shall be considered that it is the intent of the City Council, in enacting this code or any ordinance,
that if any part of the code or ordinance be held unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable, the remaining
parts shall remain in force, unless the code or ordinance provides otherwise, or unless the remaining parts
are so essentially and inseparably connected with and dependent upon the unconstitutional, invalid or
unenforceable part that it is apparent that the City Council would not have enacted the remaining parts
without the unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable part, or unless the remaining parts, standing alone,
are incomplete and incapable of being executed in accordance with the intent of the City Council.
Statutory reference:
Similar provisions, see KRS 446.090
' 1-6 AMENDMENTS TO CODE; EFFECT OF NEW ORDINANCES; AMENDATORY
LANGUAGE.
(A) All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this code,
may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this code and printed for inclusion herein. In
the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, the
repealed portions may be excluded from the code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The
subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie
evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this code and subsequent ordinances numbered
or omitted are re-adopted as a new code by the City Council.
(B) Amendments to any of the provisions of this code may be made by amending such provisions by
specific reference to the section number of this code in the following language:
AThat section of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Radcliff, Kentucky, is hereby
amended to read as follows: ...@ The provisions shall be set out in full as desired.
(C) In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the code, is to be added, the following
language may be used:
AThat the Code of Ordinances, of the City of Radcliff, Kentucky, is hereby amended by adding a
section, to be numbered , which said section reads as follows: ...@ The new section shall then be
set out in full as desired.
8 Radcliff - General Provisions
(D) All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed shall be specifically repealed by
section, article or chapter number, as the case may be.
' 1-7 ALTERING CODE.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or
portion of this code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such code in
any manner whatsoever, except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the City Council, which
will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be
punished as provided in ' 1-8 hereof.
' 1-8 GENERAL PENALTY; CONTINUING VIOLATIONS.
Unless some other penalty is expressly provided, whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city
an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor or whenever, in
the code or ordinance, the doing of an act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful
or a misdemeanor, the violation of any such provision of this code or any such ordinance shall be punished
by a fine of not more than $500 or by confinement in the county jail for not more than one year or by both
the fine and confinement, at the discretion of the court. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation of the ordinance occurs or continues.
' 1-9 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES NOT PUNISHABLE FOR FAILURE TO PERFORM
DUTY.
Except as otherwise specifically provided, no city officer or employee shall be subject to fine or
punishment under the provisions of ' 1-8 of this code for failure to do or perform any required official act.
CHAPTER 2: ADMINISTRATION
1
2 Radcliff - Administration
CHAPTER 2: ADMINISTRATION
Section
Article I. In General
2-1. Retention of the current organization and structure of city government; continuing current
ordinances and resolutions; effective date
2-2. City to conduct nonpartisan elections
2-3. Method of selection of Council members to preside at meetings in absence of Mayor
2-4. Grievance procedure for suspected or alleged discrimination on basis of handicapped status
Article II. City Council
2-16. Composition
2-17. Regular meetings
Article III. Officers and Employees
Division 1. Generally
2-29. Reserved
2-30. Surrender of effects of office
2-31. City Attorney; City Clerk; Chief of Police; Fire Chief; Alcoholic Beverage Control
Administrator; Chief Administrative Officer; department managers
2-32. Classification and compensation plans
2-33. Defense and payment of judgments for officers and employees while in the scope of their
employment
2-34. Protection of public employees from reprisal for disclosure of information related to suspected
mismanagement, waste, fraud or endangerment of public health or safety
2-35. City Citation Officer
Division 2. Employees Retirement System
2-36. Coverage of new employees
2-37. Current employees= participation
2-38. Transferral to county employees retirement system - Termination of pension plan
3
4 Radcliff - Administration
2-39. Same - Accumulated revenue
2-40. Classifications in county system
2-41. Continuation of city=s present retirement system
Article IV. Board of Adjustment
2-43. Established
2-44. Number and appointment of members
2-45. Term of office
2-46. Reimbursement for expense
2-47. Vacancies
2-48. Removal
2-49. Officers
2-50. Adoption of bylaws; records
2-51. Meetings
2-52. Duties, jurisdiction and authority
2-53. Fees for permits, variances and appeals
Article V. Code Enforcement Board
2-54. Established
Article VI. Forestry and Conservation Board
2-55. Established
2-56. Powers
2-57. Appointment of members; term of office; removal from office; and compensation
2-58. Conflict of interest
Article VII. Finances
Division 1. Generally
2-65. Administration and procedure for ad valorem taxes
2-66. Administration and procedure for bank franchise and local deposit taxes
2-67. Investment policy for the city
2-68. Minimum cash reserve amounts in the city general operating fund
Division 2. Industrial Revenue Bonds
2-75. Guidelines adopted
2-76. Requirements for issuing industrial revenue bonds
2-77. Establishment of Bond Oversight Commission
2-78. Application for approval of industrial revenue bond issues
2-79. Additional action by city officials
2017 S-5
Administration 5
Article VIII. Smoking in Public Places and Places of Employment
2-90. Findings and intent
2-91. Definitions
2-92. Application to city-owned facilities
2-93. Prohibition of smoking in enclosed public places
2-94. Prohibition of smoking in places of employment
2-95. Prohibition of smoking in outdoor arenas and stadiums
2-96. Reasonable distance
2-97. Where smoking not regulated
2-98. Declaration of establishment as nonsmoking
2-99. Posting of signs
2-100. Nonretaliation and nonwaiver of rights
2-101. Enforcement
2-102. Violations and penalties
2-103. Public education
2-104. Governmental agency cooperation
2-105. Other applicable laws
2-106. Construction
2-107. Effective date
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
' 2-1 RETENTION OF THE CURRENT ORGANIZATION AND STRUCTURE OF CITY
GOVERNMENT; CONTINUING CURRENT ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS;
EFFECTIVE DATE.
(A) Pursuant to SB 41, being KRS 82.020 and SB 26, being KRS 83A.020, of the 1980 Regular
Session of the General Assembly of the commonwealth, the city hereby elects to retain the organization and
structure of its city government existing on 7-14-1980, immediately before the effective date of
non-emergency legislation enacted by the 1980 Regular Session of the General Assembly.
(B) For the purpose of the organization and structure of the government of the city, those sections of
the Kentucky Revised Statutes pursuant to which city government operated on 7-14-1980, which sections
have been repealed effective 7-15-1980, shall continue as directing and controlling the organization and
structure of city government, notwithstanding their respective repeal.
(C) Ordinances and resolutions of the city are hereby declared to remain in force and effect, and any
such ordinance citing or relying on a section of Kentucky Revised Statutes repealed by the 1980 Regular
Session of the General Assembly shall be deemed to refer to the repealed statute for purposes of structure,
procedure and operation only, and not for the grant of any power or authority found in the section.
6 Radcliff - Administration
(E) This section shall become effective on its passage and approval, and publication as required by
law, but the organization and structure of city government, and ordinances and resolutions of the city, shall
not change before the effective date of this section.
(Ord. passed 8-20-1980)
Cross-reference:
Disaster and emergency response organization, see '' 5-24 through 5-26
Police Department, see Chapter 16
Radcliff Convention and Tourism Commission established, see ' 10-95
Editor=s note:
Ord. passed 8-20-1980, '' 1 through 5, and Ord. passed 2-17-1981, enacted the provisions
codified as '' 2-1 and 2-2 as set out herein. Since the ordinances did not expressly amend
this code, the manner of codification has been at the editor=s discretion.
Statutory reference:
Cities of fourth class, see KRS Ch. 83A
' 2-2 CITY TO CONDUCT NONPARTISAN ELECTIONS.
The city shall conduct nonpartisan elections for city officers in accordance with KRS 83A.170.
(Ord. passed 2-17-1981)
Editor=s note:
See the editor=s note to ' 2-1.
' 2-3 METHOD OF SELECTION OF COUNCIL MEMBERS TO PRESIDE AT MEETINGS
IN ABSENCE OF MAYOR.
(A) At any meeting of the City Council held in the absence of the Mayor or in the event there is a
vacancy in the office of the Mayor, the Council person who received the most votes in the last general
election shall have the right to preside over the meeting as Mayor Pro-Tem.
(B) At his or her option, the Council person who received the most votes may elect not to serve as
Mayor Pro-Tem; in which instance, the right passes to the Council person receiving the second highest
number of votes and so forth.
(C) The Council person serving as Mayor Pro-Tem may participate in Council proceedings and may
vote as a member of the Council, but cannot vote again as Mayor in case of a tie.
(Ord. passed 11-16-1982; Ord. passed 1-19-1990; Ord. 15-03-1169, passed 3-26-2015)
2015 S-3
Administration 7
' 2-4 GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE FOR SUSPECTED OR ALLEGED DISCRIMINATION ON
BASIS OF HANDICAPPED STATUS.
(A) Purpose.
(1) The Federal Revenue Sharing Program regulations and ' 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of
1973, being 29 U.S.C. ' 794, prohibits discrimination on the basis of handicapped status in programs of
federal financial assistance.
(2) It is the policy of the city to promote equal opportunity with respect to its programs funded
with federal funds, and the city does not discriminate on the basis of handicapped status in admission or
access to, or treatment or employment in, its programs or activities as defined in the Federal Revenue
Sharing Program regulations (51.51,1).
(B) Incorporation of grievance procedures. The attached procedures shall be the Agrievance
procedures@ for anyone who believes he or she has been discriminated against by the city based on
handicapped status with respect to federally-funded programs.
(C) Administration. The administration of these procedures and related federal and state regulations
shall be the responsibility of the executive authority of the city.
(D) Amendment. These procedures may be amended by ordinance to comply with court directives or
additional federal and state regulations.
(Ord. passed 7-17-1984)
Editor=s note:
Ord. passed 7-17-1984, not specifically amendatory of the code has been included herein at
the discretion of the editor as ' 2-4. The grievance procedures established and referred to in
this section are not set out at length herein, but are on file and available for inspection in the
office of the City Clerk. The introductory language of the ordinance of 7-17-1984, has been
incorporated into division (A) hereof; '' 1 through 3 have been included as divisions (B)
through (D).
ARTICLE II. CITY COUNCIL
' 2-16 COMPOSITION.
The City Council shall be composed of six Council members.
Statutory reference:
City Council to designate its size by ordinance, see KRS 83A.030
8 Radcliff - Administration
' 2-17 REGULAR MEETINGS.
The City Council shall regularly meet on the third Tuesday of each month at 6:30 p.m. at the City Hall.
(Ord. passed 8-17-1971; Ord. passed 12-19-2000)
Statutory reference:
Council to fix meetings by ordinance, see KRS 83A.130(11)
ARTICLE III. OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
' 2-29 RESERVED.
' 2-30 SURRENDER OF EFFECTS OF OFFICE.
Every city officer and employee shall, upon the termination of his or her status as such, surrender to his
or her successor in office or his or her supervisor all of the effects of his or her office or position.
' 2-31 CITY ATTORNEY; CITY CLERK; CHIEF OF POLICE; FIRE CHIEF; ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGE CONTROL ADMINISTRATOR; CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER;
DEPARTMENT MANAGERS.
(A) City Attorney.
(1) The Mayor shall appoint and the City Council shall approve the Office of City Attorney.
(2) The duties of the City Attorney shall be to represent the city in all legal matters.
(3) The City Attorney shall be paid in accordance with the contract entered into by and between
the city and the City Attorney.
(4) The City Attorney shall take an appropriate oath of office.
(B) City Clerk.
(1) The Mayor shall appoint and the City Council shall approve the Office of City Clerk.
Administration 9
(2) The duties of the City Clerk shall be as those outlined in the appropriate KRS statutes,
including but not limited to KRS Chapter 61 as the official custodian of records pursuant to KRS 83A.085.
(3) The City Clerk shall be paid in accordance with the appropriate pay and classification
ordinance for the city and as from time to time amended.
(4) The City Clerk shall take an appropriate oath of office.
(C) Chief of Police.
(1) The Mayor shall appoint and the City Council shall approve the Office of Chief of Police.
(2) The duties of the Chief of Police shall be those as outlined in the appropriate KRS statutes.
(3) The Chief of Police shall be paid in accordance with the appropriate pay and classification
ordinance for the city and as from time to time amended.
(4) The Chief of Police shall take an appropriate oath of office.
(D) Fire Chief.
(1) The Mayor shall appoint and the City Council shall approve the Office of Fire Chief.
(2) The duties of the Fire Chief shall be those as outlined in the appropriate KRS statutes.
(3) The Fire Chief shall be paid in accordance with the appropriate pay and classification
ordinance for the city and as from time to time amended.
(4) The Fire Chief shall take an appropriate oath of office.
(E) Alcoholic Beverage Control Administrator.
(1) The Mayor shall appoint and the City Council shall approve the Office of Alcoholic Beverage
Control Administrator.
(2) The duties of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Administrator shall be those as outlined in the
appropriate KRS statutes.
(3) The Alcoholic Beverage Control Administrator shall be paid in accordance with the
appropriate pay and classification ordinance for the city and as from time to time amended.
(4) The Alcoholic Beverage Control Administrator shall take an appropriate oath of office.
10 Radcliff - Administration
(F) Chief Administrative Officer.
(1) The Mayor shall appoint and the City Council shall approve the Office of the Chief
Administrative Officer.
(2) The duties of the Chief Administrative Officer shall be those as outlined in KRS 83A.090.
(3) The Chief Administrative Officer shall be paid in accordance with the appropriate pay and
classification ordinance for the city and as from time to time amended.
(4) The Chief Administrative Officer shall take an appropriate oath of office.
(G) Department managers.
(1) The Mayor shall appoint the department managers for Public Works, Planning,
Administration and any other department managers of any newly established departments in the future.
(2) The duties of these respective department managers shall be outlined in each of their
appropriate job descriptions.
(3) The department managers shall be paid in accordance with the appropriate pay and
classification ordinance for the city and as from time to time amended.
(Ord. passed 7-10-1973; Ord. passed 5-24-1989; Ord. passed 1-9-1990; Ord. passed 1-9-1996; Ord. passed
8-17-2000; Ord. passed 1-19-2001; Ord. passed 2-7-2005; Ord. 08-08-1048, passed 8-19-2008)
Cross-reference:
City officers and employees relieved of criminal responsibility for failure to perform official
acts under code, see ' 1-9
Interference with city officers or employees, see ' 14-4
Statutory reference:
City Clerk specifically, see KRS.83A.085
City Council generally, see KRS Ch. 83A
Non-elected officers generally, see KRS 83A.080
' 2-32 CLASSIFICATION AND COMPENSATION PLANS.
(A) Implementation. Be it ordained by the City Council:
(1) The classification plan and compensation plan attached hereto shall be the system of
personnel administration for the city; and/or
(2) The classification plan and compensation plan may not be repealed, but may be waived,
altered or suspended only by a change of ordinance.
Administration 11
(B) Summary; employee. The employee classification plan and compensation plan provides:
(1) A designated grade for each employment position currently established by the City Council;
(2) A salary pay equalization and adjustment schedule beginning 7-1-2000, shall be in effect until
and unless changed or modified by the City Council by ordinance; and
(3) The plan also includes specifications concerning the beginning level for each established
employment position; provides for the procedure to be followed concerning promotions.
(C) Summary; Mayor and City Council. Compensation Plan for the Mayor and City Council.
(1) The legislative body of the city shall set the compensation of the officer in accordance with
KRS 83A.070 at a rate no greater than that stipulated by the finance and administration cabinet.
(2) The annual salary of the Mayor and City Council shall be increased each year by an equivalent
increase in the national consumer price index cost of living.
(Ord. passed 6-19-1984; Ord. passed 5-30-1996; Ord. passed 6-23-2000; Ord. passed 6-23-2001)
Editor=s note:
The classification and compensation plans, policies and procedures implemented in ' 2-32
above have not been included herein, but are on file for public inspection in the office of the
City Clerk.
Statutory reference:
Similar provisions, see KRS 83A.070, 83A.075
' 2-33 DEFENSE AND PAYMENT OF JUDGMENTS FOR OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
WHILE IN THE SCOPE OF THEIR EMPLOYMENT.
(A) For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
requires a different meaning.
ACTION IN TORT. Any claim for monetary damages based upon negligence, nuisance, products
liability and strict liability and shall also include any wrongful death or survival-type action.
EMPLOYEE. All full and part-time employees of the city, but shall not include any independent
contractor of any employee, or agent, supplier or subcontractor of any independent contractor.
OFFICER. Any elected official of the city, or other minor officers, including those listed in KRS
83A.085(d)(1)(a-h).
(B) Except as provided in division (E) below, the city shall, without cost to the officer or employee,
provide for the legal defense of any officer or employee in any action in tort arising out of an act or
omission occurring within the scope of the officer=s or employee=s employment or public duties of the city.
12 Radcliff - Administration
(C) The city may provide for the defense of any officer or employee through its own legal counsel or
by employing independent legal counsel or by purchasing insurance which requires the insurer to defend. If
the city defends through its own legal counsel and as legal counsel determines that the interests of the
officer or employee and the city conflict, the city shall obtain the written consent of the employee for the
representation or shall provide independent representation. An employee may have his or her own legal
counsel to assist in the defense at the expense of the employee.
(D) Upon receiving service of a summons and complaint in any action in tort brought against him or
her, an officer or employee shall, within ten days of his or her receipt of service, give written notice of the
claim and make a request that the city provide a defense to the action. The notice of claim and request for
defense shall be filed with the Mayor.
(E) The city may refuse to provide for the defense of any action in tort brought against an officer or
employee of the city if it determines and notifies the employee in writing that:
(1) The act or omission was not within the actual or apparent scope of the employee=s
employment;
(2) The employee acted or failed to act because of fraud, malice or corruption or an intentional
tort; and
(3) A timely request to defend was not made in accordance with division (D) above.
(F) If the city refuses to provide an officer or employee with a defense and the officer or employee
provides his or her own defense, the officer or employee shall be entitled to recover all necessary and
reasonable costs of the defense from the city if the act or omission is judicially determined to have arisen
out of the actual or apparent scope of the employee=s employment and the employee is found to have acted
without fraud, malice or corruption.
(G) Subject to the limitations set forth in division (H) below and provided that the city shall not pay
any award of punitive or exemplary damages, the city shall pay any judgment rendered against an officer or
employee in any action in tort, or any compromise or settlement of the action.
(H) The city may refuse to pay any judgment, compromise or settlement in any action in tort against an
officer or employee, or if the city pays any judgment, compromise or settlement, it may recover from the
officer or employee the amount of the payment and the costs to defend, if:
(1) The officer or employee acted or failed to act because of fraud, malice, corruption or
intentional tort;
(2) The action was outside the actual or apparent scope of the employee=s employment;
(3) The employee willfully failed or refused to assist in the defense of the action; or
Administration 13
(4) The employee compromised or settled the claim without the consent of the legislators of the
city.
(I) An officer or employee who is being provided a defense in an action in tort by the city shall not
enter into any compromise or settlement of the action without the approval of the legislative body of the
city.
(J) Nothing in this section shall be construed as a waiver of any defense which the city may assert in
any action in tort brought against it or any officer or employee of the city.
(Ord. passed 5-20-1986)
Editor=s note:
Codification of '' 1 through 10 of an ordinance adopted 5-20-1986 as ' 2-33 was at the
discretion of the editor.
' 2-34 PROTECTION OF PUBLIC EMPLOYEES FROM REPRISAL FOR DISCLOSURE OF
INFORMATION RELATED TO SUSPECTED MISMANAGEMENT, WASTE, FRAUD OR
ENDANGERMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH OR SAFETY.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
EMPLOYEE. A person in the service of the city, who is under contract of hire, express or implied,
oral or written, where the city has the power or right to control and direct the material details of work
performance.
EMPLOYER. The City of Radcliff, Kentucky. EMPLOYER also includes any person authorized
to act on behalf of the city with respect to formulation of policy or the supervision, in a managerial
capacity, of subordinate employees.
OFFICIAL REQUEST. A request from members of the City Council and its employees;
members of the City Council committee and employees; the Mayor and employees of the Mayor=s office.
(B) Construction of statute. Reprisal against public employees for disclosure of violations of law is
prohibited in the following instances.
(1) No employer shall subject to reprisal, or directly or indirectly use, or threaten to use, any
official authority or influence, in any manner whatsoever, which tends to discourage, restrain, repress,
dissuade, prevent, interfere with, coerce, or discriminate against any employee who in good faith reports,
discloses, divulges, or otherwise brings to the attention of the Mayor, employees of the Mayor=s office, City
Attorney, city accountants, members of the City Council or any of its committees or its commissions, the
judiciary or any member or employee of the judiciary, any law enforcement agency or its employees, or any
other appropriate body or authority, any facts or information relative to an actual or suspected violation of
any law, statute, executive order, administrative regulation, mandate, rule or ordinance of the city, the
commonwealth or any of its political subdivisions, or the United States,
14 Radcliff - Administration
or any facts or information relative to actual or suspected mismanagement, waste, fraud or endangerment of
public health or safety. No employer shall require any employee to give notice prior to making such a
report, disclosure or divulgence.
(2) This section shall not be construed as:
(a) Prohibiting an employer from requiring that an employee inform him or her of an official
request made to a department for information, or the substance of testimony made, or to be made, by the
employee to the members of the City Council on behalf of a department;
(b) Permitting the employee to leave his or her assigned work area during normal work hours
without following applicable laws, administrative regulations, rules or policies pertaining to leave, unless
the employee is requested by a Council member to appear before a committee;
(c) Authorizing an employee to represent his or her personal opinions as the opinions of his
or her employer; or
(d) Prohibiting disciplinary or punitive action if an employee discloses information which he
or she knows:
1. To be false or which he discloses with reckless disregard for its truth or falsity;
2. To be exempt from required disclosure under the provisions of KRS 61.870 to
61.884; or
3. Is confidential under any other provision of law.
(C) Notice to employees. All employees shall be notified of the passage of the ordinance from which
this section is derived, and it shall be displayed by all departments in a conspicuous place for all employees
to see.
(Ord. passed 10-23-1990)
Editor=s note:
Ord. passed 10-23-1990, did not expressly amend this code; hence, inclusion of its provisions
as ' 2-34 was at the discretion of the editor.
' 2-35 CITY CITATION OFFICER.
(A) There is hereby created the position of City Citation Officer. The City Citation Officer shall be
appointed by the Mayor. This shall be a full-time, paid position of the city, but may be performed along
with other duties within the city. The City Citation Officer shall receive such salary as is from time to time
established by the City Council. The City Citation Officer shall be at least 21 years of age and a citizen of
the United States. The Mayor may appoint more than one City Citation Officer.
Administration 15
(B) The City Citation Officer shall enforce all ordinances for the city and have the authority to issue
citations. In addition, the City Citation Officer shall have all authority as outlined in KRS 83A.087. The
City Citation Officer shall not have the power to carry a deadly weapon or make arrests.
(C) The City Citation Officer shall take steps to cause a correction of any violation of any ordinance in
the city. These steps may include warnings, a written direction to correct the matter, filing of criminal
charges and/or civil violations, or filing, with the assistance of the City Attorney, other court actions to
enforce city ordinances.
(Ord. passed 10-20-1992)
DIVISION 2. EMPLOYEES RETIREMENT SYSTEM
' 2-36 COVERAGE OF NEW EMPLOYEES.
All new employees for the city, from 6-1-1986 forward, will mandatorily be covered by the county
employees retirement system under the Kentucky retirement systems as outlined in KRS Chapter 61.
(Ord. passed 5-20-1986; Ord. passed 12-23-1996)
' 2-37 CURRENT EMPLOYEES= PARTICIPATION.
All present employees of the city, as of 5-31-1986, will have the option to come under the county
employees retirement system or to elect to stay with the city=s present retirement plan, a defined
contribution plan.
(Ord. passed 5-20-1986; Ord. passed 12-17-1996)
Editor=s note:
Ord. of 5-20-1986, '' 1 through 6, not specifically amendatory of the code, included as
Division 2, '' 2-36 through 2-41, at the discretion of the editor.
' 2-38 TRANSFERRAL TO COUNTY EMPLOYEES RETIREMENT SYSTEM -
TERMINATION OF PENSION PLAN.
The employees of the city, as of 5-31-1986, that elect to join the county employees retirement system
shall have their pension plan that is presently in effect with the city terminated.
(Ord. passed 5-20-1986)
' 2-39 SAME - ACCUMULATED REVENUE.
All city employees, as of 5-31-1986, electing to be covered by the county employees retirement system
and therefore terminating their present retirement plan, shall be given credit for all of their past
16 Radcliff - Administration
service with the city and the city hereby agrees to purchase all of the employees= prior time that the
employee has with the city by using any and all money available from the present retirement system for
those employees who are terminating their present retirement system and electing to be covered under the
county employees retirement system and any and all other sources of revenue which is authorized by the
Kentucky Revised Statutes for the city to extend for this purpose.
(Ord. passed 5-20-1986)
' 2-40 CLASSIFICATIONS IN COUNTY SYSTEM.
All new employees, as of 6-1-1986, and all present employees as of 5-31-1986, that wish to come
under the county employees retirement system, shall be added to the county employees retirement system
either hazardous or nonhazardous employees, depending on their work related activities as defined by the
county employees retirement system.
(Ord. passed 5-20-1986)
' 2-41 CONTINUATION OF CITY=S PRESENT RETIREMENT SYSTEM.
The city=s present retirement system will stay in effect if there are any employees who elect to stay with
the present retirement system and as long as there are employees with the city that are still members of the
present retirement system.
(Ord. passed 5-20-1986)
ARTICLE IV. BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
' 2-43 ESTABLISHED.
A City Board of Adjustment of the city is hereby established. A more complete statement of purposes
and authority of this Board is set out herein.
(Ord. passed 2-15-1983)
' 2-44 NUMBER AND APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.
The Board of Adjustment shall consist of five members, all of whom must be citizen members, and not
more than two of whom may be citizen members of the Planning Commission. The Mayor shall appoint the
members of the Board of Adjustment with the approval of the City Council.
(Ord. passed 2-15-1983)
Administration 17
' 2-45 TERM OF OFFICE.
The term of office of all members of the Board of Adjustment shall be four years.
(Ord. passed 2-15-1983)
' 2-46 REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSE.
The City Council may authorize reimbursement for expenses or compensation, or both, for members of
the Board of Adjustment.
(Ord. passed 2-15-1983)
' 2-47 VACANCIES.
Vacancies on the Board of Adjustment shall be filled within 60 days by the Mayor. If the Mayor fails to
act within that time, the Planning Commission shall fill the vacancy. When a vacancy occurs other than
through expiration of the term of office, it shall be filled for the remainder of that term.
(Ord. passed 2-15-1983)
Cross-reference:
Planning Commission, see '' 14.1-11 through 14.1-19
Editor=s note:
Ord. of 2-15-1983, '' I through XIV, was not enacted as a specific amendment or addition to
the code, but is included herein as Art. IV, '' 2-43 through 2-53, at the discretion of the editor.
' 2-48 REMOVAL.
Any member of the Board of Adjustment may be removed by the Mayor for inefficiency, neglect of
duty, malfeasance or conflict of interest. The removal shall be in accordance with the procedure set out in
KRS 100.217(8) and in accordance with all applicable law.
(Ord. passed 2-15-1983)
' 2-49 OFFICERS.
The Board of Adjustment shall elect annually a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and Secretary and any
other officers it deems necessary. Any officers shall be eligible for re-election at the expiration of his, her or
any term.
(Ord. passed 2-15-1983)
18 Radcliff - Administration
' 2-50 ADOPTION OF BYLAWS; RECORDS.
The Board of Adjustment shall adopt bylaws for the transaction of business and shall keep minutes and
records of all proceedings, including regulations, transactions, findings and determinations, and the number
of votes for and against each question, and if any member is absent or abstains from voting, indicating that
fact, all of which shall, immediately after adoption, be filed in the office of the Board.
(Ord. passed 2-15-1983)
' 2-51 MEETINGS.
All meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be public, except when they involve matters which are
exempt from the Kentucky Open Meetings Law.
(Ord. passed 2-15-1983)
' 2-52 DUTIES, JURISDICTION AND AUTHORITY.
The Board of Adjustment shall, in addition to its other duties, have the following jurisdiction and
authority:
(A) To hear and decide on applications for dimensional variances in accordance with the provisions of
KRS 100.241;
(B) To hear and decide applications for conditional use permits to allow the proper integration into the
community of uses which are specifically named in the zoning regulations which may be suitable only in
specific locations in the zone, provided the conditions of KRS 100.237 are met;
(C) To decide whether or not to allow the continuation of a lawful use of a building or premises
existing at the time of the adoption of any zoning regulations effecting it, but which does not conform to the
provisions of the regulations, pursuant to the provisions of KRS 100.253;
(D) To hear and decide cases where it is alleged by an applicant that there is error in any order,
requirement, decision, grant or refusal made by an administrative official in the enforcement of the zoning
regulation; provided, the appeal is made within 60 days; and
(E) To do any and all acts which are authorized by the Kentucky Revised Statutes.
(Ord. passed 2-15-1983)
' 2-53 FEES FOR PERMITS, VARIANCES AND APPEALS.
(A) The Board of Adjustment shall collect a fee of $50 for each application for conditional use
permits, dimensional variances or appeals of administrative decisions in the enforcement of the zoning
Administration 19
regulations. The fee shall be used to partially defray the administrative costs incurred by the Board and shall
be collected at the time of the application and shall be non-refundable.
(B) The $50 filing fee referred to in division (A) above shall not apply to appeals concerning fences.
(Ord. passed 2-15-1983; Ord. passed 6-26-1984)
ARTICLE V. CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD
' 2-54 ESTABLISHED.
(A) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
ABATEMENT COSTS. A city's necessary and reasonable costs for and associated with clearing,
preventing unauthorized entry to, or demolishing all or a portion of a structure or premises, or taking any
other action with regard to a structure or premises necessary to remedy a violation and to maintain and
preserve the public health, safety and welfare in accordance with any city ordinance.
BLIGHTED or DETERIORATED. Any vacant structure or vacant or unimproved lot or parcel of
ground in a predominantly built-up neighborhood:
(1) Which because of physical condition or use is regarded as a public nuisance at common law
or has been declared a public nuisance in accordance with state or city housing, building, plumbing, fire or
related codes;
(2) Which because of physical condition, use or occupancy is considered an attractive nuisance to
children, including but not limited to abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations, and unsafe fences or
structures;
(3) Which because it is dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe, vermin-infested or lacking in the facilities
and equipment required by the housing code of the city, has been designated by the department responsible
for enforcement of the code as unfit for human habitation;
(4) Which is a fire hazard, or is otherwise dangerous to the safety of persons or property;
(5) From which the utilities, plumbing, heating, sewerage or other facilities have been
disconnected, destroyed, removed, or rendered ineffective so that the property is unfit for its intended use;
(6) Which by reason of neglect or lack of maintenance has become a place for accumulation of
trash and debris, or a haven for rodents or other vermin;
2017 S-5
20 Radcliff - Administration
(7) Which has been tax delinquent for a period of at least three years; or
(8) Which has not been rehabilitated within the time constraints placed upon the owner by the
appropriate code-enforcement agency.
CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD. An administrative body created and acting under the authority of
the Local Government Code Enforcement Board Act, KRS 65.8801 to 65.8839.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. A city police officer, safety officer, citation officer, or other
public law enforcement officer with the authority to issue a citation.
FINAL ORDER. Any order:
(1) Issued by the Code Enforcement and Property Review Commission following a hearing in
accordance with division (I)(5);
(2) Created because a violator neither paid nor contested the citation within seven days as
provided in division (H)(6); or
(3) Created because a violator failed to appear at a hearing the violator requested to contest the
citation as provided in division (I)(3).
IMMINENT DANGER. A condition which is likely to cause serious or life-threatening injury or death
at any time.
ORDINANCE. An official action of the local government body, which is a regulation of a general and
permanent nature and enforceable as a local law and shall include any provision of a code of ordinances
adopted by the city legislative body which embodies all or part of an ordinance.
OWNER. A person, association, corporation, partnership or other legal entity having a legal or
equitable title in real property.
PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land, including any structures upon it.
REDEVELOPMENT. The planning or replanning, design or redesign, acquisition, clearance,
development and disposal or any combination of these, of a property in the preparation of such property for
residential and related uses, as may be appropriate or necessary.
(B) Creation and membership. There is hereby created within the city pursuant to KRS 65.8801 to
KRS 65.8839 a Code Enforcement Board which shall be composed of five members, all of whom shall be
residents of the city for a period of at least one year prior to the appointment and shall reside there
throughout the term in office.
2017 S-5
Administration 20A
(C) Enforcement powers.
(1) The Code Enforcement Board shall have the power to issue remedial orders and impose civil
fines as a method of enforcing city ordinances when a violation of the ordinance has been classified as a
civil offense.
(2) The Code Enforcement Board shall not have the authority to enforce any ordinance regulating
conduct which would also, under any provision of the Kentucky Revised Statutes, constitute a criminal
offense or a moving motor vehicle offense.
(D) Appointment of members; term of office; removal from office; oath; compensation.
(1) Members of the Code Enforcement Board shall be appointed by the executive authority of the
city, subject to the approval of the legislative body.
(2) The initial appointment to the Code Enforcement Board shall be as follows:
(a) Two members of the board shall be appointed for a term of one year.
(b) Two members of the board shall be appointed for a term of two years.
(c) One member of the board shall be appointed for a term of three years.
(3) All subsequent appointments shall be for a term of three years. A member may be
reappointed, subject to the approval of the legislative body.
(4) The executive authority may appoint, subject to the approval of the legislative body, two
alternate members to serve on the Code Enforcement Board in the absence of regular members. Alternate
members shall meet all of the qualifications and shall be subject to all of the requirements that apply to
regular members of the Code Enforcement Board.
(5) Any vacancy on the board shall be filled by the executive authority, subject to approval of the
legislative body, within 60 days of the vacancy. If the vacancy is not filled within that time period, the
remaining Code Enforcement Board members shall fill the vacancy. A vacancy shall be filled for the
remainder of the unexpired term.
(6) A board member may be removed from office by the executive authority for misconduct,
inefficiency, or willful neglect of duty. The executive authority shall submit a written statement to the
member and the legislative body setting forth the reasons for removal. The member so removed shall have
the right of appeal to the Circuit Court.
(7) All members of the Code Enforcement Board shall, before entering upon the duties of their
office, take the oath of office prescribed by Section 228 of the Kentucky Constitution.
2017 S-5
20B Radcliff - Administration
(8) Members of the Code Enforcement Board shall be compensated in the amount of $50 per
meeting.
(9) No member of the Code Enforcement Board shall hold any elected or nonelected office, paid
or unpaid, or any position of employment with the city.
(10) Each Code Enforcement Board member shall, within a two year period of two consecutive
calendar years, starting at the date of the individual's appointment, attend no less than eight hours of
continuing education.
(11) Subjects for the education required shall include, but not be limited to, the following: public
hearing procedure; parliamentary procedure; code enforcement; and powers and duties of the Code
Enforcement Board.
(E) Organization of board; meetings; quorum.
(1) The Code Enforcement Board shall annually elect a chair from among its members. The chair
shall be the presiding officer and a full voting member of the board. In the absence of the chair, the
remaining members of the board shall select a member to preside in place of and exercise the powers of the
chair.
(2) All meetings and hearings of the Code Enforcement Board shall be called as the need arises
and shall be public meetings held in accordance with the requirements of KRS 65.8815(5) and the
Kentucky Open Meetings Act.
(3) The presence of at least a majority of the board's entire membership shall constitute a quorum.
The affirmative vote of a majority of a quorum of the board shall be necessary for any official action to be
taken.
(4) Minutes shall be kept for all proceedings of the Code Enforcement Board and the vote of any
member on any issue decided by the board shall be recorded in the minutes.
(F) Conflict of interest. Any member of the Code Enforcement Board who has any direct or indirect
financial or personal interest in any matter to be decided shall disclose the nature of the interest, shall
disqualify himself or herself from voting on the matter in which he or she has an interest, and shall not be
counted for purposes of establishing a quorum.
(G) Powers of the Code Enforcement Board. The City of Radcliff Code Enforcement Board shall have
the following powers and duties:
(1) To adopt rules and regulations to govern its operations and the conduct of its hearings
consistent with this section.
(2) To conduct hearings to determine if there has been a violation of an ordinance over which it
has jurisdiction.
2017 S-5
Administration 20C
(3) To subpoena alleged violators, witnesses and evidence to its hearings. Subpoenas issued by
the Code Enforcement Board may be served by any Code Enforcement Officer.
(4) To take testimony under oath. The chairman shall have the authority to administer oaths for
the purpose of taking testimony.
(5) To make findings of fact and issue orders necessary to remedy any violation of a city
ordinance or code provision which the board is authorized to enforce.
(6) To impose civil fines, as authorized, on any person found to have violated an ordinance over
which the board has jurisdiction.
(H) Code Enforcement proceedings. The following requirements shall govern all enforcement
proceedings before the Code Enforcement Board:
(1) Enforcement proceedings shall only be initiated by the issuance of a citation by a Code
Enforcement Officer.
(2) Except when immediate action is necessary pursuant to division (P), if a Code Enforcement
Officer believes, based on his personal observation or investigation, that a person has violated a city
ordinance, he may issue a Notice of Violation allowing the alleged violator a specified period of time to
remedy the violation without incurring a fine. If the alleged violator fails or refuses to remedy the violation
within the time specified, the Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to issue a citation.
(3) The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a citation by one of the following methods:
(a) Personal service to the alleged violator;
(b) Leaving a copy of the citation with any person 18 years of age or older who is on the
premises, if the alleged violator is not on the premises at the time the citation is issued; or
(c) Posting a copy of the citation in a conspicuous place on the premises and mailing a copy
of the citation by regular, first-class mail to the owner of record of the property, if no one is on the premises
at the time the citation is issued.
(4) The citation issued by the Code Enforcement Officer shall contain the following information:
(a) The date and time of issuance;
(b) The name and address of the person to whom the citation is issued;
(c) The physical address of the premises where the violation occurred;
(d) The date and time the offense was committed;
2017 S-5
20D Radcliff - Administration
(e) The facts constituting the offense;
(f) The section of the code or the number of the ordinance violated;
(g) The name of the Code Enforcement Officer;
(h) The civil fine that may be imposed for the violation, including, if applicable:
1. The civil fine that will be imposed if the person does not contest the citation; and
2. The maximum civil fine that may be imposed if the person elects to contest the
citation;
3. The procedure for the person to follow in order to pay the civil fine or to contest the
citation; and
(i) A statement that if the person fails to pay the civil fine set forth in the citation or contest
the citation within the time allowed: the person shall be deemed to have waived the right to a hearing
before the Code Enforcement Board to contest the citation; the determination that the violation was
committed shall be final; the citation as issued shall be deemed a final order determining that the violation
was committed and imposing the civil fine as set forth in the citation; and the person shall be deemed to
have waived the right to appeal the final order to District Court.
(5) After issuing a citation to an alleged violator, the Code Enforcement Officer shall notify the
Code Enforcement Board by delivering the citation to the Administrative Assistant.
(6) (a) The person to whom the citation is issued shall respond to the citation within seven days
of the date of issuance by either paying the civil fine or requesting, in writing, a hearing to contest the
citation. If the person fails to respond to the citation within seven days, the person shall be deemed to have
waived the right to a hearing and the determination that a violation was committed shall be considered
final. In this event, the citation as issued shall be deemed a final order determining that the violation was
committed and imposing the civil fine as set forth in the citation, and the person shall be deemed to have
waived the right to appeal the final order to District Court.
(b) Notice of a final order shall be provided to the cited violator by regular first-class mail;
personal delivery; or by leaving the notice at the person's usual place of residence with any individual
residing therein who is 18 years of age or older and who is informed of the contents of the notice.
(I) Code Enforcement Hearing; notice; and final order.
(1) When a hearing has been requested, the Code Enforcement Board shall schedule a hearing.
(2) Not less than seven business days before the date of the hearing, the Code Enforcement Board
shall notify the requester of the date, time, and place of the hearing. The notice may be given by
2017 S-5
Administration 20E
regular first-class mail; personal delivery; or by leaving the notice at the person's usual place of residence
with any individual residing therein who is 18 years of age or older and who is informed of the contents of
the notice.
(3) (a) Any person requesting a hearing who fails to appear at the time and place set for the
hearing shall be deemed to have waived the right to a hearing to contest the citation, and the determination
that a violation was committed shall be final. In this event, the citation as issued shall be deemed a final
order determining the violation was committed and imposing the civil fine set forth in the citation, and the
alleged violator shall be deemed to have waived the right to appeal the final order to District Court.
(b) Notice of a final order shall be provided to the cited violator by regular first-class mail;
personal delivery; or by leaving the notice at the person's usual place of residence with any individual
residing therein who is 18 years of age or older and who is informed of the contents of the notice.
(4) All testimony at the hearing shall be taken under oath and recorded. Testimony shall be taken
from the Code Enforcement Officer, the alleged violator, and any witnesses to the violation offered by the
Code Enforcement Officer or alleged violator. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but fundamental
due process shall be observed and shall govern the proceedings.
(5) The Code Enforcement Board shall, based on the evidence, determine whether a violation was
committed. If it is determined that no violation was committed, an order dismissing the citation shall be
entered. If it is determined that a violation was committed, an order may be issued upholding the citation.
The board may impose a fine up to the maximum authorized by ordinance, or require the offender to
remedy a continuing violation to avoid a fine, or both.
(6) (a) Every final order following a hearing shall be reduced to writing, which shall include the
findings and conclusions reached and the date the order was issued. A copy shall be furnished to the person
named in the citation.
(b) If the person named in the citation is not present when the final order is issued, the order
shall be delivered to the person by regular first-class mail; personal delivery; or by leaving the notice at the
person's usual place of residence with any individual residing therein who is 18 years of age or older and
who is informed of the contents of the notice.
(J) Code Enforcement Presentation of cases. Each case before the Code Enforcement Board shall be
presented by an attorney selected by the city, a code enforcement officer for the city, or by a member of the
city's administrative staff. The city attorney may either be counsel to the Code Enforcement Board or may
present cases before the Code Enforcement Board, but shall in no case serve in both capacities.
(K) Code Enforcement Appeals; final judgment.
(1) An appeal from a final order of a Code Enforcement Board following a hearing conducted
pursuant to division (I)(5) may be made to the Hardin County District Court within 30 days of the date
2017 S-5
20F Radcliff - Administration
the order is issued. The appeal shall be initiated by the filing of a complaint and a copy of the final order in
the same manner as any civil action under the Kentucky Rules of Civil Procedure.
(2) If no appeal from a final order of the Code Enforcement Board is filed within the time period
set in division (K)(1), the Code Enforcement Board's order shall be deemed final for all purposes.
(L) Code Enforcement Lien; fines, charges, and fees.
(1) The city shall possess a lien on property owned by the person found by a nonappealable final
order as defined by division (A)(4), or by a final judgment of the court, to have committed a violation of a
city ordinance. The lien shall be for all civil fines assessed for the violation and for all charges and fees
incurred by the city in connection with the enforcement of the ordinance, including abatement costs. An
affidavit of the Code Enforcement Officer shall constitute prima facie evidence of the amount of the lien
and regularity of the proceedings pursuant to KRS 65.8801 to 65.8839.
(2) The lien shall be recorded in the office of the county clerk. The lien shall be notice to all
persons from the time of its recording and shall bear interest until paid. The lien shall continue for ten years
following the date of the nonappealable final order or final court judgment.
(3) Subject to division (N), the lien shall take precedence over all other liens, except state, county,
school board, and city taxes, and may be enforced by judicial proceedings, including a foreclosure action.
(4) In addition to the remedy prescribed in division (L)(1), the person found to have committed
the violation shall be personally responsible for the amount of all civil fines assessed for the violation and
for all charges, fees and abatement costs incurred by the city in connection with the enforcement of this
section. The city may bring a civil action against the person and shall have the same remedies as provided
for the recovery of a debt.
(M) Code Enforcement Lienholder notification system. The city shall obtain and maintain priority over
previously filed liens, as provided in division (L), in accordance with the following provisions:
(1) Individuals and entities, including but not limited to lienholders, may register with the city to
receive electronic notification of final orders entered pursuant to this section.
(2) In order to receive the notification, the registrant shall submit the following information to the
Administrative Assistant:
(a) Name;
(b) Mailing address;
(c) Phone number; and
(d) Electronic mailing address.
2017 S-5
Administration 20G
(3) A registrant may use the electronic form provided on the city Web site to submit the
information required by division (M)(2). It shall be the responsibility of the registrant to maintain and
update the required contact information with the city. The city shall inform a registrant of any evidence
received that the electronic mailing address is invalid or not functional so that the registrant may provide an
updated electronic mailing address.
(4) Once per month, the city shall send electronic mail notification of all final orders entered
pursuant to this section since the last date of notification to each party registered pursuant to this section.
The notification shall provide an electronic link to the City Code Enforcement database located on the city
Web site. The database shall include the following information regarding each final order:
(a) The name of the person charged with a violation;
(b) The physical address of the premises where the violation occurred;
(c) The last known mailing address for the owner of the premises where the violation
occurred;
(d) A copy of the full citation;
(e) A copy of the full final order; and
(f) The status of the final order regarding its ability to be appealed pursuant to this section.
(5) If an appeal is filed on a final order pursuant to this section, the city shall send electronic mail
notification to all registrants.
(6) Within ten days of the issuance of a final order pursuant to this section, the city shall update
its Code Enforcement Database to reflect the issued final order, and shall post the notification required by
division (M)(4) containing an updated link to the Code Enforcement Database on the city Web site.
(7) The city shall maintain the records created under this section for ten years following their
issuance.
(N) Liens.
(1) A lienholder of record who has registered pursuant to division (M)(2) may, within 45 days
from the date of issuance of notification under division (M)(4):
(a) Correct the violation, if it has not already been abated; or
(b) Pay all civil fines assessed for the violation, and all charges and fees incurred by the city
in connection with enforcement of the ordinance, including abatement costs.
2017 S-5
20H Radcliff - Administration
(2) Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from taking immediate action if necessary under
Division (O).
(3) The lien provided by division (L) shall not take precedence over previously recorded liens if:
(a) The city failed to comply with the requirements of division (M) for notification of the
final order; or
(b) A prior lienholder complied with division (N)(1).
(4) A lien that does not take precedence over previously recorded liens under division (N)(3)
shall, if the final order remains partially unsatisfied, continue to take precedence over all other subsequent
liens except liens for state, county, school board and city taxes.
(5) The city may record a lien before the 45-day period established in division (N)(1) expires. If
the lien is fully satisfied prior to the expiration of the 45-day period, the city shall release the lien in the
county clerk's office where the lien is recorded within 15 days of satisfaction.
(6) Failure of the city to comply with division (M) and division (N), or failure of a lien to take
precedence over previously filed liens as provided in division (N)(3), shall not limit or restrict any other
remedies the city has against the property of the violator.
(Ord. 17-03-1199, passed 3-21-2017)
ARTICLE VI. FORESTRY AND CONSERVATION BOARD
' 2-55 ESTABLISHED.
(A) There is hereby created within the city a Forestry and Conservation Board, as per Ord. 00-06-806,
passed 6-23-2000. The Board shall be composed of seven members.
2017 S-5
Administration 21
(B) The Forestry and Conservation Board is established to promote and improve the education and
appreciation for our community=s natural environment by authorizing the creation of an advisory board to
oversee forestry and conservation in the city.
(Ord. passed 9-15-2004)
' 2-56 POWERS.
(A) The Forestry and Conservation Board shall be responsible for overseeing the development of
Saunders Springs Nature Preserve.
(B) The Board shall be responsible for overseeing the development of Saunders Springs Nature
Preserve.
(C) The Board shall have the authority to request grant monies through the completion of grant
proposals with the consent and through the office of the City Chief Administrative Officer or his or her
designee. Expenditure of all forestry and conservation grant monies and private donations to the city for
forestry and conservation activities shall be accomplished through a duly enacted city budget ordinance.
All checking accounts shall be maintained by and in the name of the city.
(D) The Board shall be required to obtain City Council approval prior to the expenditure of any city
revenue and shall also be required to obtain City Council approval prior to committing the donation of
in-kind contributions from city resources.
(Ord. passed 5-21-2002)
' 2-57 APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS; TERM OF OFFICE; REMOVAL FROM OFFICE;
AND COMPENSATION.
(A) Members of the Board shall be appointed by the Mayor of the city, subject to the approval of the
City Council.
(B) All subsequent appointments shall be for a term of three years. A member may be reappointed,
subject to the approval of the City Council.
(C) Any vacancy on the Board shall be filled by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the City Council
within 60 days of the vacancy. If the vacancy is not filled within that time period, the remaining Board
members shall fill the vacancy.
(D) A Board member may be removed from office by the Mayor for misconduct, inefficiency or
willful neglect of duty. The Mayor must submit a written statement to the member and the City Council
setting forth the reasons for dismissal.
22 Radcliff - Administration
(E) Members of the Forestry Board shall be compensated for attendance at each meeting.
Compensation shall be an amount determined by the legislative body as reflected in the annual budget.
(F) The Board shall annually elect a Chair and Vice-Chair from among its members. The Chair shall
be the presiding officer and a full voting members of the Board. In the absence of the Chair, the Vice-Chair
shall be the presiding officer and a full voting member of the Board.
(G) Regular meeting of the Board shall be held on the third Thursday of each month at 5:00 p.m.
Meetings other than those regularly scheduled shall be special meetings held in accordance with the
requirements of the Kentucky Open Meetings Act.
(H) All meetings of the Board shall be held in accordance with the requirements of the Kentucky Open
Meetings Act.
(I) The affirmative vote of a majority of a quorum of the Board shall be necessary for any official
action to be taken.
(J) Minutes shall be kept for all proceedings of the Board and the vote of each member on any issue
decided by the Board shall be recorded in the minutes.
(Ord. passed 5-21-2002; Ord. passed 6-15-2004)
' 2-58 CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
Any member of the Board who has any direct or indirect financial or personal interest in any matter to
be decided shall disclose the nature of the interest and shall disqualify himself or herself from voting on the
matter in which he or she has an interest and shall not be counted for purposes of establishing a quorum.
(Ord. passed 6-23-2000; Ord. passed 5-21-2002)
ARTICLE VII. FINANCES
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
' 2-65 ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURE FOR AD VALOREM TAXES.
(A) Assessment date for city taxation. The assessment date for city taxation shall be January 1 of each
year.
Administration 23
(B) Assessment list and equalization. The assessment list shall be as provided by the Property
Valuation Administrator for the county and the equalization of the assessments shall be in accordance with
the Property Valuation Administrator=s procedures for county and state taxes and the city will accept the
assessments and equalization of the county=s Property Valuation Administrator.
(C) Time and manner of paying taxes/discounts, interest and penalties. Taxes shall be due and payable
on December 31 of each year. Any discounts, interest and penalties shall be in accordance with KRS 92.590
as it pertains to second class cities. If the tax assessments are not received from the County Property
Valuation Administrator in a timely manner, then all of the times for discounts, interest and penalties shall
be adjusted accordingly.
(Ord. passed 12-15-1992)
Statutory reference:
Similar provisions, see KRS 92.540, 92.590
' 2-66 ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURE FOR BANK FRANCHISE AND LOCAL
DEPOSIT TAXES.
(A) Time table for collection of tax. The city will issue tax bills to financial institutions no later than
December 1 of each year. Payment of the tax shall be due with a 2% discount by December 31 of each year
or without the discount by January 31 of each year.
(B) Enforcement procedures. The city shall have a lien for taxes on the property assessed for taxes to
the extent allowed under KRS 134.420.
(C) Penalties. All taxes due in accordance with these sections which are not paid prior to 6-30-1997,
for the tax year 1996, or which are not paid before January 31, for all subsequent tax years shall be deemed
delinquent and shall be subject to a penalty of 10% and shall bear interest at the rate of 6% per annum.
(D) Purpose. All monies collected pursuant to these sections shall be paid into the General Fund of the
city to be used for the payment of proper expenditures as determined by the City Council.
(Ord. passed 8-21-1996)
Statutory reference:
Similar provisions, see KRS Ch. 136, KRS 134.420
' 2-67 INVESTMENT POLICY FOR THE CITY.
(A) General policy. It is the policy of the city to invest public funds in a manner which will provide the
highest investment return with the maximum security of principal while meeting the daily cash flow
demands of the city and conforming to all state statutes and city regulations governing the investment of
public funds.
24 Radcliff - Administration
(B) Scope.
(1) This investment policy applies to all financial assets held directly by the city. These financial
assets are accounted for in the city=s annual financial report and include all monies in the following funds:
(a) General Fund;
(b) Special Revenue Fund;
(c) Debt Service Funds;
(d) Capital Projects Funds;
(e) Utility General Fund;
(f) Utility Depreciation Fund; and
(g) Any new fund created by the governing body.
(2) Financial assets of the city held and invested by trustees or fiscal agents are excluded from
these policies; however, the assets shall be invested in accordance with state laws applicable to the
investment of local government funds and in accordance with the city=s primary investment objectives.
(C) Investment objectives.
(1) Safety. Safety of principal is the foremost objective of the city=s investment program.
Investments shall be undertaken in a manner that seeks to ensure the preservation of capital in the overall
portfolio. To attain this objective, diversification is required in order that potential losses on individual
securities do not exceed the income generated from the remainder of the portfolio.
(2) Liquidity. The city=s investment portfolio shall remain sufficiently liquid to enable the city to
meet all operating requirements which might be reasonably anticipated.
(3) Return on investment. The city=s investment portfolio shall be designed with the objective of
attaining a market rate of return throughout the budgetary and economic cycles, taking into account the
city=s investment risk constraints and the cash flow characteristics of the portfolio.
(D) Investment authority. Management responsibility for the city=s investment program is hereby
delegated to the Mayor. The Mayor shall have the authority, subject to the approval of the governing body,
to establish additional specific written procedures for the operation of the investment program which are
consistent with this investment policy. The procedures shall include explicit delegation of
Administration 25
authority, if any, to persons responsible for investment transactions. No person may engage in an
investment transaction except as provided under the terms of this policy and the procedures established by
the Mayor. The Mayor shall be ultimately responsible for all transactions undertaken and shall establish a
system of controls to regulate the activities of subordinate officials and employees. The controls shall be
designated to prevent and control losses of public funds arising from fraud, employee error,
misrepresentation by third parties, unanticipated changes in financial markets or imprudent actions by
officers and employees. The Mayor shall maintain all records to the city=s investment program.
(E) Prudent person rule. The actions of the Mayor in the performance of his or her duties as manager
of the city=s funds shall be evaluated using the Aprudent person@ standard. Investments shall be made with
judgement and care under prevailing circumstances which persons of prudence, discretion and intelligence
exercise in the management of their own affairs, not for speculation, but for investment considering the
probable safety of their capital as well as the probable income to be derived.
(F) Authorized investments. The funds of the city available for investment shall be invested in
accordance with this policy and all applicable state statutes, and only in certificates of deposit issued by or
other interest bearing accounts of any bank or savings and loan institution which are insured by the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation or similar entity or which are collateralized, to the extent uninsured, by any
obligations permitted by KRS 41.240(4).
(G) Diversification of investments.
(1) Diversification of the city=s investment portfolio by institution, type of investment instrument
and term to maturity is the primary method to minimize investment risk.
(2) The city=s funds shall be diversified by security type and institution. With the exception of
fully insured or fully collateralized investments, and except for authorized investment pools, no more than
$100,000 secured by the FDIC, and if over $100,000, it must be secured by a bonding agreement from the
Financial Institution.
(3) To the extent possible, the city will attempt to match its investments with anticipated cash
flow requirements. Unless matched to a specific cash flow need, the city=s funds should not, in general, be
invested in securities maturing more than one year from the date of purchase. Reserve funds may be
invested in securities exceeding one year, if maturity of the investments are made to coincide as nearly as
practicable with the expected use of the funds.
(H) Authorized financial dealers and institutions.
(1) The Mayor shall maintain a list of financial institutions. All financial institutions who desire
to provide investment services to the city shall supply the Mayor with information sufficient to adequately
evaluate the institution and answer any and all inquiries posed by the Mayor or the governing body,
including the following information:
26 Radcliff - Administration
(a) Audited financial statements;
(b) Regulatory reports on financial condition;
(c) Written memorandum of agreement for the deposit of public funds or trading resolution,
as appropriate; and
(d) Any additional information considered necessary to allow the Mayor to evaluate the
credit worthiness of the institution.
(2) The Mayor shall evaluate the financial capacity and credit worthiness of financial institutions
prior to the placement of the city. The Mayor shall conduct an annual review of the financial condition and
registrations of financial institutions and, and based on the review, make any recommendations regarding
investment policy or program changes determined to be necessary.
(I) Safekeeping and custody.
(1) To protect against potential fraud and embezzlement, investment assets shall be secured
through third-party custody and safekeeping institutions. The Mayor and any other officers or employees of
the city authorized to engage in investment transactions shall be bonded in an amount established by the
governing body. Collateralized securities, such as repurchase agreements, shall be purchased using the
delivery vs. payment procedure. Money market mutual funds used for investments must provide for
independent custodians of their portfolios and delivery vs. payment on their portfolio securities.
(2) The safekeeping procedures utilized in the city=s investment program shall be reviewed
annually by the independent auditor.
(J) Collateral.
(1) It is the policy of the city to require that all cash and investments maintained in any financial
institution named as a depository be collateralized. Collateral shall be limited to all types of instruments
authorized as collateral for state funds in KRS 41.240.
(2) Collateral shall always be held by an independent third-party custodian with whom the city
has a current custodial agreement. A clearly-marked evidence of ownership (safekeeping receipt) must be
supplied to the city and retained by the Mayor. The right of collateral substitution is hereby granted.
(K) Investment reporting.
(1) The Mayor shall prepare and submit to the governing body a quarterly report regarding the
status of the city=s investment program. As to each investment, the report shall include the following
information:
Administration 27
(a) Name of financial institution from which the investment was purchased or in which
assets are deposited;
(b) Type of investment;
(c) Certificate or other reference number, if applicable;
(d) Percentage yield on an annualized basis;
(e) Purchase date, purchase price and maturity date; and
(f) Current market value of the investment.
(2) In addition, the report shall explain the quarter=s total investment return and compare the
return with budgetary expectation.
(3) The quarterly report shall also summarize recent market conditions, economic developments
and anticipated investment conditions, and indicate any areas of policy concern and suggested revisions of
investment strategies. Copies of the report shall be submitted to each member of the governing body and
the chief executive officer of the city.
(L) Audit. In connection with the audit of city funds conducted by an independent certified public
accountant, the auditor shall conduct a review of the city=s investment program, including internal controls
and procedures, and the results of the review, including recommended changes, shall be included in the
city=s audit.
(M) Investment policy adoption.
(1) This policy shall be reviewed annually and revised as appropriate. Any amendments to this
policy must be made by order of the governing body.
(2) Any investment held on the date of initial adoption of this policy which does not meet the
guidelines of this policy shall be exempt from its provisions. At maturity or liquidation, the monies so
invested, if reinvested, shall be reinvested only in accordance with this policy. The Mayor may take a
reasonable period of time to adjust the existing portfolio to the provisions of this policy in order to avoid
the premature liquidation of any current investment.
(Ord. passed 9-26-1994)
Statutory reference:
Similar provisions, see KRS 66.480, 41.240(4)
28 Radcliff - Administration
' 2-68 MINIMUM CASH RESERVE AMOUNTS IN THE CITY GENERAL OPERATING FUND.
(A) The city shall maintain a fund balance consisting of cash reserves in the General Fund equivalent
to, at a minimum, 26% to 30% of regular on-going operating expenditures. For the purposes of this section,
current fiscal year's actual expenditures shall exclude significant non-recurring items.
(B) The city shall measure its compliance with this section on an annual basis during the city's
budgeting process. During the course of the fiscal year, the City Finance Department shall monitor closely
the city's revenues and expenditures to ensure reserves are not used beyond any planned usage. At a
minimum, during the annual financial budgeting process, City Finance Department staff shall review the
current projected reserves to ensure those reserve levels are appropriate given the economic and financial
risk factors to which the city is subject.
(C) The provisions of this section notwithstanding, the City Council may withdraw funds from its
reserves in the event of an emergency and after the General Fund's budgeted contingency is exhausted.
Furthermore, the City Council does not intend by means of this section to abrogate the right of any future
Radcliff City Council to exercise its ability to budget and expend funds for lawful public purposes as
authorized by the Kentucky Revised Statutes and other applicable law.
(Ord. 17-09-1210, passed 9-19-2017)
DIVISION 2. INDUSTRIAL REVENUE BONDS
' 2-75 GUIDELINES ADOPTED.
The City Council does hereby approve and adopt the set of local guidelines (the AGuidelines@), entitled
ARadcliff Requirements For Issuing Industrial Revenue Bonds@ as hereinafter set out in ' 2-76, and it is
hereby ordered that each proposed building project involving a bond issue must be brought before the City
Council for discussion and must comply with the guidelines, after which the City Council will pass an
ordinance stating its position on the bond issue.
(Ord. passed 11-17-1981)
Editor=s note:
Ord. of 11-17-1981, not specifically amendatory of the code, has been included herein as
Div. 2, '' 2-75 through 2-79 at the discretion of the editor.
' 2-76 REQUIREMENTS FOR ISSUING INDUSTRIAL REVENUE BONDS.
(A) All applications to the city for industrial revenue bond financing or economic development
revenue bond financing for projects for which the financing is authorized by KRS 103-200 shall be
reviewed by the Revenue Bond Oversight Commission and then submitted to the City Council of the city,
2017 S-5
Administration 28A
reviewed by the City Council and, if approved, recommended to the Industrial Revenue Bond Oversight
Committee of the commonwealth (the AState Oversight Committee@) if the project falls under KRS
103.200(2), (4), (8), (9) and (16), and off-street parking facilities, cable television and mass communication
facilities as authorized by KRS 103.200(3), according to the guidelines hereinafter set out.
(B) Application to the city shall be made in writing on the same application forms as those prescribed
and adopted by the state=s Oversight Committee for application to the committee for review. The
application forms shall be submitted in quadruplicate, and shall be filed with the City Clerk. One copy of
the application shall then be given to the Chairperson of the Bond Oversight Commission. An application
fee of $150 will be required with the submission of the application.
(C) The Revenue Bond Oversight Commission shall hold meetings at the call of the Chairperson of
the Commission. The applicant and the project developer shall be notified of a meeting date within 14 days
of the application submission. All meetings of the Commission must be advertised in the local newspaper
giving the time, place, date and purpose of each Commission meeting and the application to be considered
at the meeting at least seven days in advance of any such meeting. The Commission will elect a
Chairperson to preside over the meeting. The terms of the Commission shall be for one year with no
limitations on succession. The Commission shall consist of three members appointed by the Mayor and
approved by the City Council. At least two members of the Commission must be present to conduct
business.
2017 S-5
28B Radcliff - Administration

Administration 29
(D) The Commission shall make a recommendation to the City Council concerning approval or
disapproval of the application. The recommendation shall not be binding on the City Council. The
recommendation from the Commission will include a written statement outlining the benefits that the
project will provide the community and indicating why they believe the project should be approved by the
City Council. If a project is recommended by the commission to be disapproved, then the Commission will
also state their reasons for recommending disapproval. The Commission shall make such recommendations
to the City Council in writing within ten days from the final meeting on the application. If the Commission
believes the application is deficient in areas that can be otherwise met by the applicant, the Commission
may state those conditions to be met in writing to the applicant and allow the applicant 30 days in which to
try and meet those conditions. The Commission may then accept a resubmittal of the project if the applicant
can alleviate the problems cited by the Commission. In determining what applications the Commission will
recommend approval or disapproval, the Commission will follow the Industrial Revenue Bond Oversight
Committee policy statements issued by the state=s Bond Oversight Committee. The City Council will
follow the same policy statements concerning its final approval or disapproval.
(E) (1) The applicant shall notify the local Chamber of Commerce and any other group which has
filed a written request with the City Clerk for notification of the filing of the applications, in writing, at
least seven days prior to the date in which the Revenue Bond Oversight Commission will hold its public
meeting on the application and at least seven days prior to the date in which the inducement ordinance is
presented to the City Council for the first time. The notice shall briefly:
(a) Describe the project;
(b) Give the location of the project;
(c) State the amount of the proposed bond issue;
(d) Give the date of the Revenue Bond Oversight Commission meeting at which the
application will be presented and in the case of the inducement ordinance, give the date of the City Council
meeting at which the inducement ordinance will first be presented; and
(e) Inform the local Chamber of Commerce and any such other group, if any, of its
opportunity to comment on the project.
(2) A copy of the notice or notices shall be filed with the City Clerk. The City Council shall
consider any comments received as a result of the notice or notices prior to the second reading of the
inducement ordinance. The Bond Oversight Commission shall consider any comments received as a result
of the notice at its meeting on the application.
30 Radcliff - Administration
(F) Each inducement ordinance shall receive two readings by the City Council. Not less than seven
days prior to the second reading of an inducement ordinance the applicant shall advertise, in a newspaper
which qualifies under KRS Chapter 424 for legal publication by the city, notice of the City Council meeting
at which the inducement ordinance will be considered for second reading. The notice shall include:
(1) A statement that the City Council will consider at the meeting authorization for industrial
revenue bonds to finance the project;
(2) The date, time and place of the meeting;
(3) The name of the applicant;
(4) The type and location of the project; and
(5) A statement that members of the public will have an opportunity to comment on the project
and the bond issue at the meeting.
(G) During any City Council meeting at which an inducement ordinance for a project covered by these
guidelines is considered and at any meeting of the Bond Oversight Commission in which an application is
considered, a reasonable opportunity shall be given for the public to provide comments concerning the
proposed bond issue.
(H) For any project for which an inducement ordinance is enacted on second reading in accordance
with the procedure set out in these guidelines, the city will notify the state=s Oversight Committee in
writing of the passage and include in the notification a statement outlining the benefits that the project will
provide for the city and surrounding area and indicating why the project should be approved by the state=s
Oversight Committee.
(I) The meeting of the state=s Oversight Committee at which a project, so recommended by the city
for approval, will be considered, shall be attended by the Mayor or other official designated by the Mayor.
The Mayor or such designated official shall be prepared to explain the position of the city relative to the
project and the bond issue.
(J) These guidelines shall become effective upon approval of same by the state=s Oversight
Committee.
(Ord. passed 11-17-1981)
Administration 31
' 2-77 ESTABLISHMENT OF BOND OVERSIGHT COMMISSION.
The Bond Oversight Commission is hereby established for the purpose of reviewing all applications for
industrial building revenue bonds to be issued by the city. The Commission shall make recommendations to
the City Council as to whether the applications should be approved or disapproved concerning the issuance
of industrial building revenue bonds.
(Ord. passed 11-17-1981)
' 2-78 APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL OF INDUSTRIAL REVENUE BOND ISSUES.
The application form (the Aapplication@) of the state=s Oversight Committee is hereby adopted insofar
as it is appropriate to be used as an application for consideration of a bond issue by the City Council, a true
copy of which application is attached to the ordinance codified herein, entitled AApplication for Approval of
Industrial Revenue Bond Issues@.
(Ord. passed 11-17-1981)
Editor=s note:
The application form referred to in ' 2-78 is not set out at length herein, but is on file and
available for inspection in the offices of the city.
' 2-79 ADDITIONAL ACTION BY CITY OFFICIALS.
The Mayor and other appropriate city officials are hereby authorized to take such further action as may
be necessary to carry out the intent of this division with reference to such building projects and any other
industrial building projects which may be presented or proposed to the City Council pursuant to this
division.
(Ord. passed 11-17-1981)
ARTICLE VIII. SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES AND PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT
' 2-90 FINDINGS AND INTENT.
(A) The Radcliff City Council finds the following.
(1) Numerous studies have found that tobacco smoke is a major contributor to indoor air
pollution. Breathing secondhand smoke is a cause of disease in healthy nonsmokers. These diseases include
heart disease, stroke, respiratory disease and lung cancer. The National Cancer Institute determined in 1999
that secondhand smoke is responsible for the early deaths of up to 65,000 Americans annually. (National
Cancer Institute (NCI), AHealth effects of exposure to environmental tobacco smoke:
32 Radcliff - Administration
the report of the California Environmental Protection Agency. Smoking and Tobacco Control Monograph
10,@ Bethesda, MD: National Institutes of Health, National Cancer Institute (NCI), August 1999.)
(2) The Public Health Service=s National Toxicology Program (NTP) has listed secondhand
smoke as a known carcinogen. (Environmental Health Information Service (EHIS), AEnvironmental tobacco
smoke: first listed in the Ninth Report on Carcinogens,@ U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
(DHHS), Public Health Service, NTP, 2000; reaffirmed by the NTP in subsequent reports on carcinogens,
2003, 2005.)
(3) A study of hospital admissions for acute myocardial infarction in Helena, Montana before,
during and after a local law eliminating smoking in workplaces and public places was in effect, has
determined that laws to enforce smoke-free workplaces and public places may be associated with a
reduction in morbidity from heart disease. (Sargent, Richard P.; Shepard, Robert M.; Glantz, Stanton A.,
AReduced incidence of admissions for myocardial infarction associated with public smoking ban: before
and after study,@ British Medical Journal 328: 977-980, April 24, 2004.)
(4) Secondhand smoke is particularly hazardous to the elderly, individuals with cardiovascular
disease and individuals with impaired respiratory function, including asthmatics and those with obstructive
airway disease. Children exposed to secondhand smoke have an increased risk of asthma, respiratory
infections, sudden infant death syndrome, developmental abnormalities and cancer. (California
Environmental Protection Agency (Cal EPA), AHealth effects of exposure to environmental tobacco
smoke,@ Tobacco Control 6(4): 346-353, Winter, 1997.)
(5) The Americans with Disabilities Act, which mandates access to public places and workplaces
for persons with disabilities, deems impaired respiratory function to be a disability. (Daynard, R.A.,
AEnvironmental tobacco smoke and the Americans with Disabilities Act,@Nonsmokers= Voice 15(1): 8-9.)
(6) The U.S. Surgeon General has determined that the simple separation of smokers and
nonsmokers within the same air space may reduce, but does not eliminate, the exposure of nonsmokers to
secondhand smoke. (Department of Health and Human Services. The Health Consequences of Involuntary
Smoking: A Report of the Surgeon General. Public Health Service, Centers for Disease Control, 1986.)
(7) The Environmental Protection Agency has determined that secondhand smoke cannot be
reduced to safe levels in businesses by high rates of ventilation. Air cleaners, which are only capable of
filtering the particulate matter and odors in smoke, do not eliminate the known toxins in secondhand
smoke. (Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), AIndoor air facts no. 5: environmental tobacco smoke,@
Washington, D.C.: Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), June 1989.)
(8) The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has determined that the risk of acute
myocardial infarction and coronary heart disease associated with exposure to tobacco smoke is nonlinear
Administration 33
at low doses, increasing rapidly with relatively small doses such as those received from secondhand smoke
or actively smoking one or two cigarettes a day, and has warned that all patients at increased risk of
coronary heart disease or with known coronary artery disease should avoid all indoor environments that
permit smoking. (Pechacek, Terry F.; Babb, Stephen, ACommentary: How acute and reversible are the
cardiovascular risks of secondhand smoke?@ British Medical Journal, 328: 980-983, April 24, 2004.)
(9) A significant amount of secondhand smoke exposure occurs in the workplace. Employees
who work in smoke-filled businesses suffer a 25% to 50% higher risk of heart attack and higher rates of
death from cardiovascular disease and cancer, as well as increased acute respiratory disease and measurable
decrease in lung function. (Pitsavos, C; Panagiotakos, D.B.; Chrysohoou, C; Skoumas, J.; Tzioumis, K.;
Stefanadis, C; Toutouzas, P., AAssociation between exposure to environmental tobacco smoke and the
development of acute coronary syndromes: the CARDIO2000 case-control study,@Tobacco Control 11(3):
220-225, September 2002.)
(10) Smoke-filled workplaces result in higher worker absenteeism due to respiratory disease, lower
productivity, higher cleaning and maintenance costs, increased health insurance rates, and increased
liability claims for diseases related to exposure to secondhand smoke. (AThe high price of cigarette
smoking,@ Business & Health 15(8), Supplement A: 6-9, August 1997.)
(11) Numerous economic analyses examining restaurant and hotel receipts and controlling for
economic variables have shown either no difference or a positive economic impact after enactment of laws
requiring workplaces to be smoke-free. Creation of smoke-free workplaces is sound economic policy and
provides the maximum level of employee health and safety. (Glantz, S.A.; Smith, L., The Effect of
Ordinances Requiring Smoke-Free Restaurants on Restaurant Sales in the United States. American Journal
of Public Health, 87:1687-1693, 1997; Colman, R.; Urbonas, C.M., AThe economic impact of smoke-free
workplaces: an assessment for Nova Scotia, prepared for Tobacco Control Unit, Nova Scotia Department of
Health,@ GPI Atlantic, September 2001.)
(12) Smoking is a potential cause of fires; cigarette and cigar bums (sic) and ash stains on
merchandise and fixtures causes economic damage to business health 15(8), Supplement A: 6-9, August
1997.)
(13) The smoking of tobacco is a form of air pollution, a danger to health and a material public
nuisance.
(B) Accordingly, the City Council adopts the foregoing as justification for this article, the purpose of
which is to:
(1) Protect the public health and welfare by prohibiting smoking in public places and places of
employment; and
(2) Guarantee the right of nonsmokers to breathe smoke-free air; and
34 Radcliff - Administration
(3) Recognize that the public=s need to breathe smoke-free air shall have priority over the
individual=s desire to smoke.
(Ord. 09-12-1079, passed 12-17-2009)
' 2-91 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning.
BUSINESS. A sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other business entity,
either for profit or not for profit, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold;
professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural or other
professional services are delivered; and private clubs.
EMPLOYEE. A person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or indirect
monetary wages or profit, and a person who volunteers his or her services for a nonprofit entity.
EMPLOYER. A person, business, partnership, association, corporation, including a municipal
corporation, trust or nonprofit entity that employs the services of one or more individual persons.
ENCLOSED AREA. All space between a floor and ceiling that is enclosed on all sides by solid walls
or windows (exclusive of doorways), which extend from the floor to the ceiling.
HEALTH CARE FACILITY. An office or institution providing care or treatment of diseases, whether
physical, mental or emotional, or other medical, physiological or psychological conditions, including, but
not limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics, including treatment facilities for drug
addiction, alcoholism and the like, weight control clinics, nursing homes, homes for the aging or
chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentists
and all specialists within these professions. This definition shall include all waiting rooms, hallways,
private rooms, semiprivate rooms and wards within health care facilities.
PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT. An area under the control of a public or private employer that
employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas,
employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, meeting rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias and
hallways. A private residence is not a PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT unless it is used as a childcare, adult
day care or health care facility.
PRIVATE CLUB. An organization, whether incorporated or not, which is the owner, lessee or
occupant of a building or portion thereof used exclusively for club purposes at all times, which is operated
solely for a recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent or athletic purpose, but not for
pecuniary gain, and which only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation. The
Administration 35
affairs and management of the organization are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or
similar body chosen by the members at an annual meeting. The organization has established bylaws and/or
a constitution to govern its activities. The organization has been granted an exemption from the payment of
federal income tax as a club under 26 U.S.C. ' 501.
PUBLIC PLACE. An enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted,
including, but not limited to, banks, bars, educational facilities, health care facilities, hotel and motel
lobbies, laundromats, polling places, public transportation facilities, reception areas, restaurants, retail food
production and marketing establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores, shopping malls, sports
arenas, theaters and waiting rooms. A private club is a PUBLIC PLACE when being used for a function to
which the general public is invited. A private residence is not a PUBLIC PLACE unless it is used as a
childcare, adult day care or health care facility.
RESTAURANT. An eating establishment, including, but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias,
sandwich stands, national and regional chains, and private and public school cafeterias, which gives or
offers for sale food to the public, guests or employees, as well as kitchens and catering facilities in which
food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. The term RESTAURANT shall include a bar area
within the restaurant.
RETAIL TOBACCO STORE. A retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and
accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental.
SERVICE LINE. An indoor line in which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of
any kind, whether or not the service involves the exchange of money.
SHOPPING MALL. An enclosed public walkway or hall area that serves to connect retail or
professional establishments.
SMOKING. Inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or other lighted
tobacco product or any other lighted substance, whether otherwise legally possessed or consumed such as
marijuana, in any manner or in any form.
SPORTS ARENA. Sports pavilions, stadiums, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming
pools, roller and ice rinks, bowling alleys, and other similar places where members of the general public
assemble to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition, or witness sports or other
events.
(Ord. 09-12-1079, passed 12-17-2009)
' 2-92 APPLICATION TO CITY-OWNED FACILITIES.
Smoking policies concerning facilities owned or operated by the city shall be governed by regulations
adopted in compliance with KRS 61.165. Smoking is prohibited in all enclosed public places
36 Radcliff - Administration
defined herein and in all enclosed facilities as defined herein that are owned, operated or under the
jurisdiction of the City of Radcliff government.
(Ord. 09-12-1079, passed 12-17-2009)
' 2-93 PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN ENCLOSED PUBLIC PLACES.
Smoking is prohibited in all enclosed public places as defined in ' 2-91 above, within the city.
(Ord. 09-12-1079, passed 12-17-2009)
' 2-94 PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT.
(A) Smoking is prohibited in all enclosed facilities within places of employment. This prohibition
includes, but is not limited to, common work areas, auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting
rooms, private offices, elevators, hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias, employee lounges, stairs and
restrooms.
(B) This prohibition on smoking shall be communicated to all existing employees by the effective date
of this article [April 1, 2010] and to all prospective employees upon their application for employment.
(Ord. 09-12-1079, passed 12-17-2009)
' 2-95 PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN OUTDOOR ARENAS AND STADIUMS.
Smoking, to include vapor and smokeless tobacco, is prohibited in all Radcliff city parks, to include
Saunders Springs Nature Preserve, except in designated smoking areas which will be in view of playing
fields and playgrounds.
(Ord. 09-12-1079, passed 12-17-2009; Ord. 17-04-1201, passed 4-18-2017)
' 2-96 REASONABLE DISTANCE.
Smoking is prohibited within a reasonable distance of at least 15 feet of the outside entrance to or open
windows of any enclosed area in which smoking is prohibited by this article, and smokers shall not obstruct
the entrance at any time while smoking; and smoking is also prohibited within a reasonable distance from
the air intake of a ventilation system serving an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited, in order to
insure tobacco smoke does not enter that enclosed area through entrances, windows, ventilation systems or
other means.
(Ord. 09-12-1079, passed 12-17-2009)
2017 S-5
Administration 37
' 2-97 WHERE SMOKING NOT REGULATED.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, the following areas shall be exempt
from the provisions of '' 2-93 and 2-94:
(A) Private residences, except when used as a licensed childcare, adult day care or health care facility;
(B) Hotel and motel rooms that are rented to guests and are designated as smoking rooms; provided,
however, that not more than 20% of rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be so designated, and
that designated smoking rooms shall be contiguous and shall be able to be accessed by handicapped
persons. Smoke from the designated smoking rooms shall not infiltrate into areas where smoking is
prohibited under the provisions of this article. The status of rooms as smoking or nonsmoking may not be
changed, except to add additional nonsmoking rooms;
(C) Retail tobacco stores, provided that smoke from these premises does not infiltrate into areas where
smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this article;
(D) Private clubs that have no employees; provided that when such clubs are being used for functions
to which the general public is invited, the prohibitions set out in '' 2-93 and 2-94 shall apply; and
(E) Outdoor areas of places of employment, except those covered by the provisions of '' 2-95 and 2-
96.
(Ord. 09-12-1079, passed 12-17-2009)
' 2-98 DECLARATION OF ESTABLISHMENT AS NONSMOKING.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, an owner, operator, manager or other authorized
person in control of an establishment, facility or outdoor area may declare that entire establishment, facility
or outdoor area as a nonsmoking place regardless of its designation under this article. Within such
premises, as an authorized nonsmoking designation has been made and signage conforming to the
specifications set out in ' 2-99(A) is posted, smoking shall be prohibited as if otherwise prohibited by this
article.
(Ord. 09-12-1079, passed 12-17-2009)
' 2-99 POSTING OF SIGNS.
(A) ANo Smoking@ signs or the international ANo Smoking@ symbol, consisting of a pictorial
representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it, shall be clearly and
conspicuously posted in every public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this
38 Radcliff - Administration
article. The party responsible for the placement of the signage is the owner, operator, manager or other
person in control of the premises.
(B) A conspicuous sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited shall be posted at each entrance
utilized by the public entering and exiting public places within which smoking is prohibited by this article.
A conspicuous sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited shall be posted at each entrance utilized by
employees entering and exiting places of employment within which smoking is prohibited by this article.
(C) All ashtrays shall be removed from any area within which this article or the owner, operator,
manager or other person having control of the area prohibits smoking, except for ashtrays displayed for sale
and not for use on the premises.
(Ord. 09-12-1079, passed 12-17-2009)
' 2-100 NONRETALIATION AND NONWAIVER OF RIGHTS.
(A) No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner retaliate against an
employee, applicant for employment or customer because that employee, applicant or customer exercises
any rights afforded by this article or reports or attempts to prosecute a violation of this article.
(B) An employee who continues to work in a setting where an employer allows smoking in violation
of this article does not waive or otherwise surrender any legal rights the employee may have against the
employer or any other party.
(Ord. 09-12-1079, passed 12-17-2009)
' 2-101 ENFORCEMENT.
(A) The city=s code enforcement officer, the city police, the Fire Department, the Hardin County
Health Department (subject to formal determination by the Health Board that the Hardin Health
Department shall assume enforcement responsibilities) and all other city officials and employees designated
by the city shall enforce this article.
(B) Notice of the provisions of this article shall be given to all applicants for a business license in the
city.
(C) Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this article may initiate enforcement with
any of the authorized persons listed above.
(D) The Planning Department, Health Department, Fire Department, or their designees, while in an
establishment performing otherwise legal inspections, shall inspect for compliance with this article.
Administration 39
(E) Owners, managers, operators or employees of establishments regulated by this article shall inform
persons seen violating this article of the requirements of this article. In the event an owner, manager,
operator or employee of an establishment regulated by this article observes a person or persons violating
this article, he or she shall immediately direct the person or persons in violation to extinguish the item
being smoked.
(1) In the event the person or persons violating this article complies with this directive, no
violation shall exist for the owner, manager, operator or employee witnessing the violation. In the event an
owner, manager, operator or employee of an establishment regulated by this article observes a person or
persons violating this article and fails to immediately direct the person or persons in violation to extinguish
the item being smoked, the owner, manager, operator or employee failing to take appropriate steps required
by this article shall be in violation of this article.
(2) In the event the person or persons violating this article fails or refuses to comply with this
directive, the owner, manager, operator or employee directing the person or persons violating this article
shall take immediate and reasonable steps to obtain the removal of the person or persons from the premises.
(a) As an example of the reasonableness required, if there is a person violating this article
whom the owner, manager, operator or employee of an establishment regulated by this article is required to
remove from the premises, but the person is intoxicated or otherwise reasonably believed to be unable to
safely drive or conduct himself or herself if required to leave those premises, in this event the owner,
manager, operator or employee may reasonably determine to allow the person violating this article to
remain on the premises until appropriate arrangements may be made for the person=s removal.
(b) In the event the person or persons violating this article is timely removed from the
premises, no violation shall exist for any owner, manager, operator or employee related to the establishment
in which these events occurred. In no event is an owner or agent of the premises to forcibly remove the
person violating this article. Compliance is achieved under this division (E)(2) if the owner or agent of the
premises orders the person violating this article to leave its premises and promptly notifies the police if the
person refuses.
(3) In the event the person or persons violating this article fails or refuses to comply with this
directive and the owner, manager, operator or employee who observed the violation or if a different person
who directed the person or persons in violation to leave the premises, fails to take immediate and
reasonable steps to obtain the removal of the person or persons from the premises, the owner, manager,
operator or employee failing to take appropriate steps required by this article shall be in violation of this
article.
(4) In all events, the establishment in which a violation occurs shall be in violation of this article
for each violation that occurs on its premises and in connection with which the owner, manager, operator or
employee fail to take appropriate steps required by this article.
40 Radcliff - Administration
(5) An employee who observes a person or persons violating this article may immediately notify
his or her owner, manager or supervisor of the violation in satisfaction of the employee=s responsibility
under this article. The failure of the employee=s owner, manager or supervisor to take appropriate steps
required by this article in response to the employee=s notice shall not constitute a violation on the part of the
employee.
(6) In the event all duties required under this section are satisfied yet the person violating this
article persists in his or her violation and/or refuses to vacate the premises on which the violation occurred,
the owner, manager, supervisor and/or employee shall immediately contact one or more of the agencies or
departments authorized above to enforce this article informing the agency or department of the
circumstances of the violation.
(7) The mere presence of a person smoking within premises of an establishment governed by this
article does not constitute a violation on the part of the establishment. The establishment and its agents
shall only be charged for a violation of this article if the responsible agent(s) of the establishment fails to
timely satisfy each responsibility prescribed for them in this section.
(F) Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the city, the Hardin County Health
Department, an employee, or any person aggrieved by a failure to comply with this article, whether by
commission or omission, including violations on the part of an owner, operator, manager, employee or
other person(s) in control of a public place or a place of employment covered by this article, may bring
legal action to enforce this article, either by civil action seeking injunctive relief or by criminal complaint in
a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 09-12-1079, passed 12-17-2009)
' 2-102 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
(A) A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this article shall
be guilty of a violation, punishable by a fine not exceeding $50.
(B) A person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls a public place or place of
employment and who fails to comply with the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a violation,
punishable by:
(1) A fine not exceeding $50 for a first violation within a one-year period;
(2) A fine not exceeding $100 for a second violation within one year; and
(3) A fine not exceeding $250 for each additional violation within one year.
(C) The fines set out above shall be enforced by administrative citation payable at the Finance
Department of the city. Failure to pay the citation within ten days will result in appropriate action being
taken in the Hardin District Court for violation of this article.
Administration 41
(D) In addition to the fines established by this section, violations of this article by a person who owns,
manages, operates or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment may result in the suspension
or revocation of any permit or license issued to the person for the premises on which the violation occurred.
(E) Violation of this article is declared to be a public nuisance, which may be abated by the city or its
designated agents by restraining order, preliminary and permanent injunction, or other means provided for
by law. The city may recover the reasonable costs of any court enforcement action seeking abatement of
this nuisance.
(F) Each day on which a violation of this article occurs shall be considered a separate and distinct
violation.
(Ord. 09-12-1079, passed 12-17-2009)
' 2-103 PUBLIC EDUCATION.
The Mayor=s office shall take steps to offer a continuing program by which the purpose and
requirements of this article are made clear to citizens and to the owners, operators, managers and employees
required to comply with it. The program may include publication of a brochure, publication of news
releases and public meetings.
(Ord. 09-12-1079, passed 12-17-2009)
' 2-104 GOVERNMENTAL AGENCY COOPERATION.
The city requests the Hardin County Health Department for its assistance in the effective
implementation of this article.
(Ord. 09-12-1079, passed 12-17-2009)
' 2-105 OTHER APPLICABLE LAWS.
This article shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by
other applicable laws.
(Ord. 09-12-1079, passed 12-17-2009)
' 2-106 CONSTRUCTION.
This article shall be construed so as to further its stated purposes.
(Ord. 09-12-1079, passed 12-17-2009)
42 Radcliff - Administration
' 2-107 EFFECTIVE DATE.
This article shall be effective April 1, 2010.
(Ord. 09-12-1079, passed 12-17-2009)
CHAPTER 2.1: HARDIN COUNTY CODE OF ETHICS
1
2 Radcliff - Hardin County Code of Ethics
CHAPTER 2.1: HARDIN COUNTY CODE OF ETHICS
Section
2.1-1. Adopted by reference
 2.1-1 ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
The Hardin County Code of Ethics is adopted by reference and made a part of herein as if
appearing in total.
3
4 Radcliff - Hardin County Code of Ethics
CHAPTER 2.5: ALARM SYSTEMS
1
2 Radcliff - Alarm Systems
CHAPTER 2.5: ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
2.5-1. Definition; scope of chapter
2.5-2. False alarms
2.5-3. Central offices to be staffed 24 hours a day
2.5-4. Requirements for attachment to city departments
2.5-5. Permit; required
2.5-6. Same; issuance
2.5-7. Same; revocation
2.5-8. Grace period for existing systems prohibited by this chapter
2.5-9. Penalty for violation
Editors note:
An ordinance of 9-2-1986, not expressly amendatory of the code, has been included as Chapter
2.5, at the discretion of the editor.
 2.5-1 DEFINITION; SCOPE OF CHAPTER.
(A) For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ALARM SYSTEM. An assembly of equipment and devices or a single device such as a solid
state unit which uses electrical energy to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and
to which police are expected to respond. In this chapter, the term ALARM SYSTEM shall include, but
not be limited to, the terms automatic holdup alarm systems, burglar alarm systems, holdup alarm
systems and manual holdup alarm systems. ALARM SYSTEMS which monitor temperature,
humidity or any other condition not directly related to the detection of an unauthorized intrusion into
premises or an attempted robbery at premises are specifically excluded from the provisions of this
chapter.
(B) If a system employs an audible signal emitting sounds or a flashing light or beacon designed
to signal persons outside the premises, the system shall be within the definition of alarm system and
shall be subject to this chapter.
(Ord. passed 9-2-1986)
3
4 Radcliff - Alarm Systems
 2.5-2 FALSE ALARMS.
(A) Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
FALSE ALARM. The activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction,
improper installation or the negligence of the owner or lessee of an alarm system, or his or her
employees or agents. In addition, the use of an alarm to summon police or the department personnel for
reasons other than those listed on alarm system permits will also be considered a FALSE ALARM.
FALSE ALARMS shall not include alarms caused by electrical interruptions, floods or other natural
disasters.
(B) Fee charged for false alarms.
(1) Any person, firm or corporation having a burglar, hold-up or any type of intrusion alarm
or alarm system, as defined in  2.5-1, shall be charged a fee of $10 for the fourth false alarm call
responded to by the Police Department within a calendar year and $25 for each false alarm thereafter.
(2) If the possessor of the alarm shows to the satisfaction of the Police Chief that the false
alarm was not the result of negligence or improper maintenance, the fee may be waived.
(Ord. passed 9-2-1986)
Cross-reference:
Building, Fire, Housing and Safety Standards, see Chapter 4
Police Department, see Chapter 16
 2.5-3 CENTRAL OFFICES TO BE STAFFED 24 HOURS A DAY.
No person, firm or corporation shall provide a private alarm service system programmed to a
central office unless it shall have the central office staffed at all times, 24 hours a day, including
holidays.
(Ord. passed 9-2-1986)
 2.5-4 REQUIREMENTS FOR ATTACHMENT TO CITY DEPARTMENTS.
(A) No person, firm or corporation, without notice as set forth in division (B) of this section, shall
use or cause to be used any telephone or electronic device or attachment that automatically selects a
public primary telephone trunk line of the Police Department, Fire Department or any other department
or bureau of the city, and then reproduces any prerecorded message to report any burglary or other
emergency.
Alarm Systems 5
(B) The person, firm or corporation must notify the Chief of Police that this type of system is in
operation and provide that authority with any information that it may require to effectively respond to
any alarm that may be transmitted by the device.
(Ord. passed 9-2-1986)
 2.5-5 PERMIT; REQUIRED.
No person, firm or corporation shall cause to be connected to the Police Department a private
alarm system unless the person, firm or corporation is issued an annual hold-up alarm permit by the
Chief of Police.
(Ord. passed 9-2-1986)
 2.5-6 SAME; ISSUANCE.
(A) Alarm system permits shall be issued to those persons, firms or corporations who:
(1) Are required by federal law to maintain a hold-up alarm system;
(2) Had in existence, prior to the effective date of this chapter, a hold-up alarm system
connected to the Police Department; and
(3) Have made application for the permit and have received approval by the Chief of Police.
(B) All persons to receive a license under division (A) above must also comply with the following
conditions:
(1) Use alarm equipment meeting at least the minimum federal standards as set forth in the
Federal Bank Protection Act of 1968 for any banking or lending institution covered under its
provisions;
(2) Comply with all the applicable provisions of this chapter;
(3) Install at the permittees expense, at the Police Department switchboard termination
point, equipment which is designated by the Chief of Police;
(4) Assume all costs of installation, maintenance and monthly rental of telephone lines used
by the permittee for the alarm;
(5) Sign an agreement holding the city harmless for any and all damages or losses resulting
from the existence or use of the permittees alarm system;
(6) Follow alarm testing procedures set forth by the Chief of Police and assume any expenses
for testing of the alarm; and
6 Radcliff - Alarm Systems
(7) Assume responsibility and expense for the removal of the alarm when the service is
discontinued or permit is revoked or not renewed.
(C) Any person who has been denied a permit by the Chief of Police under this section may
appeal this decision to the City Council.
(Ord. passed 9-2-1986; Ord. passed 12-19-1986; Ord. passed 3-22-1989)
 2.5-7 SAME; REVOCATION.
The Chief of Police may revoke the permit of any permittee failing to pay any fee or charge
required in this chapter, or for repeated false alarms caused by willful acts or by negligence or
improper maintenance of equipment, for failure to repair or replace equipment when notified by the
Police Department that the repair or replacement is required to meet the standards set out in this code
or for failure to keep a hold harmless agreement in effect as required.
(Ord. passed 9-2-1986)
 2.5-8 GRACE PERIOD FOR EXISTING SYSTEMS PROHIBITED BY THIS CHAPTER.
Those persons, firms or corporations presently having alarm systems which are prohibited in this
chapter shall be permitted to maintain the connection until 12-31-1986, after which date failure to
disconnect from any department or departments of the city will be deemed a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 9-2-1986; Ord. passed 12-19-1986)
 2.5-9 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than
$10, nor more than $250, for each offense. A separate offense will be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. passed 9-2-1986)
CHAPTER 3: ANIMALS AND FOWL
1
2 Radcliff - Animals and Fowl
CHAPTER 3: ANIMALS AND FOWL
Section
Article I. In General
3-1. Nuisances
3-2. Dogs running at large
3-3. Destruction of abandoned and suffering animal
Article II. Dogs; Vicious Dogs; Cruelty
3-10. Definitions
3-11. Alternate opinion
3-12. Control of dogs
3-13. Control of vicious dogs
3-14. Enforcement of restrictions on vicious dogs
3-15. Impoundment
3-16. Provision of necessities
3-17. Restraint by leash or chain; specifications
3-18. Abandonment
3-19. Cruelty to animals
3-20. Cruelty or exhibition fighting prohibited
3-21. Killing dogs, cats for food or fur prohibited
3-22. Mutilation of animals
3-23. Sexual acts with animals
3-24. Removal of animal in immediate danger
3-25. Confiscation of victimized animal
3-26. Penalties
Cross-reference:
Nuisances, see Chapter 13
Statutory reference:
Animals generally, see KRS Title XXI
Power of city with reference to animals, see KRS 258.365
3
4 Radcliff - Animals and Fowl
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 3-1 NUISANCES.
(A) It shall be unlawful for anyone to maintain or keep, within the city, a dog, cat or other animal
or fowl of any kind or description whatever that is a nuisance to persons or property within the city.
Any dog, cat or other animal or fowl which habitually barks, yelps, cries or howls to the great
discomfort of the peace and quiet of the neighborhood, or in such a manner as to materially disturb or
annoy persons in the neighborhood who are of ordinary sensibilities, or any dog, cat or any other
animal or fowl whose actions annoy or disturb an individual so that he or she is fearful of injury, is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance. This section shall not apply to any dog, cat or other animal or
fowl located within an area zoned agriculture within the city.
(B) A nuisance shall be deemed to exist when actions by the dog, cat or other animal or fowl
annoy or disturb an individual in possession of his or her property so that its ordinary use or occupation
is rendered uncomfortable to him or her; or if the actions annoy or disturb an individual so that he or
she is fearful of bodily injury to his or her person.
(C) Whenever any person shall complain to the Police Department that a dog, cat or other animal
or fowl which habitually barks, howls, yelps or cries, or is annoying or disturbing an individual, is
being kept by any person in the city, the Police Department shall notify the owner of the animal that a
complaint has been received and that the person should take whatever steps necessary to alleviate the
howling, yelping, barking or crying.
(D) If the warning given to the person alleged to be keeping a dog or cat or any other animal or
fowl, as set forth above is ineffective, then a verified complaint of at least two citizens not from the
same family may be presented to the Police Department alleging that an animal which habitually
howls, barks, yelps or cries, or that the actions of an animal annoy or disturb an individual so that he or
she is fearful of bodily injury to his or her person, is being kept by any person in the city. The verified
complaint shall be deemed prima facie evidence that a nuisance exists. The Police Department shall
inform the owner of the animal that the verified petition has been received and shall cite the owner of
the animal for the violation alleged in the petition as a violation of this section.
(E) Any person maintaining or keeping a dog, cat or other animal or fowl that is a nuisance shall
be fined in an amount not less than $20, nor more than $250. A separate offense shall be committed for
each day a nuisance is permitted to exist. Any persons violating this section may also be found guilty
of a civil offense. The civil fine shall be not less than $20, nor more than $250. The civil fine shall be
paid directly to the city. If the fine is not paid within 30 days of notification, then the city may recover
the fine in a civil action in a court of proper jurisdiction. The city may also obtain injunctions or
abatement orders to ensure compliance with this section or pursue administrative remedies when
appropriate, including injunctions and abatement proceedings.
(Ord. passed 3-16-1993)
Animals and Fowl 5
 3-2 DOGS RUNNING AT LARGE.
(A) No owner, custodian, possessor or harborer shall permit any dog to run at large other than on
his or her own premises at any time, unless the dog is under the control of his or her owner, custodian,
possessor or harborer, as defined and set forth in  3-12 of this code.
(B) The owner, custodian, possessor or harborer shall be responsible for cleaning up after his or
her dog on any and all property other than the owners, custodians, possessors or harborers own
property for any excretions by the dog. The owner, custodian, possessor or harborer shall further be
responsible for any damages caused by the dog upon the premises of another regardless of what those
damages are.
(C) Whoever, being the owner, custodian, possessor or harborer of any dog, violates this section
shall be fined in an amount not less than $20, nor more than $250, for each offense. Any persons
violating this section may also be found guilty of a civil offense. The civil fine shall be not less than
$20, nor more than $250. The civil fine shall be paid directly to the city. If the fine is not paid within
30 days of notification, then the city may recover the fine in a civil action in a court of proper
jurisdiction. The city may also obtain injunctions or abatement orders to insure compliance with this
section or pursue administrative remedies when appropriate, including injunctions and abatement
proceedings.
(Ord. passed 3-16-1993)
 3-3 DESTRUCTION OF ABANDONED AND SUFFERING ANIMAL.
(A) Any peace officer may destroy or kill or cause to be destroyed or killed any animal found
abandoned and suffering and not properly cared for, or appearing to be injured, diseased or suffering
past recovery for any useful purpose.
(B) Before destroying the animal the officer shall obtain the judgment to that effect of a
veterinarian or of two reputable citizens called by him or her to view the animal in his or her presence,
or shall obtain consent to the destruction from the owner of the animal.
(C) (1) Any animal placed in the custody of a licensed veterinarian for treatment, boarding or
other care, which shall be unclaimed by its owner or his or her agent for a period of more than ten days
after written notice by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, is given the owner or his or
her agent at his or her last known address, shall be deemed to be abandoned and may be turned over to
the nearest humane society, dog pound or animal shelter, or disposed of as the custodian may deem
proper.
(2) The giving of notice to the owner or the agent of the owner of the animal by the licensed
veterinarian, as provided herein, shall relieve the licensed veterinarian and any custodian to whom the
animal may be given of any further liability for disposal.
(Ord. passed 7-19-1983)
6 Radcliff - Animals and Fowl
ARTICLE II. DOGS; VICIOUS DOGS; CRUELTY
 3-10 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
AT LARGE. Not restrained by leash, cord, chain or otherwise confined in an enclosed area.
DOG. This term shall be intended to mean both male and female.
DOG WARDEN. This term shall be interchangeable with Animal Warden and Animal Control
Officer.
ENCLOSURE. An uncovered fence or structure of at least seven feet in height or a covered fence
or structure of sufficient height to allow the dog to stand erect without touching the top or cover,
forming or causing an enclosure suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and suitable to confine
a vicious dog in conjunction with other measures which may be taken by the owner of keeper, such as
tethering of the vicious dog. Further, the fence or structure shall be sufficiently embedded in the ground
to prevent the dog from digging under the fence or structure. The enclosure shall be securely enclosed
and locked and designed with secure sides, top and bottom and shall be designed to prevent the dog
from escaping from the enclosure.
KEEPER. Any person to whom a vicious dog is entrusted.
OWNER. Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation owning, keeping or harboring a
dog.
RESTRAINT. A vicious dog shall be deemed to be under restraint if on the premises of the owner
or keeper and confined in a secure enclosure as previously defined or under the control of the owner or
keeper and securely muzzled and restrained with a chain or braided leather, nylon or manilla lead or
leash having a minimum tensile strength of 300 pounds and not exceeding three feet in length.
VICIOUS DOG. Includes the following:
(1) Any dog which constitutes a physical threat to human beings or other domestic animals
by virtue of a known propensity to endanger life by an unprovoked assault or bite so as to cause serious
bodily harm;
(2) Any dog which, when unprovoked, in a vicious or terrorizing manner approaches any
person in an attitude of attack upon the streets, sidewalks or any public grounds or places;
Animals and Fowl 7
(3) Any dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause
injury to or otherwise endanger the safety of human beings or domestic animals;
(4) Any dog which bites (to the extent of puncturing or severely bruising skin), inflicts injury,
assaults or otherwise attacks a human being or domestic animal without provocation on public or
private property;
(5) Any dog owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of dog fighting or any
dog trained for dog fighting;
(6) Any dog which has previously attacked or bitten a human being other than under the type
of circumstances that would be justifiable hereunder;
(7) Any dog which has behaved in such a manner that the owner or keeper thereof knows or
should reasonably know that the dog is possessed of tendencies to attack or to bite human beings other
than the type which would be justified hereunder;
(8) Any dog certified by a doctor of veterinary medicine, after observation thereof, as posing
a danger to human life or property if not kept in the manner required by this article upon the basis of
reasonable medical probability;
(9) Any dog which has been classified as vicious by the County Dog Warden or a peace
officer;
(10) Any dog which has been trained as an attack or guard dog, except such dogs which are
employed by any police department within the commonwealth; or
(11) An animal shall not be deemed vicious solely because:
(a) It bites, attacks or menaces:
1. Anyone assaulting its owner or keeper; or
2. Any person or other animal who has tormented or abused it.
(b) It is otherwise acting in the defense of any attack from a person or other animal upon
its owner or any other person;
(c) It is protecting or defending its young or the young of any other animal; or
(d) Where a person has broken into or entered, without permission, the enclosure of such
dog.
(Ord. 07-10-1022, passed 10-16-2007)
8 Radcliff - Animals and Fowl
 3-11 ALTERNATE OPINION.
Should the owner or keeper of any dog which has been classified as vicious by the County Dog
Warden, a peace officer, or by a doctor of veterinary medicine, and should the owner desire to
challenge the classifications, then the owner/keeper may engage the services of a licensed doctor of
veterinary medicine, all costs of which are to be borne by the owner/keeper of the dog in question. The
alternate opinion must be acquired and completed within 48 hours of the initial classification of the dog
as being vicious.
(Ord. 07-10-1022, passed 10-16-2007)
 3-12 CONTROL OF DOGS.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor within the city any dog that barks or
yelps or otherwise makes such noise as to disturb the peace and quiet of the people in the neighborhood
or area where the dog is kept. Verification of more than one person from at lease two different
households shall be required, before this provision takes effect.
(B) It shall be unlawful to entice a dog from a yard or enclosure of its owner or keeper or to bring
any dog into the city for the purpose of impounding or disposing of the same or to remove a muzzle or
license tag from any dog without the consent of the owner, keeper or custodian thereof.
(C) No owner, custodian, possessor or harborer shall permit any dog to run at large other than on
its owners premises at any time unless under the direct control of the owner, custodian, possessor or
harborer.
(D) (1) The owner, custodian, possessor or harborer of every dog shall, at all times, keep the dog
either:
(a) Confined on the owners premises within an enclosure which it can not escape;
(b) Firmly secured by means of a collar or chain or other device so that it can not escape
and stray from the premises on which it is secured; or
(c) Under the immediate control of the person.
(2) The term UNDER IMMEDIATE CONTROL is defined as the power to manage and
direct the dog and is not limited to physical control of the dog.
(Ord. 07-10-1022, passed 10-16-2007)
Animals and Fowl 9
 3-13 CONTROL OF VICIOUS DOGS.
(A) (1) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep or harbor within the city, a
vicious dog that shall bite or fiercely attack any person or domestic animal while outside of its owners
yard or enclosure or real estate.
(2) This section shall not apply where a person shall break into or enter without the
permission the premises or enclosure of the dog and be pursued therefrom and attacked or bitten by the
dog.
(B) All vicious dogs shall be confined in an enclosure. It shall be unlawful for any owner or
keeper to maintain a vicious dog upon any premises which does not have a locked enclosure.
(C) It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper to allow any vicious dog to be outside of the
dwelling of the owner or keeper or outside of the enclosure unless the owner or keeper has the vicious
dog under proper restraint, and under the direct control and supervision of the owner or keeper of the
vicious dog.
(D) The owner or keeper of a vicious dog shall display a sign on his or her premise warning that
there is a vicious dog on the premises. The sign shall be visible and capable of being read from the
public street. The sign shall be a minimum of two square feet in area.
(E) The owner or keeper shall immediately notify the County Dog Warden and the Police
Department if a vicious dog is on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked another animal or has attacked
a human being or has died.
(F) The County Dog Warden or peace officer is hereby empowered to make whatever inquiry is
deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article, and any such County Dog
Warden or peace officer is hereby empowered to seize and impound any vicious dog whose owner or
keeper fails to comply with the provisions hereof, subject to the right of the owner or keeper to contest
the seizure or impoundment, as provided in this article, in County District Court.
(G) In the event that the owner or keeper of the dog refuses to surrender the dog to the County
Dog Warden, the County Dog Warden may obtain a search warrant from a judge of the County District
Court to seize the dog upon the execution of the warrant.
(H) No person shall walk or exercise a vicious dog within 1,000 feet of a school, day care, day
nursery, playground, hospital or fairground.
(I) No more than two vicious dogs may be kept at a singular site or residence. This section shall
not apply to duly licensed kennels.
(J) No vicious dog may be kept on a chain tied to a fixed point outside an enclosure.
(Ord. 07-10-1022, passed 10-16-2007)
10 Radcliff - Animals and Fowl
 3-14 ENFORCEMENT OF RESTRICTIONS ON VICIOUS DOGS.
In the event that a public law enforcement officer or the County Dog Warden has probable cause
to believe that a vicious dog is being harbored in the city in violation of this article, he or she may:
(A) Order the violation immediately corrected and cite the owner or keeper to appear in court for
the violation; or
(B) If the violation cannot be immediately corrected and the dog is posing an imminent serious
threat to human beings or other domestic animals, the dog may be seized and impounded, in which case
the owner or keeper will be cited to appear in court for the violation. At the owners or keepers request
and expense, the impoundment may be at a veterinarian or licensed kennel of the owners or keepers
choosing. If the court rules that the dog is not vicious as defined, it will be released to the owner or
keeper upon payment to the County Dog Warden of the expense of keeping the dog, pursuant to a
schedule of the costs maintained by the County Dog Warden. If the court rules that it is vicious as
defined, the dog will be released to the owner or keeper only after payment of any fees and penalties,
and upon presentation of proof by the owner or keeper that the dog will be kept restrained or confined
as specified in this article. If, within seven days following the order regarding a vicious dog the owner
or keeper of a vicious dog fails to either provide proof that the dog will be kept restrained or confined
in compliance with the provisions of this article or fails to reclaim it after impoundment and pay the
fees and penalties, the dog may be humanely euthanized.
(Ord. 07-10-1022, passed 10-16-2007)
 3-15 IMPOUNDMENT.
(A) Any dog found running at large within the city limits, unless under direct control of the owner,
custodian, possessor or harborer shall be owner, custodian, possessor or harborer taken up by the
County Dog Warden and/or other proper authority, and impounded in the shelter designated by the
County Animal Shelter and there confined in a humane manner for a period of not less than five days
unless sooner claimed by its owner, custodian or person entitled thereto.
(B) The County Dog Warden may humanely destroy or transfer title of all animals held after the
legal detention period in division (A) above has expired and the animal has not been claimed by its
owner, custodian or other person entitled to the possession thereof, provided the person to whom title is
being transferred licenses the dog according to the laws of the commonwealth and supplies proof of a
rabies inoculation for the dog together with the boarding charges levied by the animal shelter, and in
addition thereto the pickup fee payable to the city provided below.
(C) Any owner, custodian or other person entitled to the possession of a dog impounded under
division (A) above may be claimed by such owner, custodian or person entitled to possession thereof
upon proof that the dog has been or is licensed, according to the laws of the commonwealth; proof that
Animals and Fowl 11
the dog has been inoculated against rabies; payment of boarding charges levied by the county; and
payment to the county of any fine due.
(Ord. 07-10-1022, passed 10-16-2007)
 3-16 PROVISION OF NECESSITIES.
No owner shall fail to provide his or her animal with good wholesome food and water, proper
shelter and protection from the weather, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering and humane
care and treatment. Any owner of animals shall maintain a clean and healthful shelter and living area
for any animal being kept, which area shall be free of accumulated waste and debris so that the animal
shall be free to walk or lie down without coming in contact with any such waste or debris. All such
shelters or living areas must be cleaned and maintained regularly so as to promote proper health for the
animals being kept. All living areas shall be constructed and maintained to promote proper drainage of
rainwater to prevent the accumulation of mud and/or water. Shelters shall be constructed to protect the
animal from precipitation and of a material which provides insulation from temperature extremes. In
addition to the shelter, a shaded area shall also be provided by means of other structures, tree(s) or
awning(s). The shelter shall have a floor augmented with resting boards; insulating bedding materials
shall be provided
during inclement weather extremes.
(Ord. 07-10-1022, passed 10-16-2007)
 3-17 RESTRAINT BY LEASH OR CHAIN; SPECIFICATIONS.
If any animal is restricted by a chain, leash or similar restraint, it shall be designed and placed as
defined under restraint in this article.
(Ord. 07-10-1022, passed 10-16-2007)
 3-18 ABANDONMENT.
No person shall abandon any animal, abandonment consisting of: leaving an animal for a period in
excess of 24 hours, without providing for someone to feed, water and check on the animals condition;
or leaving an animal by the roadside or other area; or leaving an animal on either public or private
property without the property owners consent. In the event that an animal is found so abandoned, the
animal may be taken by a County Dog Warden or peace officer and impounded in a shelter, and there
confined in a humane manner. The animal, if taken from private property, shall be kept for not less than
the prescribed period in accordance with the procedures set forth in  3-15. In the event that an animal
is so abandoned, the owner or keeper, if any, whom he or she has charged with the animals care, shall
be subject to a citation for violation of this section.
(Ord. 07-10-1022, passed 10-16-2007)
Statutory reference:
Destruction of suffering, abandoned or hopelessly diseased animal, see KRS 257.100(4)
12 Radcliff - Animals and Fowl
 3-19 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to willingly or maliciously inflict unnecessary or needless
cruelty, torture, abuse or cruelly beat, strike or abuse any animal, or by an act, omission or neglect,
cause or inflict any unnecessary or unjustifiable pain, suffering, injury or death to any animal, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter, whether the animal belongs to such person or to another, except that
reasonable force may be employed to drive away vicious animals or trespassing animals.
(Ord. 07-10-1022, passed 10-16-2007)
Statutory reference:
Cruelty to animals, see KRS 525.130
Torture of dog or cat, see KRS 525.135
 3-20 CRUELTY OR EXHIBITION FIGHTING PROHIBITED.
(A) No person shall cause or allow cruelty to be inflicted on an animal.
(B) No person shall cause or permit any dogfight or other combat between animals. For the
purpose of this division, neglect, cruel, ill treatment and torment of an animal shall be defined as a
failure by a person to adhere to the requirements and provisions of enforcement. In the event there is a
reasonable cause to suspect that an animal is being beaten, cruelly ill-treated, neglected or tormented or
involved in dog fight or other combat custody of such an animal may be taken by a Hardin County Dog
Warden, peace officer or humane officer and impounded in a shelter or other facility maintained by a
humane society. The animal shall be held as evidence, and confined in such facility in a humane
manner. Upon finding by a court that the animal has been neglected, beaten, cruelly ill treated or
tormented or involved in a dogfight or other combat between animals, the animal shall become the
property of the county.
(C) No person shall own, possess, keep or train any dog with the intent that the dog shall be
engaged in exhibition of fighting. In the event that a person shall own, possess, keep or train any
animal with the intent that the animal shall be engaged in an exhibition of fighting, he or she shall be
liable for citation for violation of this article and subject to the penalties under  3-14.
(D) No person shall be present at any dogfight or combat between animals. In the event that a
person is present at a dogfight or combat between animals, he or she shall be liable for citation for
violation of this article and subject to the penalties provided in  3-14.
(E) Any person who is found present at a dog fight or combat between animals, and who is
charged with being a spectator in violation of this article, and who is in possession of and/or is the
owner of an animal of the same species as that involved in the animal fight, shall be charged with intent
to engage in an exhibition of fighting in violation of this article. The animal shall be confiscated if
found on the premises or in the immediate area of the dogfight or combat between animals.
(Ord. 07-10-1022, passed 10-16-2007)
Animals and Fowl 13
 3-21 KILLING DOGS, CATS FOR FOOD OR FUR PROHIBITED.
No person shall raise or kill a dog or cat for food or the skin or fur.
(Ord. 07-10-1022, passed 10-16-2007)
 3-22 MUTILATION OF ANIMALS.
No person shall mutilate any animal whether dead or alive. This provision does not apply to
accepted livestock practices concerning humane slaughter.
(Ord. 07-10-1022, passed 10-16-2007)
 3-23 SEXUAL ACTS WITH ANIMALS.
No person shall engage in or cause or allow any other person to engage in a sexual act with any
animal.
(Ord. 07-10-1022, passed 10-16-2007)
 3-24 REMOVAL OF ANIMAL IN IMMEDIATE DANGER.
Any animal observed by a peace officer or County Dog Warden to be in immediate danger may be
removed from such situation by the quickest and most reasonable means available.
(Ord. 07-10-1022, passed 10-16-2007)
 3-25 CONFISCATION OF VICTIMIZED ANIMAL.
(A) Any animal found involved in a violation of any portion of this article may be confiscated by
any County Dog Warden or peace officer and held in a humane manner. Upon conviction of this charge
by a court of law, all animals so confiscated shall become the property of the county, and the owner of
the animals shall pay to or reimburse the county all veterinary fees associated with medical treatment
provided the animals while it was in custody.
(B) A County Dog Warden or peace officer shall be allowed reasonable access to inspect the
property of anyone found guilty of violation of any of the provisions under this article.
(Ord. 07-10-1022, passed 10-16-2007)
14 Radcliff - Animals and Fowl
 3-26 PENALTIES.
(A) Any person violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a Class A
misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or be imprisoned for a period not to
exceed 12 months in jail, or both so fined and imprisoned. Each day a violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
(B) Any person found guilty of owning a vicious dog, in addition to the penalties imposed, may be
required by a District Court Judge to have the dog humanely euthanized if, in the opinion of that Judge,
the severity of the attack warrants the action.
(C) Any person found guilty of owning a potentially vicious dog or vicious dog shall be fined not
less than $250 and shall have the dog spayed or neutered within seven days of that finding. Proof of the
surgery must be provided to the citing agency within 24 hours of its performance.
(D) Any person found guilty of owning a potentially vicious dog or a vicious dog, in addition to
any other penalties or stipulations imposed, shall within seven days of that finding also have the dog
implanted with a microchip identification. Within seven days of that implantation, the owner shall
present the animal to the Division for scanning and verification of the microchip and identification
number.
(E) In addition to any penalties and/or stipulations imposed, anyone convicted of violations of 
3-19 and 3-20 may also be required to relinquish ownership of the animal(s) to the County Dog
Warden immediately upon conviction and the animal may be humanely euthanized according to the
standard of procedures followed by the County Dog Warden.
(Ord. 07-10-1022, passed 10-16-2007)
TITLE 4: BUILDING, FIRE, HOUSING AND SAFETY STANDARDS
1
2 Radcliff - Building, Fire, Housing and Safety Standards
CHAPTER 4: BUILDING, FIRE, HOUSING AND SAFETY STANDARDS
Section
Article I. In General
4-1. Codes adopted
4-1.1. Established
4-1.2. Planning Director
4-1.3. Building Official
4-2. Violations
4-3. Building permit - required
4-4. Building permit and plan review schedule
4-5. Appeals
4-6. Electrical inspections
Article II. Smoke Detectors
4-26. Smoke detectors
Article III. Rapid Access Systems
4-35. Definitions
4-36. Application
Cross-reference:
Excavations, see  18-28 through 18-34
Explosives and Blasting, see Chapter 7
Flood Damage Prevention, see Chapter 7.5
Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks, see Chapter 11
Nuisances, see Chapter 13
Parking in fire lanes, see  12-28
Subdivisions, see Chapter 19
3
2011 S-1
4 Radcliff - Building, Fire, Housing and Safety Standards
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 4-1 CODES ADOPTED.
(A) The following codes and standards are hereby adopted by reference:
(1) The Kentucky Building Code (current edition, as amended, updated or replaced);
(2) The Kentucky Residential Code (current edition, as amended, updated or replaced);
(3) The Kentucky State Plumbing Code (current edition, as amended, updated or replaced);
(4) IBC National Property Maintenance Code (current edition, as amended, updated or
replaced); and
(5) Those codes and standards identified in 815 KAR 10:060 (current form, as amended),
Kentucky standards of safety, namely:
(a) NFPA 1, Uniform Fire Code, current edition;
(b) NFPA 101, Life Safety Code, current edition;
(c) NFPA 70, National Electrical Code, current edition;
(d) FPS 33-01, Application for Fire Alarm Systems Certification, current version; and
(e) FPS 33-02, Renewal Application for Fire Alarm Systems Certification, current
version.
(B) The codes and standards are hereby made a part of the public records of the city.
(Ord. passed 3-19-1957; Ord. passed 8-22-1969; Ord. passed 9-15-1992; Ord. passed 1-19-2001; Ord.
07-08-1017, passed 8-21-2007; Ord. 10-03-1083, passed 3-8-2010; Ord. 12-08-1134, passed 8-13-
2012; Ord. 14-09-1160, passed 9-8-2015)
Statutory reference:
Power of city to adopt by reference, see KRS 83A.060(5)
Similar provisions, see 815 KAR 7:120 and 815 KAR 7:125
 4-1.1 ESTABLISHED.
There is hereby established a Planning and Development Department to be governed and staffed as
provided by KRS Chapter 100 and applicable state law.
2015 S-3
Building, Fire, Housing and Safety Standards 4A
 4-1.2 PLANNING DIRECTOR.
(A) There is hereby created the Office of Planning Director of the city.
(B) The Planning Director shall:
(1) Perform tasks in all phases of the administration of the Planning and Development
Department and the enforcement and maintenance of the citys zoning and land use ordinances;
(2) Serve as an advisor to the Planning Commission, Board of Adjustments, and Code
Enforcement Board; and review and respond to submitted site use plans and development packages;
(3) Enforce approved site plans;
(4) Be responsible for preparation, presentation and review of zone studies;
(5) Update and maintain official city maps and the citys comprehensive plan;
(6) Be responsible for the preparation, maintenance and review of required
departmental reports and records;
2015 S-3
4B Radcliff - Building, Fire, Housing and Safety Standards
Building, Fire, Housing and Safety Standards 5
(7) Oversee financial records required in the management of the departmental budget;
(8) Supervise, direct, evaluate and assign departmental personnel; and
(9) Assist in the performance of other departmental duties as required.
(C) The Planning Director shall report directly to the Mayor.
 4-1.3 BUILDING OFFICIAL.
The Building Official shall:
(A) Be responsible for the enforcement of state and local building codes and other codes and
ordinances as described in this Chapter 4;
(B) Assist in the enforcement and administration of the citys zoning ordinances and
subdivision regulations;
(C) Clear building, occupancy, and other related permits according to state and local
regulations;
(D) Perform inspections on buildings, nuisances, subdivisions, drainage problems, sewer
taps and related properties and projects as required;
(E) Review building plans and assist in review of site plans;
(F) Provide for the collection and accountability of all permit and review fees for the
department;
(G) Prepare required departmental reports and records;
(H) Make deliveries of departmental documents and notices as required; and
(I) Assist in the performance of other tasks related to departmental operations as needed.
 4-2 VIOLATIONS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, repair, construct or maintain any building or structure
in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or of any of the standards adopted herein. Any
person who shall violate this section shall be fined not less than $20, nor more than $500, and/or 12
months imprisonment. Any person violating this article may also be found guilty of a civil offense.
The civil fine shall be not less than $20, nor more than $250. The civil fine shall be paid directly to the
city. If the fine is not paid within 30 days from the date of notification, then the city may recover the
fine in a civil
6 Radcliff - Building, Fire, Housing and Safety Standards
action in a court of proper jurisdiction. The city may also obtain injunctions or abatement orders to
insure compliance with this article or pursue administrative remedies when appropriate, including
injunctions and abatement proceedings.
(Ord. passed 3-16-1993)
Statutory reference:
Power of city to regulate buildings, see KRS 198B.060
 4-3 BUILDING PERMIT - REQUIRED.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, build, remodel, alter, renovate or otherwise
change any building without a building permit.
(B) Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined not less than $20, nor more
than $250, for each offense. Each days violation constitutes a separate offense. Any persons violating
this section may also be found guilty of a civil offense. The civil fine shall be not less than $20, nor
more than $250. The civil fine shall be paid directly to the city. If the fine is not paid within 30 days of
notification, then the city may recover the fine in a civil action in a court of proper jurisdiction. The
city may also obtain injunctions or abatement orders to ensure compliance with this section or pursue
administrative remedies when appropriate, including injunctions and abatement proceedings.
(Ord. passed 9-21-1993)
Cross-reference:
Restrictions on building permit issuance, see  18-19
 4-4 BUILDING PERMIT AND PLAN REVIEW SCHEDULE.
(A) A person desiring a building permit or requesting a plat review or other related fee based
services shall pay such fee as is established by the Mayor and City Council herein. No permit shall
issue until the proper fee is paid and there shall be no partial payment of the fee:
Construction Cost Fee Schedule
Residential and Commercial
State jurisdiction projects $50
$0 - $3,999 $0
$4,000 - $9,999 $25
$10,000 - $14,999 $50
$15,000 - $19,999 $75
$20,000 - $29,999 $100
Building, Fire, Housing and Safety Standards 7
Construction Cost Fee Schedule
Residential and Commercial
$30,000 - $39,999 $125
$40,000 - $49,999 $150
$50,000 - $59,999 $175
$60,000 - $69,999 $200
$70,000 - $79,999 $225
$80 000 - $89,999 $250
$90,000 - $99,999 $300
$100,000 - $149,999 $400
$150,000 - $199,999 $500
$200,000 - $299,999 $600
$300,000 - $399,999 $700
$400,000 - $499,999 $800
$500 000 - $999 999 $1,000
$1,000,000 and over $1,500 for the first $1,000,000; $1.50 for
each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof
Planning and Development Department
REVIEW FEES
Preliminary plat $500
Record plat $175
Amended record plat $175
Development plan $20
Zone map amendment $350
Dimensional variance $150
Conditional use $150
Administrative appeal $150
Cell tower application fee $2,500
2015 S-3 Repl.
8 Radcliff - Building, Fire, Housing and Safety Standards
Planning and Development Department
PERMIT FEES
Sign permits
First sign $25
Additional signs $5
Temporary signs $5
Plan review fee (current KBC fee schedule) ($50 min)
Plan review fee for tents and temporary structures, or permanent
buildings used for the retail sale of fireworks
Tents and temporary structures $125
Permanent buildings $250
Single-family - up to 1,999 sq. ft. $100
Single-family - 2,000 sq. ft. and over) $150
Demolition permit
Residential $50
Commercial $100
DOCUMENT FEES
Comprehensive plan $25
Zoning ordinance $20
Subdivision regulations $20
RECORDING FEES
Land use restrictions $11.50
Record plat $15
Engineering copy $4
MAPPING FEES
Digital vector map (dwg) 500 ft. x 500 ft. grid $27
Minimum fee (8 grids) $216
Digital imagery map (tiff) $425
Hard copy map (500 ft. x 500 ft.) topographic data w/contours (P grid) $9
2015 S-3
Building, Fire, Housing and Safety Standards 8A
Planning and Development Department
MAPPING FEES (continued)
Topographic data w/o contours (P grid) $5
Aerial imagery (per grid) $6
Labor charge (hard copy maps)
Per hour $24
Per hour minimum (30 minutes) $12
2015 S-3
8B Radcliff - Building, Fire, Housing and Safety Standards
Building, Fire, Housing and Safety Standards 9
(B) Any person, when called upon to do so by the Planning or Building Officials, shall
report by sworn statement to the Planning or Building Officials any and all information necessary for
him or her to ascertain the amount of fee due; the failure to do so shall constitute valid and legal
grounds for the withholding or refusal of the building permit.
(C) All monies obtained from the payment of the fees provided for in this section shall be
paid into and become part of the General Fund of the city.
(D) (1) Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be fined not less
than $20, nor more than $250, for each offense. Each days violation shall constitute a separate offense.
Any person violating this section may also be found guilty of a civil offense. The civil fine shall be not
less than $20, nor more than $250. The civil fine shall be paid directly to the city.
(2) If the fine is not paid within 30 days of notification, then the city may recover
the fine in a civil action in a court of proper jurisdiction.
(3) The city may also obtain injunctions or abatement orders to ensure compliance
with this section or pursue administrative remedies when appropriate, including injunctions and
abatement proceedings.
(Ord. passed 1-23-1968; Ord. passed 1-21-1975; Ord. passed 3-16-1993; Ord. passed 9-21-1993; Ord.
07-08-1017, passed 8-21-2007; Ord. 15-05-1170, passed 5-11-2015)
 4-5 APPEALS.
(A) Any person aggrieved by the Planning or Building Officials in the refusal to issue a
building permit or any dispute that arises in connection with the appraised value of the contemplated
completed structure shall have recourse to the Board of Adjustment.
(B) The appeal shall be taken under the provisions of KRS 100.257, 100.161 and 100.263.
(Ord. passed 1-23-1968; Ord. 07-08-1017, passed 8-21-2007)
 4-6 ELECTRICAL INSPECTIONS.
(A) The city shall administer the electrical codes in accordance with the Kentucky Revised
Statutes, including all electrical inspection services, and the city shall be entitled to charge fees not to
be changed for a period of one year for services as set by the city. The city shall, in conjunction with its
Planning and Zoning office, provide a place where the public may commence the electrical inspection
process, fill out the necessary forms and pay the necessary fees.
(B) The city shall contract with a certified electrical inspector who shall be responsible for
enforcing the Uniform State Building Code and requiring reasonable standards for the construction,
alteration and
2015 S-3
10 Radcliff - Building, Fire, Housing and Safety Standards
repair of any electrical wiring in the city and the inspector shall follow the minimum standard
requirements of the National Electrical Code in making his or her inspections.
(C) The city shall fix the compensation of the citys electrical inspector and fix, by ordinance, all
reasonable fees that shall be paid for permits that are required of all persons in the city before
commencing construction, alteration or repairs of any electrical wiring. The fees as outlined in
Appendix A attached to the ordinance codified herein shall be effective beginning 9-1-1990.
(D) (1) The electrical inspector shall have the right during reasonable hours to enter any building
in the city in the discharge of his or her official duties or for the purpose of making an inspection or test
of the electrical wiring therein; and he or she shall have the duty, and authority to enforce all the
ordinances, local, state and national laws and building codes.
(2) He or she shall have the power to cause the current in any wire conduit to be turned off
whenever this is necessary in an emergency for the protection of life or property.
(E) He or she shall make all inspections necessary for the enforcement of the proper Building
Code and National Electrical Code, and no electrical wiring shall be covered until it has been inspected
and approved.
(F) The electrical inspector shall give a certificate of approval to the owner or person in charge of
the premises which he or she has inspected where he or she finds that the electrical apparatus and
wiring therein fully comply with the proper ordinances, local state and national laws and Building
Codes.
(G) (1) Any person violating or failing to comply with this section shall be fined not less than
$20, nor more than $250, for each offense. Each days violation or non-compliance shall constitute a
separate offense.
(2) Any persons violating this section may also be found guilty of a civil offense. The civil
fine shall be not less than $20, nor more than $250. The civil fine shall be paid directly to the city. If
the fine is not paid within 30 days of notification, then the city may recover the fine in a civil action in
a court of proper jurisdiction.
(3) The city may also obtain injunctions or abatement orders to ensure compliance with this
section or pursue administrative remedies when appropriate, including injunctions and abatement
proceedings.
(Ord. passed 6-19-1990; Ord. passed 9-21-1993)
Editors note:
Nonamendatory Ord. passed 6-19-1990,  1 through 6, has been codified herein by the editor
as  4-6; the fee schedule of App. A, as referred to in division (C) above, has not been
included herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the City Clerks office.
Statutory reference:
Power of city to enforce electrical building codes, see KRS 198B.060
Power of city to require permits, inspections before commencing electrical alteration,
construction; to fix fees and require certification of electrical inspectors, see KRS 227.480
Building, Fire, Housing and Safety Standards 11
ARTICLE II. SMOKE DETECTORS
 4-26 SMOKE DETECTORS.
Smoke detectors shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the codes adopted in  4-1.
(Ord. passed 1-19-2001)
ARTICLE III. RAPID ACCESS SYSTEMS
 4-35 DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
FIRE DISTRICT. The normal incorporated fire protection district covered by the City of
Radcliff Fire Department.
FIRE OFFICIAL. The City of Radcliff Fire Chief or his or her designee, who is responsible
for enforcing the requirements of a fire code or standard, or for approving equipment, materials,
installation, or a procedure.
KEY BOX. A UL listed box, of size and style approved by the Fire Official that meets the
requirements and uses the same security key code adopted by the Fire Department.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY. The person(s) charged with the responsibility for the occupancy and
maintenance of the building, and includes equally any and all tenant(s), landlords, and building or
business owners.
SECURITY CAP. A Fire Department connection (FDC) plug and cap approved for use in the
city by the Fire Official utilizing two and one-half inch National Standard thread pattern.
(Ord. 10-06-1091, passed 6-7-2010)
 4-36 APPLICATION.
(A) Automatic gates. When a property is accessed through a gate or cross arm that impedes
ingress through required fire lanes by means of a key or swipe card, it shall be equipped with a key
switch to be installed at a location approved by the Fire Official.
2011 S-1
12 Radcliff - Building, Fire, Housing and Safety Standards
(B) Security of Fire Department connections. When a building is protected by an automatic
sprinkler and/or standpipe system and the Fire Department connection is exposed to vandalism, the
Fire Official may require that a security cap be installed.
(C) Non-applicability to particular dwellings. This article shall not apply to owner-occupied one
and two family dwellings.
(D) Key box contents. The key boxes shall contain at a minimum, the following items and any
other items as designated by the Fire Official:
(1) Labeled keys to locked points of egress, whether in interior or exterior of such buildings.
(2) Labeled keys to the locked mechanical rooms.
(3) Labeled keys to any fenced or secured areas not covered in divisions (A) or (B) above.
(4) Labeled keys to any other areas that may be required by the Fire Official.
(5) A card containing the emergency contact people and phone numbers for each occupancy.
(6) Floor plans of the rooms within the building may also be required, showing locations of
shut-offs noted.
(E) Alert decals. Alert decals, approved by the Fire Official, to alert fire companies of the
presence of security features covered by this article, will be displayed on any outside doors or windows
as designated by the Fire Official.
(F) Compliance.
(1) The following buildings with fire suppression, sprinkler, or fire alarm systems installed in
them shall comply with this article:
(a) Buildings in existence as of June 7, 2010 that are newly constructed but not yet
occupied;
(b) Buildings currently under construction;
(c) Buildings applying for a certificate of occupancy;
(d) Any existing buildings when they are renovated or that have their primary usage
changed after June 7, 2010;
(e) Any existing buildings when new fire suppression, sprinkler, or fire alarm systems
are installed.
2011 S-1
Building, Fire, Housing and Safety Standards 13
(2) Compliance shall be accomplished by installing key boxes, key switches or
security caps as applicable. The cost of purchasing and installing, along with any cost associated with
implementation of the program at a specific property, will be borne by the responsible party.
(G) Non-compliance. Any person, firm, corporation, company, association or partnership
found guilty of violating any part of the foregoing sections of this article shall be subject to a fine of
$100 for each violation thereof. Each day shall be considered a separate and distinct violation of this
article.
(Ord. 10-06-1091, passed 6-7-2010)
2011 S-1
14 Radcliff - Building, Fire, Housing and Safety Standards
CHAPTER 5: CIVIL DEFENSE AND CIVIL EMERGENCIES
1
2 Radcliff - Civil Defense and Civil Emergencies
CHAPTER 5: CIVIL DEFENSE AND CIVIL EMERGENCIES
Section
Article I. In General
5-1. Reserved
Article II. Disaster and Emergency Response
Division 1. Generally
5-16. Definition
Division 2. Organization
5-24. Established
5-25. Composition
5-26. Civil Defense Director generally
Article III. Civil Emergencies
5-38. Definitions
5-39. Authority of Mayor to proclaim a civil emergency
5-40. Power of Mayor to declare curfew
5-41. Other powers of Mayor
5-42. Length of curfew or other orders of Mayor
5-43. Notice of proclamation
5-44. Obedience to orders of Mayor required
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
' 5-1 RESERVED.
3
4 Radcliff - Civil Defense and Civil Emergencies
ARTICLE II. DISASTER AND EMERGENCY RESPONSE
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
' 5-16 DEFINITION.
For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning.
DISASTER AND EMERGENCY RESPONSE. The preparation for and the carrying out of all
emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, to prevent,
minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from fire, flood, tornado, other natural or human-caused
disasters, riot, enemy attack, sabotage, explosion, power failure, energy shortages, transportation
emergencies or other causes, and the threatened or impending happenings of any of the above, and in order
to insure that preparations and response for this state will be adequate to deal with disaster or emergencies
or the threat of same. These functions include, without limitation, fire fighting services, police service,
medical and health services, ambulance service, rescue, search and rescue, engineering, warning services,
communications, radiological, chemical and other monitoring, decontamination and neutralization,
evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency welfare services, emergency transportation, plant
protection, temporary restoration of public utility services, and other functions related to effective reaction
to a disaster or emergency situation, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the
preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions.
(Ord. passed 4-11-1968)
Statutory reference:
Similar provisions, see KRS Ch. 39B
DIVISION 2. ORGANIZATION
' 5-24 ESTABLISHED.
There is hereby established the city=s Organization for Disaster and Emergency Response.
(Ord. passed 4-11-1968)
Statutory reference:
Local organization for disaster and emergency response required, see KRS 39B.010
Civil Defense and Civil Emergencies 5
' 5-25 COMPOSITION.
The Organization for Disaster and Emergency Response of the city will consist of the officers and
employees of the city plus the volunteer forces as are enrolled to aid them during an emergency and all
groups, organizations and persons who by agreement in accordance with applicable law are charged with
duties necessary for the protection of life and property in the city.
(Ord. passed 4-11-1968)
' 5-26 CIVIL DEFENSE DIRECTOR GENERALLY.
(A) The Office of Director of the city=s Organization for Disaster and Emergency Response is hereby
created. The Director shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the approval of the City Council.
(B) The Director shall:
(1) Represent the Mayor on all matters pertaining to civil defense planning and organization;
(2) Develop a comprehensive city civil defense plan. This plan shall provide for the effective
mobilization of necessary public resources of the city, integration of resources provided by state or federal
governments and a special procedure for utilization of private property when this becomes necessary and is
authorized;
(3) Coordinate the preparation and implementation of civil defense plans with appropriate city
employees and city officials as applicable; and
(4) Be directly responsible to the Mayor during periods of emergency for the direction and
supervision of all city civil defense forces.
(C) During periods of emergency, the Director shall, with authorization by the Mayor, obtain vital
supplies and equipment which are not otherwise available from city resources, but are needed for the
protection of life and property. With the Mayor=s authorization, the Director may obligate the city to pay for
the supplies and equipment.
(Ord. passed 4-11-1968)
Statutory reference:
Similar provisions, see KRS 39B.010
6 Radcliff - Civil Defense and Civil Emergencies
ARTICLE III. CIVIL EMERGENCIES
' 5-38 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning.
CIVIL EMERGENCY. A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of actual force or
violence, or any threat to use force if accompanied by immediate power to execute it by three or more
persons acting together without authority of law.
CURFEW. A prohibition against any person walking, running, loitering, standing or motoring upon
any alley, street, highway, sidewalk, public property or vacant premises, except officers or persons
designated as not subject to the CURFEW.
(Ord. passed 4-11-1968)
' 5-39 AUTHORITY OF MAYOR TO PROCLAIM CIVIL EMERGENCY.
When, in the judgment of the Mayor, or acting Mayor, a civil emergency is deemed to exist, he or she
shall forthwith proclaim, in writing, its existence.
(Ord. passed 4-11-1968)
' 5-40 POWER OF MAYOR TO DECLARE CURFEW.
After proclamation of a civil emergency by the Mayor, or acting Mayor, he or she may order a general
curfew applicable to the geographical areas deemed advisable and applicable during such hours of the day
or night as deemed necessary in the interest of the public safety and welfare.
(Ord. passed 4-11-1968)
' 5-41 OTHER POWERS OF MAYOR.
After the proclamation of a civil emergency, the Mayor, or acting Mayor, may also, in the interest of
public safety and welfare:
(A) Order the discontinuance of the sale, distribution or giving away of gasoline or other liquid
flammable or combustible products in any container other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor
vehicle;
(B) Order the closing of gasoline stations and other establishments, the chief activity of which is the
sale, distribution or dispensing of liquid flammable or combustible products; and
2015 S-2
Civil Defense and Civil Emergencies 7
(C) Issue such other orders as are eminently necessary for the protection of life and property.
(Ord. passed 4-11-1968; Ord. 13-05-1137, passed 5-21-2013)
' 5-42 LENGTH OF CURFEW OR OTHER ORDERS OF MAYOR.
The curfew or orders authorized in this article shall remain in effect until rescinded by the Mayor, or
acting Mayor, but for a period not to exceed 72 hours from the time they became effective unless approved
by the City Council.
(Ord. passed 4-11-1968)
' 5-43 NOTICE OF PROCLAMATION.
After proclamation of a civil emergency, the Mayor or acting Mayor shall forthwith provide for notice
thereof to be given to members of the City Council, and to the public by the best available means; provided,
however, that the proclamation shall still be effective immediately.
(Ord. passed 4-11-1968)
' 5-44 OBEDIENCE TO ORDERS OF MAYOR REQUIRED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to obey any curfew proclaimed by the Mayor or acting Mayor
or any other order promulgated pursuant to this article.
(Ord. passed 4-11-1968)
2015 S-2
8 Radcliff - Civil Defense and Civil Emergencies
CHAPTER 6: RESERVED
1
2 Radcliff - Reserved
CHAPTER 7: EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING
1
2 Radcliff - Explosives and Blasting
CHAPTER 7: EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING
Section
Article I. In General
7-1. Scope
7-2. Exemption
7-3. Storage, transportation and use generally
7-4. Permit to manufacture or sell
Article II. Blasting Permit
7-16. Required
7-17. Fee
7-18. Renewal
7-19. State license required
7-20. Location to be specified
7-21. When effective
7-22. Effect of false statements
7-23. Distribution of copies
7-24. Contracts
7-25. Penalty
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 7-1 SCOPE.
This chapter shall apply to the manufacture, possession, storage, sale, transportation and use of
explosives and blasting agents.
3
4 Radcliff - Explosives and Blasting
 7-2 EXEMPTION.
This chapter shall not apply to:
(A) Explosives or blasting agents while in the course of transportation via railroad, water, highway
or air when the explosives or blasting agents are moving under the jurisdiction of and in conformity
with, regulations adopted by any federal or state department or agency;
(B) The transportation and use of explosives or blasting agents in the normal and emergency
operation of state or federal agencies nor to municipal Fire and Police Departments; providing, they are
acting in their official capacity and in the proper performance of their duties;
(C) Small arms ammunition and components therefor, which are subject to the Gun Control Act of
1968 (18 U.S.C.  44) and regulations promulgated thereunder;
(D) Blasting standards, KRS 351.310 through 351.380 and 805 KAR 4:010 through 4:060; and/or
(E) Explosives or blasting agents being used on the site of federal or state projects.
Cross-reference:
Excavations, see  18-28 through 18-34
Licenses and Taxation, see Chapter 10
Nuisances, see Chapter 13
 7-3 STORAGE, TRANSPORTATION AND USE GENERALLY.
All activities within the scope of this chapter shall conform to the regulations of the states
Division of Explosives and Blasting (805 KAR 4:005 through 4:165).
 7-4 PERMIT TO MANUFACTURE OR SELL.
(A) No person or corporation shall operate a business establishment where explosives are
maintained for the sale, or manufacture for sale, of explosives in the city without first obtaining a
permit from the City Clerk.
(B) The fee for this permit shall be as established by the Mayor and Council.
Explosives and Blasting 5
ARTICLE II. BLASTING PERMIT
 7-16 REQUIRED.
No person shall conduct a blasting operation within the city without first obtaining a permit from
the City Clerk.
 7-17 FEE.
The fee for a blasting permit or permit renewal shall be as established by the Mayor and Council.
 7-18 RENEWAL.
In the event that a project is not completed, blasting permits must be renewed annually upon the
applicants payment of the renewal fee.
 7-19 STATE LICENSE REQUIRED.
(A) No person shall be issued a permit to blast on public property unless the person to be in charge
of the blasting holds a valid state blasters license.
(B) No person shall be issued a permit to blast on private property with more than five pounds of
explosives unless the person in charge of the blasting holds a valid state blasters license.
 7-20 LOCATION TO BE SPECIFIED.
The blasting permits shall specify the location of the blasting to be permitted.
 7-21 WHEN EFFECTIVE.
(A) A permit allowing blasting shall be issued upon application but, on public property, shall not
become valid until seven days after its issuance.
(B) If unanticipated blasting is required, the permit may become valid as soon as the City Clerk
notifies all required agencies.
6 Radcliff - Explosives and Blasting
 7-22 EFFECT OF FALSE STATEMENTS.
False statements, made for the purpose of obtaining a permit, shall render the permit null and void
from the time of issuance.
 7-23 DISTRIBUTION OF COPIES.
Copies of the blasting permit shall be distributed by the City Clerk to the Police Department,
County Water District, Mayor, City Sewer Superintendent, City Inspector and all public utilities.
 7-24 CONTRACTS.
On any contract issued by an agency of the city, blasting permits shall be issued by the City Clerk
unless otherwise specified in the contract.
 7-25 PENALTY.
Any person who shall violate this chapter shall be fined not less than $20, nor more than $500,
and/or imprisonment for 12 months for each offense. Each days violation shall constitute a separate
offense. Any persons violating this chapter may also be found guilty of a civil offense. The civil fine
shall be not less than $20, nor more than $250. The civil fine shall be paid directly to the city. If the
fine is not paid within 30 days of notification, then the city may recover the fine in a civil action in a
court of proper jurisdiction. The city may also obtain injunctions or abatement orders to ensure
compliance with this chapter or pursue administrative remedies when appropriate, including
injunctions and abatement proceedings.
(Ord. passed 3-16-1993)
CHAPTER 7.5: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
1
2 Radcliff - Flood Damage Prevention
CHAPTER 7.5: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
Article I. Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Objectives
7.5-1. Statutory authorization
7.5-2. Findings of fact
7.5-3. Statement of purpose
7.5-4. Objectives
Article II. Definitions
7.5-5. Definitions
Article III. General Provisions
7.5-6. Lands to which this chapter applies
7.5-7. Basis for establishing the special flood hazard areas
7.5-8. Establishment of development permit
7.5-9. Compliance
7.5-10. Abrogation and greater restrictions
7.5-11. Interpretation
7.5-12. Warning and disclaimer of liability
7.5-13. Enforcement, violation notice and penalties
Article IV. Administration
7.5-21. Designation of local Administrator
7.5-22. Establishment of development permit
7.5-23. Duties and responsibilities of the local Administrator
Article V. Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
7.5-31. General construction standards
7.5-32. Specific standards
7.5-33. Standards for streams without established base flood elevation (unnumbered A zones)
and/or floodways
7.5-34. Standards for shallow flooding zones
3
4 Radcliff - Flood Damage Prevention
7.5-35. Standards for subdivision proposals
7.5-36. Standards for accessory structures in all zones beginning with the letter A
7.5-37. Critical facilities
Article VI. Appeals and Variance Procedures
7.5-41. Appeals and variance procedures
Article VII. Severability
7.5-51. Severability
ARTICLE I. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS
OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES
 7.5-1 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
(A) The Legislature of the commonwealth has, in KRS 82.082, delegated to local government
units the authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general
welfare of its citizenry.
(B) Therefore, the City Council hereby adopts the following floodplain management ordinance, as
follows.
(Ord. 07-05-1005, passed 5-7-2007)
 7.5-2 FINDINGS OF FACT.
(A) The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which result in loss of life
and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all
which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
(B) These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing
increased flood height and velocity, and by the location in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to
floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed or otherwise
protected from flood damage.
(Ord. 07-05-1005, passed 5-7-2007)
Flood Damage Prevention 5
 7.5-3 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to
minimize public and private loss due to flooding by provisions designed to:
(A) Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water
erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood height or velocity;
(B) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(C) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers
which accommodate or channel flood waters;
(D) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion or flood
damage; and
(E) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters
or which may increase flood hazards to other areas.
(Ord. 07-05-1005, passed 5-7-2007)
 7.5-4 OBJECTIVES.
The objectives of this chapter are to:
(A) Protect human life and health;
(B) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(C) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(D) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(E) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric,
telephone and sewer lines; streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;
(F) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of
special flood hazard or other flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blighted
areas caused by flooding;
(G) Ensure that potential homebuyers are on notice that property is in a special flood hazard area;
and
6 Radcliff - Flood Damage Prevention
(H) Ensure that those who occupy a special flood hazard area assume responsibility for their
actions.
(Ord. 07-05-1005, passed 5-7-2007)
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
 7.5-5 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
100-YEAR FLOOD. (See BASE FLOOD.) The flood that has a 1% or greater chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year. Any flood zone that begins with the letter A is subject to the
100-YEAR FLOOD. Over the life of a 30-year loan, there is a 26% chance of experiencing such a
flood with the SFHA.
500-YEAR FLOOD. The flood that has a 0.2% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any year.
Areas subject to the 500-YEAR FLOOD have a moderate to low risk of flooding.
A ZONE. Portions of the special flood hazard area (SFHA) in which the principal source of
flooding is runoff from rainfall, snowmelt or a combination of both. In A ZONES, floodwaters may
move slowly or rapidly, but waves are usually not a significant threat to structures. Areas of 100-year
flood, base flood elevations and flood hazard factors are not determined.
A99 ZONE. The part of the SFHA inundated by the 100-year flood which is to be protected from
the 100-year flood by a federal flood protection system under construction. No base flood elevations
are determined.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE). A structure located on the same
parcel of property as the principle structure, the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal
structure. ACCESSORY STRUCTURES should constitute a minimal initial investment, may not be
used for human habitation, and should be designed to have minimal flood damage potential. Examples
of ACCESSORY STRUCTURES are detached garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns and hay
sheds.
ACCESSORY USE. A use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of
land on which it is located.
ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING STRUCTURE). Any walled and roofed expansion to the
perimeter of a structure in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a
firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by
independent perimeter load-bearing walls, is new construction.
Flood Damage Prevention 7
AH ZONE. An area of 100-year shallow flooding where depths are between one and three feet
(usually shallow ponding). Base flood elevations are shown.
AI-30 and AE ZONES. Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 1% annual chance flood (100-
year flood). Base flood elevations (BFEs) are determined.
APPEAL. A request for a review of the FIoodplain Administrators interpretation of any provision
of this chapter or from the Floodplain Administrators ruling on a request for a variance.
AO ZONE. An area of 100-year shallow flooding where water depth is between one and three feet
(usually sheet flow on sloping terrain). Flood depths are shown.
AR/AL  A30, AR/AE, AR/AH, AR/AO and AR/A ZONES. Special flood hazard areas (SFHAs)
that result from the de-certification of a previously accredited flood protection system that is in the
process of being restored to provide a 100-year or greater level of flood protection. After restoration is
complete, these areas will still experience residual flooding from other flooding sources.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or AH Zone on a communitys Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) where the base flood depths range from one to three feet, there is no
clearly defined channel, the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may
be evident. The flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
B and X ZONES (SHADED). Areas of the 0.2% annual chance (500-year) flood, areas subject to
the 100-year flood with average depths of less than one foot or with contributing drainage area less
than one square mile, and areas protected by levees from the base flood.
BASE FLOOD. A flood which has a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year
(also called the 100-YEAR FLOOD). BASE FLOOD is the term used throughout this chapter.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/Al-A30, AR/AH and AR/AO that
indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a 1% or greater chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT. The portion of a structure having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all four
sides.
BUILDING. A walled and roofed structure that is principally aboveground; including a
manufactured home, gas or liquid storage tank or other human-made facility or infrastructure. See
definition for STRUCTURE.
C and X (UNSHADED) ZONES. Areas determined to be outside the 500-year floodplain.
8 Radcliff - Flood Damage Prevention
COMMUNITY. A political entity having the authority to adopt and enforce floodplain ordinances
for the area under its jurisdiction.
COMMUNITY RATING SYSTEM (CRS). A program developed by the Federal Insurance
Administration to provide incentives to those communities in the regular program to go beyond the
minimum floodplain management requirements to develop extra measures for protection from
flooding.
COMMUNITY FLOOD HAZARD AREA (CFHA). An area that has been determined by the
Floodplain Administrator (or other delegated, designated or qualified community official) from
available technical studies, historical information and other available and reliable sources, which may
be subject to periodic inundation by floodwaters that can adversely affect the public health, safety and
general welfare. Included are areas downstream from dams.
CRITICAL FACILITY. Any property that, if flooded, would result in severe consequences to
public health and safety or a facility which, if unusable or unreachable because of flooding, would
seriously and adversely affect the health and safety of the public. CRITICAL FACILITIES include,
but are not limited to: housing likely to contain occupants not sufficiently mobile to avoid injury or
death unaided during a flood; schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency response
installations, vehicle and equipment storage facilities, emergency operations centers likely to be called
upon before, during and after a flood, public and private utility facilities important to maintaining or
restoring normal services before, during and after a flood, and those facilities or installations which
produce, use or store volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials, hazardous
materials or hazardous waste.
D ZONE. An area in which the flood hazard is undetermined.
DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including,
but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating,
drilling operations or permanent storage of materials or equipment.
ELEVATED STRUCTURE. A non-basement structure built to have the lowest floor elevated
above ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, piling, columns (post and piers),
shear walls or breakaway walls. (See freeboard requirements for residential and non-residential
structures.)
ELEVATION CERTIFICATE. A statement certified by a registered professional engineer or
surveyor on the FEMA-approved form in effect at the time of certification that verifies a structures
elevation and other related information to verify compliance with this chapter.
EMERGENCY PROGRAM. The initial phase under which a community participates in the NFIP,
intended to provide a first layer amount of insurance at subsidized rates on all insurable structures in
that community before the effective date of the initial FIRM.
ENCLOSURE. The portion of a structure below the base flood elevation (BFE) used solely for
parking of vehicles, limited storage or access to the structure.
Flood Damage Prevention 9
ENCROACHMENT. The physical advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation,
structures, permanent structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow
capacity of a floodplain.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. Any structure for which the start of construction commenced
before the effective date of the FIRM or before 1-1-1975, for FIRMs effective before that date.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION may also be referred to as EXISTING STRUCTURES.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park
or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured
homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets,
and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of
the first floodplain management ordinance adopted by the city based on specific technical base flood
elevation data which established the area of special flood hazards.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the
manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets,
and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD, FLOODING or FLOOD WATER.
(1) A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land
areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of
surface waters from any source; and/or mudslides (i.e. mudflows). See MUDSLIDES.
(2) The condition resulting from flood-related erosion. See FLOOD-RELATED EROSION.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM). A map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) has delineated
the areas of flood hazards and the regulatory floodway.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). A map on which the boundaries of the flood,
mudslide (i.e. mudflow), and flood-related erosion areas having special hazards have been designated
as Zones A, M and/or E by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance
Administration (HA).
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). A map on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) has delineated special flood
hazard areas and risk premium zones.
10 Radcliff - Flood Damage Prevention
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The report provided by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) containing flood profiles, the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and/or the Flood Boundary Floodway Map (FBFM) and the water surface
elevation of the base flood.
FLOOD-PROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes or
adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real
property, water and sanitation facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOOD-PROOFING CERTIFICATE. A certification by a registered professional engineer or
architect, on a FEMA-approved form in effect at the time of certification stating that a non-residential
structure, together with attendant utilities and sanitary facilities is watertight to a specified design
elevation with walls that are substantially impermeable to the passage of water and all structural
components are capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic flood forces, including the effects
of buoyancy and anticipated debris impact forces.
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by
flood waters from any source.
FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The individual appointed by a NFIP participating
community to administer and enforce the floodplain management ordinances.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing natural resources in the
floodplain, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works,
floodplain management ordinances and open space plans.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. This chapter and other zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading
and erosion control), and other applications of police power, which control development in flood-prone
areas. This term describes federal, state and/or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as the REGULATORY FLOODWAY.
FLOODWAY FRINGE. The area of the fioodplain on either side of the regulatory floodway
where encroachment may be permitted without additional hydraulic and/or hydrologic analysis.
FREEBOARD. A factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above the BFE, which is applied for
the purposes of floodplain management. It is used to compensate for the many unknown factors that
could contribute to flood heights greater than those calculated for the base flood. FREEBOARD must
Flood Damage Prevention 11
be applied not just to the elevation of the lowest floor or flood-proofing level, but also to the level of
protection provided to all components of the structure, such as building utilities, HVAC components
and the like.
FRAUD AND VICTIMIZATION. As related in Article VI, Appeals and Variance Procedures, of
this chapter, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In
examining this requirement, the City Council will consider the fact that every newly constructed
structure adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for 50 to 100 years.
Structures that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all
those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the
community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger and suffering that those
increased flood damages may incur. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware
that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE FACILITY. A facility, structure or other development,
which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water. The term includes only a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of
cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair or seafood processing facilities. The term does not
include long-term storage, manufacture, sales or service facilities.
GOVERNING BODY. The local governing unit (i.e., county or municipality) that is empowered to
adopt and implement ordinances to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its
citizenry.
HAZARD POTENTIAL. The possible adverse incremental consequences that result from the
release of water or stored contents due to failure of a dam or misoperation of a dam or appurtenances.
The hazard potential classification of a dam does not reflect in any way the current condition of a dam
and its appurtenant structures (e.g., safety, structural integrity, flood routing capacity).
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to
construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to
the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic
preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
12 Radcliff - Flood Damage Prevention
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either:
(a) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(b) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
INCREASED COST OF COMPLIANCE (ICC). Increased cost of compliance coverage provides
for the payment of a claim for the cost to comply with state or community floodplain management laws
or ordinances after a direct physical loss by flood. When a building covered by a standard flood
insurance policy under the NFIP sustains a loss and the state or community declares the building to be
substantially or repetitively damaged, ICC will help pay up to $30,000 for the cost to elevate, floodproof,
demolish or remove the building. ICC COVERAGE is available on residential and nonresidential
buildings (this category includes public or government buildings, such as schools, libraries
and municipal buildings) insured under the NFIP.
KRS 151.250. Plans for dams, levees and the like to be approved and permit issued by cabinet
(Environmental and Public Protection Cabinet).
(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person and no city, county or other
political subdivision of the state, including levee districts, drainage districts, flood control districts or
systems or similar bodies, shall commence the construction, reconstruction, relocation or improvement
of any dam, embankment, levee, dike, bridge, fill or other obstruction (except those constructed by the
Department of Highways) across or along any stream, or in the floodway of any stream, unless the
plans and specifications for the work have been submitted by the person or political subdivision
responsible for the construction, reconstruction or improvement and the plans and specifications have
been approved in writing by the cabinet and a permit issued. However, the cabinet by regulation may
exempt those dams, embankments or other obstructions, which are not of a size or type as to require
approval by the cabinet in the interest of safety or retention of water supply.
(2) No person, city, county or other political subdivision of the state shall commence the
filing of any area with earth, debris or any other material, or raise the level of any area in any manner,
or place a building, barrier or obstruction of any sort on any area located adjacent to a river or stream or
in the floodway of the stream so that the filling, raising or obstruction will in any way affect the flow of
water in the channel or in the floodway of the stream unless plans and specifications for the work have
been submitted to and approved by the cabinet and a permit issued as required in division (1) of this
definition above.
(3) Nothing in this section is intended to give the cabinet any jurisdiction or control over the
construction, reconstruction, improvement, enlargement, maintenance or operation of any drainage
district, ditch or system established for agricultural purposes, or to require approval of the same except
where such obstruction of the stream or floodway is determined by the cabinet to be a detriment or
hindrance to the beneficial use of water resources in the area, and the person or political subdivision in
Flood Damage Prevention 13
control thereof so notified. The Department for Natural Resources through KRS Chapter 350 shall have
exclusive jurisdiction over KRS Chapter 151 concerning the regulation of dams, levees, embankments,
dikes, bridges, fills or other obstructions across or along any stream or in the floodway of any stream
which structures are permitted under KRS Chapter 350 for surface coal mining operations.
LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC). An official FEMA determination, by letter, to amend or
revise effective Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps and Flood Insurance
Studies. LOMCs include the following categories:
(1) LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). A revision based on technical data
showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated SFHA. A LOMA amends the current
effective FIRM and establishes that a specific property is not located in a SFHA.
(2) LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). A revision based on technical data that, usually
due to human-made changes, shows changes to flood zones, flood elevations, floodplain and floodway
delineations and planimetric features.
(3) LETTER OF MAP REVISION  FILL (LOMR F). A determination that a structure or
parcel has been elevated by properly placed engineered fill above the BFE and is, therefore, excluded
from the SHFA.
LEVEE. A human-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in
accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to
provide protection from temporary flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM. A flood protection system that consists of a levee, or levees, and associated
structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance
with sound engineering practices. For a LEVEE SYSTEM to be recognized, the following criteria must
be met.
(1) All closure devices or mechanical systems for internal drainage, whether manual or
automatic, must be operated in accordance with an officially adopted operation manual (a copy of
which must be provided to FEMA by the operator when levee or drainage system recognition is being
sought or revised).
(2) All operations must be under the jurisdiction of a federal or state agency, an agency
created by federal or state law, or an agency of a community participating in the NFIP.
LIMITED STORAGE. An area used for storage and intended to be limited to incidental items
which can withstand exposure to the elements and have low flood damage potential. Such an area must
be of flood resistant material, void of utilities except for essential lighting, and cannot be temperature
controlled.
14 Radcliff - Flood Damage Prevention
LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE. The elevation of the sidewalk, patio, deck support or basement
entryway immediately next to the structure and after the completion of construction. It does not include
earth that is emplaced for aesthetic or landscape reasons around a foundation wall. It does include
natural ground or properly compacted fill that comprises a component of a structures foundation
system.
LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area including basement. An
unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, structure access or storage
in an area other than a basement area is not considered a structures lowest floor; provided that, the
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design
requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on
a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when
connected or attached to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers and
similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be
improved property. The term MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a recreational vehicle.
(See RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.)
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MAP. The Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) or the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for a
community issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
MAP PANEL NUMBER. The four-digit number on a flood map, followed by a letter suffix,
assigned by FEMA. The first four digits represent the map panel. The letter suffix represents the
number of times the map panel has been revised. (The letter A is not used by FEMA, the letter B is
the first revision.)
MARKET VALUE. The structure value, excluding the land (as agreed between a willing buyer
and seller), as established by what the local real estate market will bear. MARKET VALUE can be
established by independent certified appraisal, replacement cost depreciated by age of structure (actual
cash value) or adjusted assessed values.
MEAN SEA LEVEL (MSL). The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. For the
purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the MSL is used as a reference for establishing
various elevations within the floodplain as shown on a communitys FIRM. For purposes of this
chapter, the term is synonymous with either National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) 1929 or North
American Vertical Datum (NAVD) 1988.
MITIGATION. Sustained actions taken to reduce or eliminate long-term risk to people and
property from hazards and their effects. The purpose of MITIGATION is twofold: To protect people
and structures and to minimize the costs of disaster response and recovery.
Flood Damage Prevention 15
MUDSLIDE (i.e. MUDFLOW). Describes a condition where there is a river, flow or inundation
of liquid mud down a hillside, usually as a result of a dual condition of loss of brush cover and the
subsequent accumulation of water on the ground, preceded by a period of unusually heavy or sustained
rain. A MUDSLIDE (i.e. MUDFLOW) may occur as a distinct phenomenon while a landslide is in
progress, and will be recognized as such by the Floodplain Administrator only if the mudflow, and not
the landslide, is the proximate cause of damage that occurs.
MUDSLIDE (i.e. MUDFLOW) AREA MANAGEMENT. The operation of and overall program
of corrective and preventative measures for reducing mudslide (i.e. mudflow) damage, including, but
not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, mudslide control works and floodplain management
regulations.
MUDSLIDE (i.e. MUDFLOW) PRONE AREA. An area with land surfaces and slopes of
unconsolidated material where the history, geology and climate indicate a potential for mudflow.
NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP). The federal program that makes flood
insurance available to owners of property in participating communities nationwide through the
cooperative efforts of the federal government and the private insurance industry.
NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD). As corrected in 1929, a vertical control
used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. (Generally used as the
vertical datum on the older FIRMs. Refer to FIRM legend panel for correct datum.)
NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the
effective date of the citys floodplain management regulations and includes any subsequent
improvements to the structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured
homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets
and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date
of the citys adopted floodplain management ordinances.
NON-RESIDENTIAL. Structures that are not designed for human habitation, including but is not
limited to: small business concerns, churches, schools, farm structures (including grain bins and silos),
pool houses, clubhouses, recreational structures, mercantile structures, agricultural and industrial
structures, warehouses and hotels or motels with normal room rentals for less than six months
duration.
NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM (NAVD). As corrected in 1988, a vertical control
used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. (Generally used on the
newer FIRMs and Digitally Referenced FIRMs (DFIRMs.) (Refer to FIRM or DFIRM legend panel for
correct datum.)
16 Radcliff - Flood Damage Prevention
OBSTRUCTION. Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, embankment, levee, dike, pile,
abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, structure, wire, fence, rock,
gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any
watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of
water, due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its
likelihood of being carried downstream.
PARTICIPATING COMMUNITY. A community that voluntarily elects to participate in the NFIP
by adopting and enforcing floodplain management regulations that are consistent with the standards of
the NFIP.
PRE-FIRM CONSTRUCTION. Construction or substantial improvement, which started on or
before 12-31-1974, or before the effective date of the initial FIRM of the community, whichever is
later.
POST-FIRM CONSTRUCTION. Construction or substantial improvement that started on or after
the effective date of the initial FIRM of the community or after 12-31-1974, whichever is later.
PROBATION. A means of formally notifying participating NFIP communities of violations and
deficiencies in the administration and enforcement of the local floodplain management regulations.
During periods of probation, each insurance policy is subject to a $50 surcharge.
PROGRAM DEFICIENCY. A defect in a communitys floodplain management regulations or
administrative procedures that impairs effective implementation of those floodplain management
standards or of the standards of 44 C.F.R.  60.3, 60.4, 60.5 and/or 60.6.
PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE. Anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire
community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free
passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, river, bay, stream, canal or basin.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle that is:
(1) Built on a single chassis;
(2) Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable to a light duty truck; and
(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters
for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
REGULAR PROGRAM. The phase of a communitys participation in the NFIP where more
comprehensive floodplain management requirements are imposed and higher amounts of insurance are
available based upon risk zones and elevations determined in a FIS.
Flood Damage Prevention 17
REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the
water surface elevation more than one foot. See BASE FLOOD.
REMEDY A VIOLATION. The process by which a community brings a structure or other
development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations or, if this is not
possible, to reduce the impact of non-compliance. Reduced impact may include protecting the structure
or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the
ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing state or federal financing
exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
REPAIR. The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing structure.
REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two or more separate
occasions during a ten-year period where the value of damages equals or exceeds an average of 50% of
the current value of the structure, beginning on the date when the damage first occurred, or, four or
more flood losses of $1,000 or more over the life of the structure, or, three or more flood losses over
the life of the structure that are equal to or greater than the current value of the structure.
RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook and
the like.
SEC. 1316. The section of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended, which states
that no new or renewal flood insurance coverage shall be provided for any property that the
Administrator finds has been declared by a duly constituted state or local zoning authority or other
authorized public body to be in violation of state or local laws, regulations or ordinances that are
intended to discourage or otherwise restrict land development or occupancy in flood-prone areas.
SHEET FLOW AREA. See AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). The portion of the floodplain subject to inundation
by the base flood and/or flood-related erosion hazards as shown on a FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AR,
A1-30, AH, AO or AR.
START OF CONSTRUCTION. (Includes substantial improvement and other proposed new
development.) The date a building permit is issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or other improvement is within 180 days of the
permit date. The actual START means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure
(including manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of
piles, construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms;
the
18 Radcliff - Flood Damage Prevention
installation on the property of accessory structures, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual START OF
CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.
STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; including
manufactured homes, gas or liquid storage tanks or other human-made facilities or infrastructures. See
BUILDING.
SUBDIVISION. Any division, for the purposes of sale, lease or development, either on the
installment plan or upon any and all other plans, terms and conditions, of any tract or parcel of land
into two or more lots or parcels.
SUBROGATION. An action brought by FEMA to recover insurance money paid out where all or
part of the damage can be attributed to acts or omissions by a community or other third party.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Any damage to a building for which the cost of repairs equals or
exceeds 50% of the market value of the building prior to the damage occurring. This term includes
structures that are categorized as repetitive loss. For the purposes of this definition, repair is
considered to occur when the first repair or reconstruction of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of the building commences. The term does not apply to:
(1) Any project for improvement of a building required to comply with existing health,
sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the Code Enforcement Official and
which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(2) Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structures continued designation as a historic structure.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any combination of reconstruction, alteration or
improvement to a building, taking place during a one-year period in which the cumulative percentage
of improvement equals or exceeds 50% of the current market value of the building. For the purposes of
this definition, an improvement occurs when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other
structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building. The term does not apply to:
(1) Any project for improvement of a building required to comply with existing health,
sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the Code Enforcement Official and
which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions;
(2) Any alteration of a historic structure; provided that, the alteration will not preclude the
structures continued designation as a historic structure; or
(3) Any building that has been damaged from any source or is categorized as repetitive loss.
Flood Damage Prevention 19
SUBSTANTIALLY IMPROVED EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS OR
SUBDIVISIONS. Repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and
pads equaling or exceeding 50% of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair,
reconstruction or improvement commenced.
SUSPENSION. Removal of a participating community from the NFIP for failure to enact and/or
enforce floodplain management regulations required for participation in the NFIP. New or renewal
flood insurance policies are no longer available in suspended communities.
UTILITIES. Includes electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment.
VARIANCE. Relief from some or all of the requirements of this chapter.
VIOLATION. Failure of a structure or other development to fully comply with this chapter. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications or other evidence
of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical
Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and
frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other topographic feature on or
over which water flows at least periodically.
WATERSHED. All the area within a geographic boundary from which water, sediments,
dissolved materials and other transportable materials drain or are carried by water to a common outlet,
such as a point on a larger stream, lake or underlying aquifer.
X ZONE. The area where the flood hazard is less than that in the SFHA. Shaded X zones shown
on recent FIRMs (B zones on older FIRMs) designate areas subject to inundation by the flood with a
0.2% probability of being equaled or exceeded (the 500-year flood) in any year. Unshaded X zones (C
zones on older FIRMS) designate areas where the annual exceedance probability of flooding is less
than 0.2%.
ZONE. A geographical area shown on a Flood Hazard Boundary Map or a Flood Insurance Rate
Map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the area.
(Ord. 07-05-1005, passed 5-7-2007)
20 Radcliff - Flood Damage Prevention
ARTICLE III. GENERAL PROVISIONS
 7.5-6 LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
This chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas (SFHA), areas applicable to KRS 151.250
and, as determined by the Floodplain Administrator or other delegated, designated or qualified
community official as determined by the City Council from available technical studies, historical
information, and other available and reliable sources, areas within the jurisdiction of the City Council
which may be subject to periodic inundation by floodwaters that can adversely affect the public health,
safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city.
(Ord. 07-05-1005, passed 5-7-2007)
 7.5-7 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for the county, dated 8-16-2007, with the accompanying
Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMS), other supporting data and any subsequent amendments thereto,
a-re hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of these regulations by the city, and for those
land areas acquired by the city through annexation. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum
area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow
implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the City Council by the Floodplain
Administrator and are enacted by City Council pursuant to statutes governing land use management
regulations. The FIS and/or FIRM are permanent records of the city and are on file and available for
review by the public during regular business hours at the citys Planning Department located at 411
West Lincoln Trail Blvd, Radcliff KY.
(Ord. 07-05-1005, passed 5-7-2007)
 7.5-8 ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
(A) A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provision of this chapter
prior to the commencement of any development activities in the special flood hazard areas (SFHA).
See Article IV,  7.5-22, for instructions and explanation.
(B) Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Floodplain
Administrator.
(Ord. 07-05-1005, passed 5-7-2007)
Flood Damage Prevention 21
 7.5-9 COMPLIANCE.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or structurally
altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable state regulations.
Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in
connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the City
Council from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. 07-05-1005, passed 5-7-2007)
 7.5-10 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or
deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed
restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. 07-05-1005, passed 5-7-2007)
 7.5-11 INTERPRETATION.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
(A) Considered minimum requirements;
(B) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(C) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(Ord. 07-05-1005, passed 5-7-2007)
 7.5-12 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on
rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes. This chapter does
not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within the areas will be
free from flooding or flood damage. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City
Council, any officer or employee, the commonwealth, the Federal Insurance Administration or the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on
this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Ord. 07-05-1005, passed 5-7-2007)
22 Radcliff - Flood Damage Prevention
 7.5-13 ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATION NOTICE AND PENALTIES.
(A) Civil offense. If, at any time, development occurs which is not in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter including obtaining or complying with the terms and conditions of a
floodplain construction permit and any approved modifications, the development shall constitute a civil
offense.
(B) Notice of violation. If, at any time, a duly authorized employee or agent of the Floodplain
Administrator has reasonable cause to believe that a person has caused development to occur which is
not in accordance with the provisions of this chapter including obtaining or complying with the terms
and conditions of a floodplain construction permit and any approved modifications thereof, a dulyauthorized
employee of the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a notice to the person responsible for
the violation and/or the property owner, stating the facts of the offense or violation, the section of this
chapter and/or of the permit violated, when it occurred, how the violation is to be remedied to bring the
development into conformity with this chapter or with the approved permit, and within what period of
time the remedy is to occur, which period of time shall be reasonable and shall be determined by the
nature of the violation and whether or not it creates a nuisance or hazard. The remedy may include an
order to stop work on the development. The notice shall also state that a citation may be forthcoming in
the event that the requested remedies and corrective actions are not taken, which citation will request a
civil monetary fine and shall state the maximum fine which could be imposed. See below.
(C) Notice of citation. If, at any time, a duly authorized employee or agent of the Floodplain
Administrator has reasonable cause to believe that a person has caused development to occur which is
not in accordance with the provisions of this chapter- including obtaining or complying with the terms
and conditions of a floodplain construction permit and any approved modifications thereof, a duly
authorized employee of the Floodplain Administrator may issue a citation to the offender stating the
violation, prior notices of violation issued, how the violation is to be remedied to bring the
development into conformity with this chapter or with the approved permit, and within what period of
time the remedy is to occur, and what penalty or penalties are recommended. When a citation is issued,
the person to whom the citation is issued shall respond to the citation within seven days of the date the
citation is issued by either carrying out the remedies and corrections set forth in the citation, paying the
civil fine set forth in the citation or requesting a hearing before the governing body. If the person to
whom the citation is issued does not respond to the citation within seven days, that person shall be
deemed to have waived the right to a hearing and the determination that a violation occurred shall be
considered final.
(D) Penalties. Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its
requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with granting
of a variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor civil offense. Any person who
violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be
fined no less than $500 or imprisoned for not more than 365 days, or both, and, in addition, shall pay
all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Floodplain Administrator from taking such
other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. 07-05-1005, passed 5-7-2007)
Flood Damage Prevention 23
ARTICLE IV. ADMINISTRATION
 7.5-21 DESIGNATION OF LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR.
The City Council hereby appoints the City Planner to administer, implement and enforce the
provisions of this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accordance with its
provisions and is herein referred to as the Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. 07-05-1005, passed 5-7-2007)
 7.5-22 ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development begins
within any special flood hazard area established in Article III,  7.5-7. Application for a development
permit shall be made on forms furnished by Floodplain Administrator prior to any development
activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale
showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities and the location of the foregoing. Endorsement
of local Administrator is required before a state floodplain construction permit can be processed.
Specifically, the following information is required.
(A) Application stage.
(1) Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level (MSL) of the proposed lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures in Zone A and elevation of highest adjacent grade;
(2) Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure
will be flood-proofed;
(3) All appropriate certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect that the
non-residential flood-proofed structure will meet the flood-proofing criteria in Article V,  7.5-32(B)
and 7.5-34(B); and
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result
of proposed development.
(B) Construction stage.
(1) Upon placement of the lowest floor, and before construction continues, or flood proofing
by whatever construction means, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain
Administrator and to the state a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor or flood-proofed
24 Radcliff - Flood Damage Prevention
elevation, as built, in relation to mean sea level. In AE, Al-30, AH, and A zones where the Community
has adopted a regulatory base flood elevation, the certification shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same.
(2) When flood proofing is utilized for a particular structure, the certification shall be
prepared by or under the direct supervision of a certified professional engineer or architect. Any
continued work undertaken prior to the submission of the certification shall be at the permit holders
risk. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the lowest floor and flood proofing elevation survey
data submitted. Deficiencies detected by the review shall be corrected by the permit holder
immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the
survey or failure to make the corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for
the project.
(Ord. 07-05-1005, passed 5-7-2007)
 7.5-23 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR.
(A) The Floodplain Administrator and/or staff is hereby appointed, authorized and directed to
administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. The Floodplain Administrator is
further authorized to render interpretations of this chapter, which are consistent with its spirit and
purpose by granting or denying development permits in accordance with its provisions.
(B) The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be
limited to, the following.
(1) Permit review. Review all development permits to ensure that:
(a) Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;
(b) All other required state and federal permits have been obtained: Advise permittee
that additional federal or state permits may be required, and if specific federal or state permit
requirements are known, require that copies of the permits be provided and maintained on file with the
development permit;
(c) Flood damages will be reduced in the best possible manner; and
(d) The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of affected
watercourses. For purposes of this chapter, ADVERSELY AFFECTS means that the cumulative effect
of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will
increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.
Flood Damage Prevention 25
(2) Review and use of any other base flood data. When base flood elevation data has not been
provided in accordance with Article III,  7.5-7, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency,
or other source, in order to administer Article V. Any such information shall be submitted to the City
Council for adoption.
(3) Notification of other agencies.
(a) Notify adjacent communities, the states Division of Water and any other federal
and/or state agencies with statutory or regulatory authority prior to any alteration or relocation of the
watercourse;
(b) Submit evidence of the notification to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); and
(c) Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of the
watercourse is maintained.
(4) Documentation of floodplain development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and
make available as needed the following:
(a) Certification required by Article V,  7.5-32(A) (lowest floor elevations) as shown
on a completed and certified elevation certificate. Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to
mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved
structures, in accordance with Article IV,  7.5-22(B);
(b) Certification required by Article V,  7.5-32(B) (elevation or flood-proofing of nonresidential
structures) as shown on a completed and certified flood-proofing certificate. Verify and
record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the new or- substantially improved
structures have been flood-proofed, in accordance with Article IV,  7.5-22(B);
(c) Certification required by Article V,  7.5-32(C) (elevated structures);
(d) Certification of elevation required by Article V,  7.5-35(A) (subdivision standards);
(e) Certification required by Article V,  7.5-32(E) (floodway encroachments);
(f) Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of the
watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished;
(g) Review certified plans and specifications for compliance; and
(h) Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in
Article III,  7.5-13.
26 Radcliff - Flood Damage Prevention
(5) Map determinations. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the special flood hazard areas, for example, where there appears to be a conflict between
a mapped boundary and actual field conditions.
(a) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of
special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary
and actual field conditions) the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. The
person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the
interpretation as provided in Article VI;
(b) When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in
accordance with Article III,  7.5-7, then the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and
reasonable utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other
source, in order to administer the provisions of Article V;
(c) When flood-proofing is utilized for a particular structure, the Floodplain
Administrator shall obtain certification from a registered professional engineer or architect, in
accordance with Article V,  7.5-32(B) a flood-proofing certificate; and
(d) All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the
office of the Floodplain Administrator and shall be open for public inspection.
(6) Right of entry.
(a) Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this
chapter, or whenever the Administrator has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any structure
or upon any premises any condition or ordinance violation which makes the building, structure or
premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the Administrator may enter the building, structure or
premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or perform any duty imposed upon the
Administrator by this chapter.
(b) If the structure or premises are occupied, he or she shall first present proper
credentials and request entry. If the building, structure or premises are unoccupied, he or she shall first
make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the request
entry.
(c) If entry is refused, the Administrator shall have recourse to every remedy provided
by law to secure entry.
(d) When the Administrator shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other
remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care
or control of any building, structure or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as
herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the Administrator for the purpose of inspection
and examination pursuant to this chapter.
Flood Damage Prevention 27
(7) Stop work orders. Upon notice from the Administrator, work on any building, structure or
premises that is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall immediately cease. The
notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his or her agent, or to
the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed.
(8) Revocation of permits.
(a) The Administrator may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of
this chapter, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in
the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based.
(b) The Administrator may revoke a permit upon determination by the Administrator that
the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the
structure for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of
this chapter.
(9) Liability. Any officer, employee or member of the Floodplain Administrators staff,
charged with the enforcement of this chapter, acting for the applicable governing authority in the
discharge of his or her duties, shall not thereby render himself or herself personally liable, and is
hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a
result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his or her duties. Any suit brought against
any officer, employee or member because of the act performed by him or her in the enforcement of any
provision of this chapter shall be defended by the Department of Law until the final termination of the
proceedings.
(10) Expiration of floodplain construction permit. A floodplain construction permit, and all
provisions contained therein, shall expire if the holder of a floodplain construction permit has not
commenced construction within 180- calendar days from the date of its issuance by the Floodplain
Administrator.
(Ord. 07-05-1005, passed 5-7-2007)
ARTICLE V. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
 7.5-31 GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
In all special flood hazard areas, the following provisions are required.
(A) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic
loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
28 Radcliff - Flood Damage Prevention
(B) Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground
anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for
resisting wind forces.
(C) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and
utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
(D) New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices
that minimize flood damage.
(E) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air condition equipment. and other service facilities
shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.
(F) Within Zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes
to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
(G) New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of flood waters into the system.
(H) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters.
(I) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them
or contamination from them during flooding.
(J) Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a structure, which is not in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall meet the requirements of new construction as
contained in this chapter.
(K) Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a structure, which is not in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not
furthered, extended or replaced.
(Ord. 07-05-1005, passed 5-7-2007)
Flood Damage Prevention 29
 7.5-32 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation data have been provided, as set forth in
Article III,  7.5-7, the following provisions are required.
(A) Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential
structure (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor, including basement, mechanical
equipment and ductwork elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid
foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of Article V, 
7.5-32(C).
(1) In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height equal to or
exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least two feet above the
highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.
(2) In an A zone, where no technical data has been produced by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, elevated one foot above the base flood elevation, as determined by this
community. The Floodplain Administrator will determine the method by which base flood elevations
are determined. Methods include, but are not limited to, detailed hydrologic and hydraulic analyses, use
of existing data available from other sources, use of historical data, best supportable and reasonable
judgment in the event no data can be produced. Title 401 KAR (Kentucky Administrative Regulations)
Chapter 4, Regulation 060,  5(5)a, states as a part of the technical requirements for a state floodplain
permit: the applicant shall provide cross sections for determining floodway boundaries(and thereby
base flood elevations) at any proposed construction site where FEMA maps are not available. All cross
sections shall be referenced to mean sea level and shall have vertical error tolerances of no more than +
five-tenths foot. Cross sections elevations shall be taken at those points which represent significant
breaks in slope and at points where hydraulic characteristics of the base floodplain change. Each cross
section shall extend across the entire base floodplain and shall be in the number and at the locations
specified by the cabinet. If necessary to ensure that significant flood damage will not occur, the cabinet
may require additional cross sections or specific site elevations which extend beyond those needed for
making routine regulatory floodway boundary calculations.
(3) In all other zones, elevated one foot above the base flood elevation. Upon the completion
of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered
professional engineer or surveyor- and verified by the community building inspection department to be
properly elevated. The certification and verification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator.
(B) Non-residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any
commercial, industrial or non-residential structure (including manufactured homes used for nonresidential
purposes) shall be elevated to conform with Article V,  7.5-32(A) or together with
attendant utility and sanitary facilities:
(1) Be flood-proofed below an elevation one foot above the level of the base flood elevation
so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
30 Radcliff - Flood Damage Prevention
(2) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and
effects of buoyancy;
(3) Have the lowest floor, including basement, mechanical equipment, and ductwork,
elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation;
(4) A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this
division are satisfied. The certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in Article IV,  7.5-
22(A)(3); and
(5) Manufactured homes shall meet the standards in Article V,  7.5-32(D).
(a) All new construction and substantial improvement with fully enclosed areas below
the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
storage and which are subject to flooding, shall be constructed of flood resistant materials below an
elevation one foot above the base flood elevation, and, shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater.
(b) Opening sizes (FEMA Technical Bulletin 1-93) for meeting this requirement must
meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
1. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or
2. Have a minimum of two openings with a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all openings shall
be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater.
(C) Elevated structures. New construction or substantial improvements of elevated structures on
columns, posts or pilings (e.g.) that include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other
exterior walls below the base flood elevation shall be designed to preclude finished living space and
designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood
forces on exterior walls.
(1) Opening sizes for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a
professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria:
(a) Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above foundation interior
grade (which must be equal to in elevation or higher than the exterior foundation grade); and
Flood Damage Prevention 31
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or
devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions.
(2) Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of
vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the
premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator); and
(3) The interior portion of the enclosed areas shall not be partitioned or finished into separate
rooms.
(D) Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
(1) (a) All new or substantially improved manufactured homes placed on sites located
within A, A1-30, AO, AH and AE on the communitys Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) must meet
all the requirements for new construction, including elevation and anchoring. Locations include:
1. On individual lots or parcels;
2. In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions;
3. In new manufactured home parks or subdivisions;
4. In substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions;
5. Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; or
6. In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site upon which a
manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood.
(b) All manufactured homes must be:
1. Elevated on a permanent foundation;
2. Have its lowest floor elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base
flood elevation; and
3. Be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
32 Radcliff - Flood Damage Prevention
(2) Except manufactured homes that have incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood,
all manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision must be elevated so that the manufactured home is securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement, so that either the:
(a) The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above
the level of the base flood elevation; or
(b) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation
elements of at least an equivalent strength, of no less than 36 inches in height above the highest
adjacent grade.
(3) (a) All recreational vehicles placed on sites located within A, A1-30, AO, AH and AE on
the communitys Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) must either:
1. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
2. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
3. Meet the permit requirements for new construction of this chapter, including
anchoring and elevation requirements for manufactured homes.
(b) A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed and insured in
accordance with the states motor vehicle regulations, is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to
the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached
additions.
(E) Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Article III,  7.5-7, are
areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity
of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles and has erosion potential, the following
provisions shall apply:
(1) Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and
other developments unless certification (with supporting technical data) by a registered professional
engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in the base flood
elevation levels during occurrence of base flood discharge; and
(2) If Article V,  7.5-32(E) is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements
and other proposed new development shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction
provisions of Article V.
Flood Damage Prevention 33
(F) Standards for utilities.
(1) All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate:
(a) Infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and
(b) Discharge from the systems into flood waters.
(2) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding.
(Ord. 07-05-1005, passed 5-7-2007)
 7.5-33 STANDARDS FOR STREAMS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD
ELEVATION (UNNUMBERED A ZONES) AND/OR FLOODWAYS.
Located within the special flood hazard areas established in Article III,  7.5-7, where streams
exist but where no base flood data has been provided or where base flood data has been provided
without floodways, the following provisions apply.
(A) No encroachments, including fill material or structures shall be located within special flood
hazard areas, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that
the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one
foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical
data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles.
(B) New construction or substantial improvements of structures shall be elevated or flood proofed
to elevations established in accordance with Article III,  7.5-7.
(Ord. 07-05-1005, passed 5-7-2007)
 7.5-34 STANDARDS FOR SHALLOW FLOODING ZONES.
(A) Located within the special flood hazard areas established in Article III,  7.5-7, are areas
designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas have flood hazards associated with base flood depths
of one to three feet, where a clearly defined channel does not exist and the water path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate; therefore, the following provisions apply.
34 Radcliff - Flood Damage Prevention
(B) All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall:
(1) Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above either the base flood
elevation or in Zone AO the flood depth specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map above the highest
adjacent grade. In Zone AO, if no flood depth is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall
be elevated no less than two feet above the highest adjacent grade; and
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures shall:
(a) Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above either the base flood
elevation or in Zone AO the flood depth specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, above the highest
adjacent grade. In Zone AO, if no flood depth is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall
be elevated no less than two feet above the highest adjacent grade; and
(b) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be completely flood-proofed
either to the base flood elevation or above or, in Zone AO, to or above the specified flood depth plus a
minimum of one foot so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. Certification is required as stated in
Article V,  7.5-32(B).
(Ord. 07-05-1005, passed 5-7-2007)
 7.5-35 STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.
(A) All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard area and the elevation of
the base flood and be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
(B) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical
and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
(C) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
(D) In areas where base flood elevation and floodway data is not available (Zone A or unmapped
streams), base flood elevation and floodway data for subdivision proposals and other proposed
development (including manufactured home parks and subdivisions) greater than 50 lots or five acres,
whichever is the lesser, shall be provided.
(E) All subdivision plans will include the elevation of proposed structure(s) and lowest adjacent
grade. If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the lowest floor and lowest adjacent grade
elevations shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the
Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. 07-05-1005, passed 5-7-2007)
Flood Damage Prevention 35
 7.5-36 STANDARDS FOR -ACCESSORY STRUCTURES IN ALL ZONES BEGINNING
WITH THE LETTER A.
For all accessory structures in special flood hazard areas designated A, the following provisions
shall apply:
(A) Structure must be non-habitable;
(B) Must be anchored to resist floatation forces;
(C) Will require flood openings/vents no more than one foot above grade, total openings are to be
one square inch per one square foot of floor area, at least two openings required on opposite walls;
(D) Built of flood resistant materials below a level one foot above the base flood elevation;
(E) Must elevate utilities above the base flood elevation;
(F) Can only be used for storage or parking; and
(G) Cannot be modified for a different use after permitting.
(Ord. 07-05-1005, passed 5-7-2007)
 7.5-37 CRITICAL FACILITIES.
Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible, located outside the limits of
the SFHA (100-year floodplain). Construction of new critical facilities shall not be permissible within
the floodway; however, they may be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is
available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the lowest floor elevated one foot
or more above the level of the base flood elevation at the site. Flood-proofing and sealing measures
must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters.
Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to all critical
facilities to the extent possible.
(Ord. 07-05-1005, passed 5-7-2007)
36 Radcliff - Flood Damage Prevention
ARTICLE VI. APPEALS AND VARIANCE PROCEDURES
 7.5-41 APPEALS AND VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
(A) Nature of variances.
(1) The variance criteria set forth in this section of this chapter are based on the general
principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A
variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that
complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant
or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be
shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure,
its inhabitants or the property owners.
(2) It is the duty of the City Council to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so
compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level is so serious
that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare.
The long-term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are
strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and
contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are
designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate.
(B) Designation of Variance and Appeal Board. The City Council shall establish an Appeal Board
consisting of the Board of Adjustments.
(C) Duties of Variance and Appeal Board.
(1) The Appeal Board shall hear and decide requests for variances from the requirements of
this chapter and appeals of decisions or determinations made by the Floodplain Administrator in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
(2) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board or any taxpayer may appeal
the decision to the local District Court, as provided in Kentucky Revised Statutes.
(D) Appeals/variance procedures. In passing upon the applications, the Appeal Board shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this
chapter and the:
(1) Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(2) Danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
Flood Damage Prevention 37
(3) Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of
the damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property;
(4) Importance to the community of the services provided by the proposed facility;
(5) Necessity that the facility be located on a waterfront, in the case of functionally
dependent facility;
(6) Availability of alternative locations which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(7) Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(8) Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management
program for that area;
(9) Safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(10) Expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters
and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(11) Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, water systems,
streets and bridges.
(E) Conditions for variances. Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of
this chapter, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems
necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
(1) Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in
flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
(2) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum
necessary to afford relief considering the flood hazard. MINIMUM NECESSARY means to afford
relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of
variances to an elevation requirement, this means the City Council need not grant permission for the
applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that
elevation which the City Council believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local
ordinance.
(3) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum
necessary to afford relief considering the flood hazard. In the instance of an historical structure, a
determination shall be made that the variance is the minimum necessary to afford relief and not destroy
the historic character and design of the structure.
38 Radcliff - Flood Damage Prevention
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant (as defined in this chapter); and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood
height, additional threats to public safety, cause extraordinary public expense, create nuisance (as
defined in the definition section under public safety and nuisance), cause fraud or victimization of
the public (as defined in the definition section) or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(5) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the
difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and
stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the
reduced lowest floor elevation.
(6) The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report
any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and the Federal Insurance
Administration (MA) upon request
(7) Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other
proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the
provisions hereof are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety
and does not create a public nuisance.
(F) Variance notification. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice over the signature of a community official that:
(1) The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood elevation will
result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of
insurance coverage;
(2) The construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. A copy of
the notice shall be recorded by the Floodplain Administrator in the Office of the Recorder and shall be
recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land; and
(3) The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all variance actions, including
justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in the communitys biennial report
submission to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Flood Damage Prevention 39
(G) Historic structures. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures (see definition) upon determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not
preclude the structures continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
(H) No impact certification within the floodway. Variances shall not be issued within any mapped
or designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
(Ord. 07-05-1005, passed 5-7-2007)
ARTICLE VII. SEVERABILITY
 7.5-51 SEVERABILITY.
(A) This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any
section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, the decision shall not
affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared
to be unconstitutional or invalid.
(B) If any section, clause, sentence or phrase of this chapter is held to be invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then the holding shall not affect the validity of
the ordinance as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be
unconstitutional or invalid.
(Ord. 07-05-1005, passed 5-7-2007)
40 Radcliff - Flood Damage Prevention
CHAPTER 8: GARBAGE AND TRASH
1
2 Radcliff - Garbage and Trash
CHAPTER 8: GARBAGE AND TRASH
Section
Article I. In General
8-1. Definitions
8-2. Littering prohibited
8-3. Prevention of scattering
8-4. Upsetting, tampering with receptacles or placing garbage in receptacles other than own
8-5. Dumping
8-6. Containers
8-7. Prohibited storage
8-8. Permitted storage
8-9. Investigation of premises
8-10. Notice of removal
8-11. Commercial handbills or handbills and signs on public places
8-12. Mandatory garbage pickup
8-13. Convey of loose materials on public ways
8-14. Maintenance of property
8-15. Illegal deposits of garbage (Reserved)
8-16. Illegal deposits of litter and the like
8-17. Disposal (Reserved)
8-18. Dumping
8-19. Litter receptacles
8-20. Enforcement
8-21. Abatement by the city
8-22. Recovery by city of expenses of litter removal
Article II. Principles for Establishing Franchise
8-51. Established
8-52. Consideration paid by bidder
8-53. Various bid requirements
8-54. Number of weekly collections
8-55. Hours of collection; littering
8-56. Bidder to furnish personnel and equipment
8-57. Materials subject to refusal
8-58. Bidder to maintain office in city
3
4 Radcliff - Garbage and Trash
8-59. Performance bond
8-60. Insurance required
8-61. Compliance with state workers compensation provisions
8-62. Failure of bidder to perform
8-63. Assignment subject to consent of city
8-64. Records to be kept by bidder
8-65. Termination of agreement
8-66. Modification
8-67. Right of enforcement by city
8-68. Disposal of waste materials
8-69. Definitions
8-70. Authority to advertise for bids
8-71. Residential/commercial bid acceptance
8-72. Term of the franchise
8-73. Penalty
Editors note:
Inclusion of  8-1, 8-3 through 8-18, 8-20 and 8-21 of an ordinance adopted 4-5-1979, as
Chapter 8, Art. II,  8-19 through 8-37, was at the discretion of the editor, the ordinance being
nonamendatory of the code. To accomplish this inclusion, the editor has designated the
existing provisions of Chapter 8,  8-1 through 8-8, as Article I, In General. In connection
with the establishment of franchises, the users attention is drawn to  8-22 of the chapter,
which reads as follows: In the event Hardin County adopts an ordinance pertaining to the
same subject matter as this chapter, then and in that event any standard of Hardin Countys
ordinance which is more stringent than the corresponding standard in this chapter shall
become the standard for purposes of this chapter.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 8-1 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ASHES. Residue from fires used for cooking and for heating buildings.
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL. Any handbill which:
(1) Advertises for sale, or promotional gifts or prizes, any merchandise, product, commodity
or thing;
Garbage and Trash 5
(2) Directs attention to any business or other activity for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales or by other means;
(3) Directs attention to or advertises any meeting, exhibition, theatrical or other performance
or vent of any kind for which an admission fee is charged;
(4) Directs attention to or advertises any meeting, exhibition, theatrical or other performance
or event of any kind for which an admission fee is charged; or
(5) While containing reading or pictorial matter other than advertising matter, is
predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is distributed or circulated for advertising
purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
CONSTRUCTION SITES. Any private or public property upon which repairs to existing
buildings, construction of new buildings or demolition of existing structures is taking place.
ELEMENTS. Any element whether created by nature or created by humans, which with
reasonable foreseeability could carry litter from one place to another. ELEMENTS shall include, but
not be limited to, air current, rain, water current and animals.
GARBAGE. Wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of foods,
wastes from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
HANDBILL. Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, circular, leaflet, pamphlet,
paper, booklet or any other printed matter or literature which is not delivered by United States mail,
except that HANDBILL shall not include a newspaper that is placed in a paper box provided by a
newspaper company.
JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle which is partially dismantled or wrecked and
which cannot safely or legally be operated. Junked, wrecked or nonoperative motor vehicles,
including parts cars, stored on private real property by automobile collectors, whether as a hobby or a
profession, if these motor vehicles and parts cars are stored out of ordinary public view by means of
suitable fencing, trees, shrubbery or other means.
LITTER. Any uncontainerized human-made or human-used waste, which, if deposited within the
city other than in a litter receptacle, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare or to
impair the environment of the people of the city. LITTER may include, but is not limited to, any
combustible trash, including, but not limited to, paper, cartons, boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, wood
furniture, bedding; non-combustible trash, including, but not limited to, metals, tin cans, metal
furniture, dirt, catch-basin dirt, small quantities of rock and pieces of concrete, other mineral waste;
street rubbish, including, but not limited to, street sweepings; contents of litter receptacles.
LITTER RECEPTACLE. Any container which is designed to receive litter and to prevent the
escape of litter deposited therein, which is of the size or sufficient capacity to hold all litter generated
between collection periods and which is in compliance with the regulations issued pursuant to this
article.
6 Radcliff - Garbage and Trash
MOTOR VEHICLE. Any self-propelled land vehicle which can be used for towing or transporting
people or materials, including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, buses, motor homes, motorized
campers, motorcycles, motor scooters, tractors, snowmobiles, dune buggies and other off-the-road
vehicles.
MOTOR VEHICLE ACCESSORIES. Any part or parts of any motor vehicle.
PARK. A public or private park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any public or
private area devoted to active or passive recreation, or any other area under the supervision of the
department of parks and recreation.
PARKING LOTS. Any private or public property with provisions for parking vehicles, to which
the public is invited or which the public is permitted to use or which is visible from any public place or
private premises.
PERSON. Includes any individual, firm, partnership or corporation.
PRIVATE PREMISES. Includes any dwelling house, building or other structure designed to be
used, either wholly or in part, for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or
continuously uninhabited or vacant and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps,
vestibule, mailbox or other structure belonging or pertinent to the dwelling house, building or other
structure, and any real property not owned by the federal government, state, county, city school board
or other public subdivision.
PUBLIC PLACE. Includes any and all streets, boulevards, avenues, lanes, alleys, easements,
medians or other public ways, and parks, squares, plazas, grounds and buildings frequented by the
general public, whether publicly or privately owned.
REMOVAL. The physical relocation of any of the items herein designated to constitute garbage,
litter, ashes, including junked motor vehicles and motor vehicle accessories, to an authorized location.
 8-2 LITTERING PROHIBITED.
No person shall deposit any litter within the city except in public receptacles, in authorized private
receptacles for collection or in any duly licensed disposal facility.
 8-3 PREVENTION OF SCATTERING.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such
manner as to prevent litter from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any public place or
private premises.
Garbage and Trash 7
 8-4 UPSETTING, TAMPERING WITH RECEPTACLES, OR PLACING GARBAGE IN
RECEPTACLES OTHER THAN OWN.
(A) No person shall upset or tamper with a public or private receptacle designed or used for the
deposit of litter or cause or permit its contents to be deposited or strewn in or upon any public place or
private premises.
(B) No person shall place any garbage, or litter within the city in a receptacle other than his or her
own receptacle or one which has been provided for him or her by his or her corporation or landlord. It
shall be prima facie proof that the individual has placed garbage or litter in an unauthorized receptacle
if the trash found in the receptacle bears the name of the individual who is not authorized to place
garbage or litter in the receptacle.
 8-5 DUMPING.
It shall be unlawful to dispose of garbage, refuse or ashes by dumping same on any premises in the
city, with or without the consent of the owner of the premises. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any
real property in the city to dump or permit the dumping of garbage, refuse or ashes on his or her
property.
(Ord. passed 3-4-1969)
 8-6 CONTAINERS.
(A) All garbage, refuse and ashes awaiting disposal shall be placed in metal or plastic containers
equipped with a tight cover. Any container that is not a commercial dumpster used by a sanitation
company shall be equipped with handles so that it may be carried by one person and shall have a
capacity of not less than ten gallons or more than 30 gallons. While storing garbage, refuse or ashes,
the container shall be kept completely closed at all times.
(B) No person shall permit his or her containers to set upon any public right-of-way unless placed
there for pickup and then only on the day of pickup and prior to the pickup. All containers shall be
placed near a public road, street or at a place convenient to be picked up for disposal purposes.
(Ord. passed 3-16-1967; Ord. passed 3-4-1969)
Cross-reference:
Nuisances, see Chapter 13
Editors note:
See the editors note under the chapter analysis.
Statutory reference:
Solid Waste Management, see KRS Ch. 109
8 Radcliff - Garbage and Trash
 8-7 PROHIBITED STORAGE.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having custody of any junked motor vehicle or
motor vehicle accessories to store or permit any such vehicle or accessories to remain on any private
property within the city for a period of more than 30 days after the receipt of a notice requiring the
removal, and it shall be further unlawful for any person owning any private property in the city to store
or permit to remain any vehicle or accessories on his or her property for more than a like period. The
storage is declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated or removed and penalties imposed as
provided in this chapter.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person, after notification to remove any junked motor vehicle or
motor vehicle accessories from any private property has been given, to move the same to any other
private property upon which storage is not permitted or onto any public highway or other public
property for purposes of storage.
(C) This section shall not apply to any motor vehicle or motor vehicle accessories stored
underneath a covering including, but not limited to, tarpaulins and/or car coverings in which the motor
vehicle or motor vehicle accessories cannot be seen by the public.
 8-8 PERMITTED STORAGE.
This section shall not apply to any motor vehicle or motor vehicle accessories stored within an
enclosed building or on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner
when necessary to the operation of the business enterprise, in a storage place or depository maintained
in a lawful place and manner, or seasonal use vehicles such a snowmobiles, motorcycles, motor
scooters and non-motorized campers. The business enterprises shall include auto junk yards, auto repair
and auto body shops but shall not include automobile service stations or tire, battery and accessory
sales stores.
 8-9 INVESTIGATION OF PREMISES.
The Code Enforcement Officer on routine inspection or upon receipt of a complaint may
investigate a suspected junked motor vehicle or motor vehicle accessories and record the make, model,
style and identification numbers and its situation.
 8-10 NOTICE OF REMOVAL.
(A) Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer finds or is notified that any junked motor vehicle or
motor vehicle accessories have been stored or permitted to remain on any private property within the
city, the Code Enforcement Officer shall send, by certified mail, a notice to the owner of record of the
Garbage and Trash 9
motor vehicle or accessories, if the owner can be ascertained by the exercise of reasonable diligence,
and also the owner of the private property as shown on the tax assessment records of the city, on which
the same is located, to remove the junked motor vehicle or motor vehicle accessories within 30 days.
(B) The notice shall also contain the following additional information:
(1) Nature of complaint;
(2) Description and location of the motor vehicle and/or motor vehicle accessories;
(3) Statement that the motor vehicle or motor vehicle accessories will be removed from the
premises no later than 30 days from date of notification;
(4) Statement that removal from the location specified in the notification upon which the
storage is not permitted is prohibited and shall subject the person to additional penalties;
(5) Statement that if removal is made within the time limits specified, notification shall be
given in writing to the Code Enforcement Officer; and
(6) Statement of the penalties provided for non-compliance with the notice.
 8-11 COMMERCIAL HANDBILLS OR HANDBILLS AND SIGNS ON PUBLIC PLACES.
(A) Commercial handbills or handbills, signs; public places and objects.
(1) No person shall paint, mark or write on, or post or other wise affix any handbill or sign to
or upon any sidewalk, crosswalk, curb, curbstone, street lamppost, hydrant, tree, shrub, tree stake or
guard, electric light or power or telephone pole or wire appurtenances, or upon any fixture of the fire
alarm or police system or upon any lighting system, public bridge, drinking fountain or other
lifesaving equipment, street sign or traffic sign.
(2) Nothing in this section contained shall apply to the installation of terrazzo sidewalks or
sidewalks of similar construction, sidewalks permanently colored by an admixture in the material of
which the same are constructed, and for which the building inspector has granted a written permit.
(3) Any commercial handbill, handbill or sign found posted, or otherwise affixed upon any
public property contrary to the provisions of the section, may be removed by the Code Enforcement
Officer. The person responsible for any such illegal posting shall be liable for the cost incurred in its
removal.
(4) Nothing in this section shall apply to the installation of a metal plaque or plate, or
individual letters or figures, in a sidewalk commemorating a historical, cultural or artistic event,
location or personality for which the Building Inspector has granted a written permit.
10 Radcliff - Garbage and Trash
(B) Throwing or distributing commercial handbills or handbills in public places. No person shall
throw, scatter or cast any kind of commercial handbill or handbill in or upon any public place within
the city; and no person shall hand out or distribute or sell any commercial handbill in any public place;
provided, however, it shall not be unlawful for any person to hand out or distribute handbills or any
other thing which is otherwise permitted and authorized by law in any public place to any person
willing to accept the commercial handbill or handbill or other thing, without payment therefore.
(C) Placing commercial handbills or handbills in or upon vehicles, except with the consent of the
owner of the property. No person shall deposit, fasten, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or upon
any vehicle. The provisions of the section shall not be deemed to prohibit the handing of any
noncommercial handbill to the owner or other occupant of any vehicle who is willing to accept it
without payment therefore.
(D) Premises posted against commercial handbill or handbill distribution. No person shall place
any handbill upon any premises if required by anyone thereon not to do so or if there is placed on the
premises in a conspicuous position near any entrance thereof a sign bearing notice indicating in any
manner that the occupants of the premises do not desire to have any such handbills left upon the
premises.
(E) Manner of commercial handbill or handbill distribution on inhabited private premises. No
person shall place any commercial handbill or handbill in or upon any private premises which are
inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such commercial handbill or handbill directly to any
other person then present in or upon the private premises. However, in case of inhabited private
premises which are not posted against commercial handbill or handbill distribution as provided in this
article, any person, unless requested by someone upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit
any commercial handbill or handbill in or upon the inhabited private premises, if the handbill is placed
or deposited so as to prevent it from being carried by the elements about the premises or elsewhere,
except that mailboxes may not be so used when prohibited by federal postal laws or regulations.
(F) Clean-up. Any person distributing commercial handbills or handbills shall maintain the area
which they are utilizing free of any litter caused by or related to the commercial handbill or handbill
distribution.
 8-12 MANDATORY GARBAGE PICKUP.
All persons, partnerships, corporations or any legal entity who accumulate garbage or litter within
the city shall be required to have the garbage or litter disposed of by a commercial sanitation company
which regularly picks up garbage or litter within the city. The garbage or litter shall be picked up at
least once per week. Mandatory garbage or litter pickup is required in order to provide for the health
and welfare of the citizens of the city and to ensure the best disposal of garbage or litter.
Garbage and Trash 11
 8-13 CONVEY OF LOOSE MATERIALS ON PUBLIC WAYS.
(A) Vehicles dropping contents on street. It shall be unlawful for any person to transport in any
vehicle or by any other means or manner any loose material or articles likely to sift, fall, spill or be
blown about on any public street, alley, easement or median, or any other public way in the city;
provided that this section shall not be construed to apply to the provisions of this chapter preparatory to
having such material collected and disposed of, in the manner provided herein.
(B) Regulations for use of garbage or litter disposal vehicles.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to overload such vehicles. Each operator of such a
vehicle shall cover the contents or shall convey the contents in tightly secured and covered boxes or
other containers. The bed and sides of any vehicle used for the transport of garbage or littler shall be of
metal construction or shall be lined with metal.
(2) In case any of the contents of the vehicles shall become blown or scattered upon any
public street, alley, easement, median or other public way or place in the city, the person in charge
thereof shall immediately gather up or cause to be gathered up any such blown or scattered material.
(3) No persons shall drive or move any loaded or partly loaded truck or other vehicle within
the city unless the vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any part of its load, contents or litter
from being blown or deposited upon any public place or private premises. Nor shall any person drive or
move any vehicle or truck within the city, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any
public place or private premises, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any kind.
 8-14 MAINTENANCE OF PROPERTY.
(A) Litter collection and storage areas; clean conditions. Every owner or occupant or lessee of a
house or building used for residence, business or commercial purpose shall maintain litter collection
and storage areas in a clean condition and insure that all litter is properly containerized. Failure to so
maintain clean litter collection and storage areas shall constitute a violation of this section.
(B) Duty to collect litter before it is carried from the premises. All litter that is subject to
movement by the elements shall be secured by the owner of the premises where it is found before the
same is allowed to be removed by the elements to adjoining premises. Cleaning up the litter in a
reasonable time is a defense to a violation.
(C) Neglected premises visible to the public. It shall be the duty of any person owning or
controlling a house or other building or premises, including vacant lots visible from any public place or
private premises, to maintain the premises in a reasonably clean and orderly manner and to a standard
12 Radcliff - Garbage and Trash
conforming to other orderly premises in that vicinity. It shall be a violation of this section to abandon,
neglect or disregard the condition or appearance of any premises so as to permit it to accumulate litter
thereon. Neglected premises shall not include fields or farm land that are not adjacent to residences and
are natural to the field or area.
(D) Areas around business premises; clean conditions. The owner or person in control of any
public place, including but not limited to restaurants, shopping centers, fast-food outlets, stores, hotels,
motels, industrial establishments, office buildings, apartment buildings, housing projects, gas stations,
hospitals and clinics shall keep the premises clean of litter and shall take measures to prevent litter
from being carried by the elements to adjoining premises. It shall be a violation of this section to
abandon, neglect or disregard the condition or appearance of the premises so as to permit it to
accumulate litter thereon.
(E) Construction sites; clean conditions. The property owners and the prime contractors in charge
of any construction site shall maintain the construction site in such manner that litter will be prevented
from being carried by the elements to adjoining premises.
(F) Maintaining sidewalks, easements and alleys. Persons owning, occupying or in control of any
premises shall keep the sidewalks, easements and alleys adjacent thereto free of litter.
(G) Neglected containers; contractor.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person who has contracted to collect and remove litter, or
garbage described above to allow that litter, or garbage to remain uncollected beyond the date provided
by the contract for its collection and removal, or in any case to allow that container to remain
unemptied for longer than fourteen days or in any case until after that litter, or garbage creates any
condition which is offensive to persons upon any private premises or public place.
(2) A violation of this section may be abated in accordance with the provisions of  8-21 of
this article; provided, however, that, in lieu of the lien therein provided the container in question may
be impounded and a lien be executed against any property held in connection with the business of
collecting litter or garbage by the person who has agreed by contract to collect and remove that litter or
garbage in question.
 8-15 ILLEGAL DEPOSITS OF GARBAGE. (RESERVED)
 8-16 ILLEGAL DEPOSITS OF LITTER AND THE LIKE.
It shall be unlawful to cause or permit any ashes or litter to accumulate except in a covered
container.
 8-17 DISPOSAL. (RESERVED)
Garbage and Trash 13
 8-18 DUMPING.
(A) It shall be unlawful to dispose of garbage or litter by dumping same on any premises in the
city, with or without the consent of the owner of the premises.
(B) It shall be unlawful for the owner of any real property in the city to dump or permit the
dumping of garbage or litter on his or her property.
 8-19 LITTER RECEPTACLES.
(A) Containers generally.
(1) All garbage or litter awaiting disposal shall be placed in metal or plastic containers
equipped with a tight cover.
(2) Any container that is not a commercial dumpster used by a sanitation company shall be
equipped with handles so that it may be carried by one man and shall have capacity of not less than ten
gallons, nor more than 36 gallons.
(3) While storing garbage or litter, the container shall be kept completely closed at all time.
(B) Pick-up. No persons shall permit their containers to set upon any public right-of-way unless
placed there for pick-up and then only on the day of pick-up and prior to the pick-up. All containers
shall be placed near a public road, street or at a place convenient to be picked up for disposal purposes.
(C) Public places. Every owner, occupant, tenant or lessee using or occupying any public place
shall provide adequate litter receptacles of sizes, numbers and types as required to contain all litter
generated by those persons frequenting that public place and as specified by the Code Enforcement
Officer.
(D) Private premises. The owner or person in control of private premises shall maintain litter
receptacles for collection of litter as necessary.
(E) Specifications. Litter receptacles shall comply in size, material and all other characteristics
with the specification of regulations made pursuant to this article.
(F) Periodical emptying of receptacles. All litter shall be removed periodically from litter
receptacles as necessary to maintain their usefulness and in accordance with regulations made pursuant
to this article.
(G) Litter receptacles obstructing traffic. Litter receptacles shall not be placed in any location
where they may obstruct vehicular traffic or unreasonably obstruct pedestrian traffic.
14 Radcliff - Garbage and Trash
(H) Containers exempt from the provisions of this section. No section of this article and no
regulations made pursuant to this article in furtherance of the purposes and provisions of this article
shall be construed to regulate the containers used in the collection of litter, or garbage which containers
are regulated by city ordinances.
 8-20 ENFORCEMENT.
Regulations promulgated in this article shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer.
 8-21 ABATEMENT BY THE CITY.
The Code Enforcement Officer, where premises are in violation of any section of this article, is
hereby empowered to enter upon the premises and may thereupon correct the unclean conditions and
place a lien on the land in the same amount and in accordance with the procedure provided for
abatement of unwholesome environmental conditions, but the person shall also be liable in an action to
recover the hereinafter named penalty.
 8-22 RECOVERY BY CITY OF EXPENSES OF LITTER REMOVAL.
The city is damaged by the depositing of litter within the city and the cost of litter removal has
become a significant expense of the city. It is intended that persons responsible for the expenses shall
bear the costs of same. In order to recover the cost of litter removal, the city may bring a civil action
against any person believed to be responsible for depositing litter. The city may, in order to avoid the
necessity of the institution of the action, make an offer of settlement to any person believed to be
responsible for depositing litter. If the settlement offer is accepted, no action will be instituted by the
city.
ARTICLE II. PRINCIPLES FOR ESTABLISHING FRANCHISE
 8-51 ESTABLISHED.
The city does hereby establish an exclusive franchise for the collection of garbage, trash, refuse
and waste within the territorial limits of the city for residential and commercial residents as they now
exist and as they may exist in the future.
(Ord. passed 4-5-1979; Ord. passed 9-8-2003)
Garbage and Trash 15
 8-52 CONSIDERATION PAID BY BIDDER.
The city shall be paid a consideration by the successful bidder for a franchise, which shall be
expressed as a percentage of the gross revenue received by the successful bidder with a guaranteed
minimum of 3%. The successful bidder(s) shall pay the percentage of gross revenue known as
franchise fees at least on a quarterly basis. The franchise fee shall be due no later then fifteen days from
the last day of the quarterly period based on a calendar year basis. ( January 15, April 15, July 15 and
October 15)
(Ord. passed 4-5-1979; Ord. passed 9-8-2003; Ord. 08-11-1051, passed 11-12-2008)
 8-53 VARIOUS BID REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Collection. The successful bidder shall collect and dispose of all residential and commercial
garbage, trash, refuse and waste, with the exception of no industrial waste and roll-off dumpsters leased
by customers for disposal of construction debris on a temporary, limited or one-time basis, and shall
collect the approved fees therefor, subject to the approval of the City Council. The successful bidder
shall not, at any time, raise the garbage collection rates without the approval of the City Council. No
add on charges may be assessed without the expressed consent of the City Council.
(B) Company information. Each bidder shall give his or her full name, firm or company and his,
her or its address.
(C) Service of customers. Each bidder must serve any customer located within the city and be
prepared to service the entire area of the city.
(D) Charges. Each bidder must state the charge to each customer receiving services and the
charges shall not be discriminatory nor unreasonable however, bidder(s) may differentiate among
customer charges between commercial customers and residential customers and other relevant factors
such as the size of commercial containers and number of pick ups provided but any and all charges
must always be approved by the City Council as here and after set out. The charges for each type of
collection and disposal service shall be the same for each type of user receiving the service, but in no
event shall the collection charges be charged more than three months in advance. The responsibility for
the collection of the charges shall be with the franchise holder who assumes the sole responsibility
therefore without right of indemnification from the city who is free of obligation for these charges.
(E) Description of vehicles. Each bidder must state the number of vehicles, type of vehicle and
age of vehicle to be used in servicing its customers.
(F) Proposed rates.
(1) Each bidder must state the proposed rates to be charged for:
(a) Collection and transportation services rendered;
16 Radcliff - Garbage and Trash
(b) Disposal services rendered; and
(c) Total services rendered per customer.
(2) These amounts may be on a per pick-up basis or per time span basis (example: per day,
per week, per month and the like) or per volume or per weight basis or container size as it relates to
commercial customers.
(Ord. passed 4-5-1979; Ord. passed 2-18-1998; Ord. passed 9-8-2003; Ord 08-11-1051, passed 11-12-
2008)
 8-54 NUMBER OF WEEKLY COLLECTIONS.
The successful bidder shall be responsible for the pickup of residential garbage, trash, refuse and
waste at the street or lot fronting each residence. The collection for residential customers must be at
least one time per calendar week. The number of collections for commercial customers shall be agreed
upon between the commercial customer and the successful bidder, but shall not be less than one pickup
per week and the successful bidder shall be capable of pickups as often as daily.
(Ord. passed 4-5-1979; Ord. passed 2-18-1998; Ord. passed 9-8-2003; Ord 08-11-1051, passed 11-12-
2008)
 8-55 HOURS OF COLLECTION; LITTERING.
The successful bidder shall make collections between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. and
such collection shall be done as quietly as possible. The successful bidder shall not litter any premises,
whether public or private.
(Ord. passed 4-5-1979; Ord 08-11-1051, passed 11-12-2008)
Editors note:
Inclusion of 1, 3-18, 20, 21 of an ordinance adopted Apr. 5, 1979, as Ch. 8, art. 11, 8-19-8-37,
was at the discretion of the editor, the ordinance being nonamendatory of the Code. To
accomplish
this inclusion, the editor has designated the existing provisions of Ch. 8, 1-8-8, as Article I. In
General. In connection with the establishment of franchises, the users attention is drawn to 22 of
the ordinance, which reads as follows: In the event Hardin County adopts an ordinance
pertaining
to the same subject matter as this ordinance, then and in that event any standard of Hardin
Countys Ordinance which is more stringent than the corresponding standard in this ordinance
shall become the standard for purposes of this ordinance.
 8-56 BIDDER TO FURNISH PERSONNEL AND EQUIPMENT.
The successful bidder shall furnish all labor, tools and equipment necessary for the operation of the
collection system and be responsible for all maintenance of the equipment. The successful bidder shall
provide an adequate number of collection vehicles; and each of the vehicles must be inspected annually
Garbage and Trash 17
by a representative of the city and must be kept in good repair, appearance and in a sanitary condition
at all times. Each vehicle shall have clearly visible on each side the name and phone number of the
successful bidder, but shall not make reference to the city.
(Ord. passed 4-5-1979)
 8-57 MATERIALS SUBJECT TO REFUSAL.
(A) The successful bidder may refuse to accept for regular collection the following, except that the
successful bidder shall be required to collect material not in convenient garbage cans and bundles such
as household fixtures, appliances and furniture at specified times designated as cleanup periods by the
City Council. In addition, the successful bidder will be required to furnish, at a location to be
determined by the city, one 40-yard roll off box without charge to the city for use by the general public
during April clean up.
(1) Radioactive materials;
(2) Poisons liable to contaminate the disposal area;
(3) Liquid wastes;
(4) Construction projects;
(5) Materials not in convenient garbage cans and bundles; and
(6) Household fixtures, appliances, furniture, rock and stone.
(B) The bidder shall operate in compliance with all the applicable laws, ordinances and
regulations of the state and the city.
(Ord. passed 4-5-1979; Ord. 08-11-1051, passed 11-12-2008)
 8-58 BIDDER TO MAINTAIN OFFICE IN CITY.
The successful bidder shall establish, publish on the customers statements and maintain a local
and/or toll free telephone number providing direct access to an office in Radcliff or the office closest to
Radcliff through which he or she may be contacted for service and at which service may be applied for,
service fees paid and complaints made. The successful bidders office shall be equipped with sufficient
telephones and shall be open with a responsible person in sufficient charge to reasonably conduct the
business of the successful bidder Monday through Friday of each week. Billing may be made for a
period of no greater than three calendar months per billing cycle in advance. The successful bidder
shall provide notices to residential customers notifying them of large item pickup dates and/or cleanup
dates.
(Ord. passed 4-5-1979; Ord. passed 2-18-1998; Ord. passed 9-8-2003; Ord 08-11-1051, passed 11-12-
2008)
18 Radcliff - Garbage and Trash
 8-59 PERFORMANCE BOND.
The successful bidder shall furnish a performance bond for the faithful performance of the
agreement, executed by a duly licensed surety company in the penal sum of $100,000, which shall be
continued as long as the agreement is in effect.
(Ord. passed 4-5-1979)
 8-60 INSURANCE REQUIRED.
The successful bidder hereby binds himself or herself to indemnify and hold harmless the city
from all claims, demands and/or actions, legal and/or equitable, arising from the bidders operation
hereinabove described. The bidder further agrees to obtain and keep continuously in effect public
liability and property damage insurance in an amount of not less than $1,000,000 for any one person
and $3,000,000 for any accident, and not less than $100,000 property damage insurance, which policy
or policies shall be for the protection of the bidder or the city as its interests may appear. Proof of the
insurance shall be furnished by the bidder to the city by certificates of insurance, with a minimum
cancellation time of ten days, the time to commence after delivery of the notice to the city at the
address hereinafter set forth: City of Radcliff, 411 W. Lincoln Trail Blvd., Radcliff, KY 40160.
(Ord. passed 4-5-1979; Ord. passed 2-18-1998)
 8-61 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE WORKERS COMPENSATION PROVISIONS.
The successful bidder, if and when he or she comes within the provisions of the Workers
Compensation Act of the state, shall carry in a company authorized to transact business in the state, a
policy of insurance fulfilling all requirements of the Workers Compensation Act of the state,
including, all legal requirements for occupation disease.
(Ord. passed 4-5-1979)
Statutory reference:
Workers compensation, see KRS Ch. 342
 8-62 FAILURE OF BIDDER TO PERFORM.
(A) In the event the successful bidder shall fail to collect materials therein provided to be collected
for a period in excess of ten days and provided the failure is not due to war, insurrection, riot, act of
God or any other cause or causes beyond the bidders control the city may, at its option, after written
notice to the bidder as provided therein, take over and operate any or all the bidders equipment used in
the performance of the agreement, and provide for the operation until the matter is resolved and the
bidder is again able to carry out its operations under the agreement. Any and all operating expense
incurred by the city in so doing may be deducted by it from any compensation which might be due to
the bidder therein from any source whatever.
Garbage and Trash 19
(B) If the bidder is unable for any cause to resume performance at the end of 30 days, all liability
of the city under the agreement to the bidder shall cease, and the city shall be free to negotiate with
other bidders for the operation. The operation with another bidder shall not release the bidder therein of
its liability to the city for the breach of the agreement. In the event that the agreement is negotiated
with another bidder, third-party liability of the bidder therein shall terminate insofar as same arises
from tortious conduct in operation and control.
(C) The city may, at its discretion, at any time during the term of this franchise, review the
operation of any solid waste collection and disposal services and may, at its discretion, with just cause,
terminate any franchise herein granted, upon 30-days notice. Additionally, the contracts may be
terminated upon five-days notice for serious violations which the city, in its sole discretion, deems
justifiable.
(Ord. passed 4-5-1979; Ord. passed 2-18-1998)
 8-63 ASSIGNMENT SUBJECT TO CONSENT OF CITY.
No assignment of the agreement or any right occurring under the agreement shall be made in
whole or in part by the successful bidder without the express written consent of the city, nor shall any
subcontract be let under the agreement without the express written consent of the city; and, in the event
of any assignment, the assignee shall assume the liability of the bidder, but the bidder shall not be
relieved of any liabilities due to any assignment or subcontract.
(Ord. passed 4-5-1979)
 8-64 RECORDS TO BE KEPT BY BIDDER.
The successful bidder shall keep daily records of garbage and trash collected and the city shall
have the right to inspect the same for the purpose of analysis of the financial conditions of the
operation. The bidder shall submit a proposed record and accounting system for approval. All
information so obtained shall be confidential and shall not be released by the city unless expressly
authorized in writing by the bidder.
(Ord. passed 4-5-1979)
 8-65 TERMINATION OF AGREEMENT.
The agreement shall terminate in the case of bankruptcy, voluntary or involuntary, or insolvency of
the bidder. The time of termination in the event of bankruptcy shall be the day and time of filing of the
petition in bankruptcy.
(Ord. passed 4-5-1979)
20 Radcliff - Garbage and Trash
 8-66 MODIFICATION.
The agreement shall constitute the entire agreement and understanding between the parties; and it
shall not be considered modified, altered, changed or amended in any respect unless in writing and
signed by the parties.
(Ord. passed 4-5-1979)
 8-67 RIGHT OF ENFORCEMENT BY CITY.
The failure of the city at any time to require performance by the bidder or any provisions of the
agreement shall, in no way, affect the right of the city thereafter to enforce same. Nor shall waiver by
the city of any breach of any provisions be taken or held to be a waiver of any succeeding breach of
provision or as a waiver of any provision itself.
(Ord. passed 4-5-1979)
 8-68 DISPOSAL OF WASTE MATERIALS.
All waste materials collected by the bidder shall be disposed of in the Hardin County Recycling
and Disposal Facility located at Pearl Hollow. The successful bidder shall be required to pay any
charges for disposal as any other landfill customer. In the event this designation of the franchise is for
any reason found illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, the city shall have the right to exercise its option
to terminate this franchise.
(Ord. passed 4-5-1979; Ord. passed 2-18-1998)
 8-69 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
COMMERCIAL CUSTOMERS and GARBAGE. All types of solid waste generated by stores,
offices, restaurants, warehouses and other service and non-manufacturing activities, excluding
residential and industrial solid waste.
INDUSTRIAL SOLID WASTE. Solid waste generated by manufacturing or industrial processes
that is not a hazardous waste or a special waste as designated by KRS 224.50-760, including, but not
limited to, waste resulting from processes for manufacturing or producing the following: electric
power generation; fertilizer or agricultural chemicals; food and related products or by-products;
inorganic chemicals; iron and steel manufacturing; leather and leather products; nonferrous metals
manufacturing or foundries; organic chemicals; plastics and resins manufacturing; pulp and paper
industry; rubber and
Garbage and Trash 21
miscellaneous plastic products, except tire-derived fuel; stone, glass, clay, and concrete products;
textile manufacturing; transportation equipment; and water treatment. Industrial waste and industrial
customers are not included in this franchise and those customers may negotiate with any waste disposal
company that is capable of removing and disposing of their industrial solid waste and garbage
RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMERS. Customers with solid waste, including garbage and trash
generated by single and multiple family residence, hotels, motels, bunk houses, ranger stations, crew
quarters and recreational areas such as picnic areas, parks and camp grounds. For the purpose of this
franchise, a RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMER is hereby defined to be those places used by persons as
their place of residence, including private residences, apartment buildings and mobile homes, including
mobile homes located within a mobile home park and commercial customers are customers who are not
residential customers.
SUCCESSFUL BIDDER. He or she shall negotiate with owners of apartment buildings and
mobile home parks as if they were commercial customers if the customers use the ordinary containers
of a commercial customer such as storage dumpster; the negotiation shall be on the same rates as were
bid and approved for commercial customers in this franchise.
(Ord. passed 9-8-2003; Ord. 08-11-1051, passed 11-12-2008)
 8-70 AUTHORITY TO ADVERTISE FOR BIDS.
The Mayor or his or her designee is hereby authorized to advertise for bids as herein before set out.
 8-71 RESIDENTIAL/COMMERCIAL BID ACCEPTANCE.
The city expressly reserves the right to distinguish between residential garbage/solid waste,
commercial garbage/solid waste and/or industrial solid waste and award a franchise limited in whole or
in part to residential garbage/solid waste and commercial garbage/solid waste or may accept separate
bids for each and/or reserve the right to accept a bid for a joint collection of each.
 8-72 TERM OF THE FRANCHISE.
This franchise shall be for a period not to exceed five years, to commence on a date agreed to by
the city and the bidder(s) and the city reserves the right to grant the franchise for such terms or optional
period as fixed by the city.
22 Radcliff - Garbage and Trash
 8-73 PENALTY.
Any person who shall violate this article shall be fined not less than $20, nor more than $500,
and/or 12-months imprisonment for each offense; a separate offense shall be committed for each day
the violation occurs. Any person violating this article may also be found guilty of a civil offense. The
civil fine shall be not less than $20, nor more than $250. The civil fine shall be paid directly to the city.
If the fine is not paid within 30 days from the date of notification, then the city may recover the fine in
a civil action in a court of proper jurisdiction. The city may also obtain injunctions or abatement orders
to ensure compliance with this article or pursue administrative remedies when appropriate, including
injunctions and abatement proceedings.
(Ord. passed 3-16-1993; Ord. passed 10-11-1994)
CHAPTER 9: HEALTH CLUBS, MASSAGE SALONS AND THE LIKE
1
2 Radcliff - Health Clubs, Massage Salons and the Like
CHAPTER 9: HEALTH CLUBS, MASSAGE SALONS AND THE LIKE
Section
9-1. Definitions
9-2. Permit required
9-3. Permit application
9-4. General equipment standards
9-5. Building structure and layout
9-6. Sanitation and hygiene
9-7. Sleeping and sleeping quarters
9-8. Contact with opposite sex
9-9. Tolerating violations of law
9-10. Inspections
9-11. Penalty
 9-1 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
HEALTH CLUB. Any establishment which offers service in the form of massage, baths, exercises
or similar services, in combination to club members, or to the public for a charge; including massage
and bath parlors and the like. The term HEALTH CLUB does not include:
(1) Hospitals, nursing homes, medical clinics or the offices or quarters of a physician, a
surgeon or an osteopath;
(2) Exercise clubs exclusively for members or clientele of one sex alone where the services,
without massage in any form, are performed by persons of the same sex as the members or clientele; or
(3) Barber shops and beauty parlors.
MASSEUR or MASSEUSE. A person who practices any one or more of the arts of body massage,
either by hand or mechanical apparatus, oil rubs, corrective gymnastics, mechano-therapy, including
color therapy, dietetics, hot packs, cabinet, tub, shower, sitz, vapor, steam or any other special type of
bath.
(Ord. passed 11-21-1972)
3
4 Radcliff - Health Clubs, Massage Salons and the Like
 9-2 PERMIT REQUIRED.
No person shall operate a health club without a permit issued by the City Clerk.
 9-3 PERMIT APPLICATION.
An applicant for a permit to operate a health club shall submit to the City Inspector plans and
specifications of the quarters proposed to be occupied. The plans shall show details of entrances,
partitions, windows, openings, ventilation, plumbing fixtures, water supply and waste and vent
connections.
(Ord. passed 11-21-1972)
Cross-reference:
Licenses and Taxation, see Chapter 10
Nuisances, see Chapter 13
Statutory reference:
Powers generally, see KRS 82.082
 9-4 GENERAL EQUIPMENT STANDARDS.
(A) All tables, tubs, shower stalls and floors (except reception and administrative areas) shall be
made of nonporous materials which may be readily disinfected.
(B) Closed containers shall be provided for wet towels and waste material.
(Ord. passed 11-21-1972)
 9-5 BUILDING STRUCTURE AND LAYOUT.
(A) No health club shall begin operations until the building occupied or to be occupied shall have
been approved by the City Inspector.
(B) Each health club shall be equipped with separate readily available toilet and lavatory facilities
for patrons and separate readily available toilet and lavatory facilities for personnel; each operating
area shall be equipped with a hand lavatory.
(C) Either the club quarters or the floor of the building on which the quarters are located shall be
equipped with a service sink for custodial services.
(Ord. passed 11-21-1972)
Health Clubs, Massage Salons and the Like 5
 9-6 SANITATION AND HYGIENE.
(A) All equipment, shower stalls, toilets and lavatories of a health club shall be regularly treated
with disinfectants and shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition at all times.
(B) No health club shall knowingly serve any patron infected with any fungus or other skin
infections; nor shall service be performed on any patron exhibiting skin inflammation or eruptions;
provided, however, that, a duly-licensed physician may certify that a person may be safely served,
prescribing the condition thereof.
(C) All personnel shall wash their hands in hot running water using a proper soap or disinfectant,
before giving any service or treatment to each separate patron.
(D) All towels and tissues, all sheets or other coverings shall be used singularly for each patron
and discarded for laundry or disposal immediately after use.
(E) Nondisposable tools of the trade shall be disinfected after use upon one patron.
(Ord. passed 11-21-1972)
 9-7 SLEEPING AND SLEEPING QUARTERS.
No part of any quarters of any health club shall be used for, or connected with, any bedroom or
sleeping quarters; no person shall sleep in the health club except for limited periods incidental to and
directly related to a massage or bath. This section shall not preclude the location of a health club in
separate quarters of a building housing, a hotel or other separate businesses or clubs.
(Ord. passed 11-21-1972)
 9-8 CONTACT WITH OPPOSITE SEX.
It shall be unlawful for any owner or manager to operate a health club where any physical contact
with the recipient of the services is provided by a person of the opposite sex. Any person violating the
provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in  1-8 of this code. In
addition to the penalty, it shall be the duty of the City Clerk to revoke the permit of the owner or
manager of the establishment, wherein the provisions of this section have been violated.
(Ord. passed 11-21-1972)
6 Radcliff - Health Clubs, Massage Salons and the Like
 9-9 TOLERATING VIOLATIONS OF LAW.
No owner or manager of a health club shall tolerate in his or her establishment any activity or
behavior prohibited by state law, including, but not limited to, those statutes prohibiting prostitution,
sodomy, adultery, fornication and any lewd and lascivious cohabitation or obscenity.
(Ord. passed 11-21-1972)
 9-10 INSPECTIONS.
All city officers and employees shall be given access to any part of the quarters of a health club for
purposes of inspection at all reasonable times.
(Ord. passed 11-21-1972)
 9-11 PENALTY.
Any person who shall violate this chapter shall be fined not less than $20, nor more than $500,
and/or 12-months imprisonment for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed
on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. Any person violating this chapter may
also be found guilty of a civil offense. The civil fine shall be not less than $20, nor more than $250.
The civil fine shall be paid directly to the city. If the fine is not paid within 30 days from the date of
notification, then the city may recover the fine in civil action in a court of proper jurisdiction. The city
may also obtain injunctions or abatement orders to ensure compliance with this chapter or pursue
administrative remedies when appropriate, including injunctions and abatement proceedings.
(Ord. passed 8-9-1993)
CHAPTER 10: LICENSES AND TAXATION
1
2 Radcliff - Licenses and Taxation
CHAPTER 10: LICENSES AND TAXATION
Section
Article I. Ad Valorem Taxes
10-1. Property assessment moratorium for commercial and residential facilities on ad valorem taxes
10-2. Revitalization credit
Article II. Insurance Tax
10-16. Tax imposed
10-17. Amount of tax
10-18. When due; late payment penalty
10-19. Records
Article III. Business Privilege License; Gross Receipts Tax
10-34. Definitions
10-35. Business privilege license/gross receipts tax application required
10-35.1. Applications
10-36. Business privilege license/gross receipts tax payment required
10-37. Payments, returns and apportionment
10-37.1. Compliance with law required
10-38. Entire gross receipts to be reported; list of contested receipts
10-39. Reports in cases of mergers, acquisitions and the like
10-40. Returns required
10-41. Interest and penalties for late payments and extensions
10-42. Reserved
10-43. Refunds
10-44. Computation of tax when one business subject to several different fees
10-45. Federal audit provisions
10-46. Business closing during the calendar year
10-47. Administrative provisions
10-48. License certificates
10-49. Restriction on license issuance
10-50. License transfer
10-51. Use of license fee and gross receipts tax
3
4 Radcliff - Licenses and Taxation
10-52. Enforcement
10-53. Temporary suspension
10-54. Revocation
10-55. Appeals from license suspension or revocation
10-56. Computation of license fee; minimum
10-57. Transient merchants/peddlers/solicitors
10-58. Penalty
10-59. Yard sales
10-60. Severability
10-61. Unloading license (Reserved)
10-62. Off-site temporary motor vehicles sales
10-63. Effective date
Article IV. Franchise Agreements
10-65. Imposed
10-66. Payments
10-67. Exemption
10-68. Penalty
Article V. Occupational Privilege Fee
10-76. Definitions
10-77. Payment of occupation privilege fee, individuals
10-78. Special occupations
10-79. Exemptions
10-80. Payment of occupational privilege fee by employers; return
10-81. Filing of return; payment of fee or refund claim
10-82. Returns to be filed by employee
10-83. Duties of Director of Finance
10-84. Enforcement powers of Director of Finance
10-85. Confidentially of returns, information and the like
10-86. Use of occupational privilege fees
10-87. Unlawful imposition of occupational privilege fee
10-88. Unpaid occupational privilege fees; interest and penalties
10-89. Criminal penalty
10-90. Claim for refund of overpayment
Article VI. Transient Room Tax
10-95. Establishment of Commission; imposition
10-96. Monthly collection by Commission Treasurer; delinquency charges
10-97. Percentage rate imposed
10-98. Collection and payment by accommodations business establishments
2017 S-4
Licenses and Taxation 5
10-99. Taxation of room and/or space charges
10-100. Bonding of Commission Treasurer or officer handling funds; quarterly report
10-101. Depository determined by City Council
10-102. Commission to submit a request for funds for operation
10-103. Council to approve Commission=s issuing of revenue bonds and borrowing of money
beyond fiscal year; effective date
10-104. Council to appoint certified public accountant for audit; enforcement in absence of
voluntary compliance
10-105. Commission to audit businesses; to bring civil action
10-106. Commission to bring criminal action
10-107. Commission membership determined by law
Cross-reference:
Health Clubs, Massage Salons and the Like, see Chapter 9
Editor=s note:
An ordinance adopted 6-26-1986, not specifically amendatory of the code, has been codified
as superseding former Art. II, '' 10-16 through 10-19, relative to automobile insurance tax,
as derived from an ordinance adopted 10-24-1984.
Statutory reference:
Licensing power of city, see KRS Ch. 91A
Revenue and taxation, see KRS 131.010 et seq.
ARTICLE I. AD VALOREM TAXES
' 10-1 PROPERTY ASSESSMENT MORATORIUM FOR COMMERCIAL AND RESIDENTIAL
FACILITIES ON AD VALOREM TAXES.
(A) Purpose. As an inducement for the remodeling, permanent improvement, refurbishing of
commercial facilities or residences which are ten years old or older and whose commercial facility or
residence is a structure the primary purpose of which is the operation of a commercial business or
residence.
(B) Scope. Only those businesses or residences that are located within the city shall be entitled to apply
for any property assessment moratorium established herein.
(C) Definitions. All definitions are the same as those in KRS 99.595.
APPLICATION.
(a) Before any qualified business or residence shall be entitled to a property assessment
moratorium as enumerated herein, it shall first make a sworn application in writing on forms to be
2017 S-4
6 Radcliff - Licenses and Taxation
provided to the Director of Finance. All applications shall be made on or before December 31 of the year in
which the property assessment moratorium is requested, due to the fact that the ad valorem assessment date
is January 1 of each year. Upon submission of an application, the Director of Finance shall promptly review
same and determine whether or not the applicant is deemed Aqualified@ and entitled to a property assessment
moratorium. Applicants shall promptly provide all support data and documents reasonably requested by the
Director of Finance in furtherance of this property assessment moratorium. An application for a building
permit shall be prima facie proof of the cost of the improvements.
(b) Upon determining that an applicant is a Aqualified business@ or a Aqualified residence@
entitling the applicant to the benefits of this property assessment moratorium, this qualification shall be
certified by the Director of Finance of the city, for a determination of the amount of property assessment
moratorium in accordance with this section.
ELIGIBILITY FOR PROPERTY ASSESSMENT MORATORIUM. Based on the cost of any
permanent improvement by a qualified business during the eligibility period of time. The eligibility period
of time runs from 1-1-2004 until 12-31-2009. Any improvement which has been either started or finished
during the eligibility period is eligible for the property assessment moratorium.
ENTITLEMENT. To be entitled to a property assessment moratorium, any permanent new
improvement must have been started or finished between 1-1-2004 and 12-31-2009.
PROPERTY ASSESSMENT MORATORIUM. There shall be an ad valorem tax property
assessment moratorium on all real property that is used as a commercial facility or residence and which is
ten years old or older that is rehabilitated, repaired or restored deferring the value of the improvements from
the added taxable assessment of qualifying units of real property for a period of years. This moratorium is
based on the authority of the city=s ability to establish an ad valorem moratorium in accordance with KRS
99.595 et seq. On the assessment date next following the expiration, cancellation or revocation of an
assessment, the property shall be assessed on the basis of its full fair cash value. Any assessment
moratorium certificate may be transferred or assigned by the holder of the certificate to a new owner or
lessee of the property. Any application for an assessment moratorium not acted upon by the applicant shall
become void two years from the date of the application and shall be purged from the files of the city. The
applicant shall have two years in which to complete the improvement unless granted an extension by the
city. In no case shall the application be extended beyond two additional years. The applicant shall notify the
city when the project is complete and the city shall then conduct an on-site inspection of the property for
purposes of verifying the improvements.
QUALIFIED BUSINESS. Any new or existing lessee, corporation, partnership, proprietorship,
cooperative or association within the scope of this property assessment moratorium.
(D) Benefit. It is intended that all benefits conferred by this property assessment moratorium shall
adhere to, and exist for the benefit of those qualified businesses directly responsible for the payment of the
permanent improvements.
Licenses and Taxation 7
(E) Effective date. This amendment to the property assessment moratorium shall take effect on
1-1-1994.
(Ord. passed 4-27-1993; Ord. passed 7-20-1993; Ord. passed 11-19-1997; Ord. passed 12-8-2003)
' 10-2 REVITALIZATION CREDIT.
(A) Purpose. The purpose of this program is to provide assistance to current and new commercial
property owners, small business owners and merchants in improving their property in a manner that is both
commercially sound and architecturally attractive.
(B) Scope. Only those businesses that have a place of business within the city shall be entitled to apply
for the revitalization credit established herein.
(C) Definitions.
APPLICATION.
(a) Before any qualified business shall be entitled to revitalization credit enumerated herein,
it shall obtain a credit form from the Business License Clerk to be submitted with the first business license
gross receipts return submitted following the completion of the property improvements.
(b) Upon submission of the credit form, the Director of Finance shall promptly review same
and determine whether or not the applicant is deemed Aqualified@ and entitled to a revitalization credit.
Applicants shall promptly provide all support data and documents reasonably requested by the Director of
Finance in furtherance of this revitalization credit. A complete description of the project and copies of paid
receipts equaling the amount of the credit claimed shall be prima facie proof of the cost of the
improvements.
(c) Upon determining that an applicant is a Aqualified business@ entitling the applicant to the
benefits of this revitalization credit, this qualification shall be certified by the Director of Finance of the
city.
ELIGIBILITY FOR PROPERTY REVITALIZATION CREDIT. Eligibility for a revitalization
credit is based on the submission of a revitalization credit form and itemized copies of the paid receipts for
the project and the approval of the City=s Financial Officer.
REVITALIZATION CREDIT. An amount equal to the approved revitalization credit shall be
deducted from gross receipts before computing business license due. If the revitalization credit exceeds the
amount of the gross receipts, the balance of the revitalization credit may be carried over to the next year. No
single credit shall be carried over for more than two years. The minimum fee shall be due and payable in all
cases regardless of credits.
8 Radcliff - Licenses and Taxation
(D) Entitlement. This entitlement will be retroactive to 1-1-2003. This entitlement will expire on
12-31-2009.
(Ord. passed 12-8-2003)
ARTICLE II. INSURANCE TAX
' 10-16 TAX IMPOSED.
There is hereby imposed on each insurance company a license fee for the privilege of engaging in the
business of insurance within the corporate limits of the city for the calendar year 1987, and thereafter on a
calendar-year basis.
(Ord. passed 6-26-1986)
' 10-17 AMOUNT OF TAX.
The license fee imposed upon each insurance company which issues any insurance policy, which is not
a life or health insurance policy, shall include the following, and shall be 11% of the premiums actually
collected within each calendar quarter by reason of the issuance of the policies on risks located within the
corporate limits of the city on those classes of business which the company is authorized to transact, less all
premiums returned to policyholders; however, any license fee or tax imposed upon premium receipts shall
not include premiums received for insuring the city against any or all liability insurance for city owned
property or premiums received employers against liability for personal injuries to their employees, or death
caused thereby, under the provisions of the Workers= Compensation Act:
(A) Casualty;
(B) Automobile;
(C) Inland marine; and
(D) Fire and allied perils.
(Ord. passed 6-26-1986; Ord. passed 9-2-1986; Ord. passed 3-24-2003, eff. 7-1-2004)
' 10-18 WHEN DUE; LATE PAYMENT PENALTY.
All license fees imposed by this article shall be due no later than 30 days after the end of each calendar
quarter. License fees which are not paid on or before the due date shall bear interest at the tax interest rate
as defined in KRS 131.010(6).
(Ord. passed 6-26-1986)
Licenses and Taxation 9
' 10-19 RECORDS.
Every insurance company subject to the license fees imposed by this article shall annually, by March
31, furnish the city with a written breakdown of all collections in the preceding calendar year for the
following categories of insurance:
(A) Casualty;
(B) Automobile;
(C) Inland marine; and
(D) Fire and allied perils.
(Ord. passed 6-26-1986)
ARTICLE III. BUSINESS PRIVILEGE LICENSE; GROSS RECEIPTS TAX
' 10-34 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning.
ASSEMBLY/MANUFACTURING. Material having no commercial value for its intended use before
processing and has appreciable commercial value for its intended use after processing by machinery.
However, MANUFACTURING shall not include processing or finishing operations which do not change
the general design or form of a product. The term MANUFACTURING shall not include foundries,
machine shops or tin shops, blacksmith or other sheet iron or metal work.
BUSINESS. The carrying on or exercise, for gain or economic benefit, either directly or indirectly, of
any business, trade, profession, occupation, vocation, calling or commercial activity whatsoever, and the
rendering of any type of service in any commerce whatsoever in the city, but such term does not include
employees of a business or person licensed under this article. The term BUSINESS shall not include the
usual activities of the boards of trade, chambers of commerce, trade associations or unions (or other
associations performing the services usually performed by trade associations or unions), community chest
funds or foundations; corporations organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable, scientific,
literary, educational or civic purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty to children or animals; or clubs or
fraternal organizations operated exclusively for social, literary, educational or fraternal purposes, where no
part of the earnings or income or receipts from such units, groups or associations inures to any private
shareholder or individual; provided, however, that if any such unit,
10 Radcliff - Licenses and Taxation
group, or association shall engage in activities other than the activities in which such units, groups or
associations usually engage, such other activities shall be included in the term BUSINESS; provided,
further, that, activities conducted for gain or profit by any educational institution, hospital or any other
institution mentioned in this section are included in the term BUSINESS.
BUSINESS ENTITY. Each separate corporation, limited liability company, business development
corporation, partnership, limited partnership, registered limited liability partnership, sole proprietorship,
association, joint stock company, receivership, trust, professional service organization or other legal entity
through which business is conducted.
CITY. The City of Radcliff, Kentucky.
CONCLUSION OF THE FEDERAL AUDIT. The date that the adjustments made by the Internal
Revenue Service to net income as reported on the business entity=s federal income tax return becomes final
and unappealable.
DISTRIBUTION. The distribution or delivery of unfinished products or materials having no
commercial value for its intended use before delivery to site located outside the city.
FINAL DETERMINATION OF THE FEDERAL AUDIT. The revenue agent=s report or other
documents reflecting the final and unappealable adjustments made by the Internal Revenue Service.
FISCAL YEAR. The same year used by a taxpayer in making his or her federal income tax return.
GROSS RECEIPTS.
(1) The gross receipts from any business, trade, occupation, profession, vocation, calling,
commerce, personal service or business activity of any kind, in the form of cash, credits, or other value
proceeding from or accruing from the sale of tangible property (real or personal) or the rendering of any
services, or both, including and without any deductions for interest, rentals, royalties, the cost of material
used, the cost of goods sold, labor costs, taxes or any other costs, or any other expenses whatsoever.
(2) There may be deducted from gross receipts, returns and allowances the amount of state or
federal excise taxes computed on a basis of the sale prices of commodities sold by a taxpayer, but the total
gross receipts including the taxes and the amount of the taxes taken as a deduction shall be shown on the
application and return required by this article.
(3) The term GROSS RECEIPTS when used in connection with, or in respect to, financial
transactions involving the sale of notes, stocks, bonds or other securities, or the loan, collection or advance
of money, or the discounting of notes, bills or other evidence of debt, or the assignment of, or
Licenses and Taxation 11
purchase of, municipal, county or state tax bills, shall be deemed to mean the gross interest, gross discount,
gross commission or other gross receipt earned by means of or resulting from the financial transactions, but
the term GROSS RECEIPTS shall not include amounts received as repayment of the principal of debts.
(4) The term GROSS RECEIPTS shall include the gross receipts from all sales made from a
place of business within the city, both to persons within the city and to persons outside the city, including
sales made by contracts entered into in the city or sales where deliveries of commodities are made within
the city.
(5) In the case of a taxpayer owning or operating a business in the city for the sale of goods, wares
or merchandise, who also operates a branch factory or store which is located outside the city, then the term
GROSS RECEIPTS shall not include the sale or proceeds of sales of goods, wares or merchandise not
manufactured in the city, unless the goods, wares or merchandise are located in the city at the time of sale
or delivery of the goods, wares or merchandise.
(6) In all transactions covered by the provisions of this article, the taxable gross receipts of all
principals shall include not only the amounts actually received by them but shall include all commissions
paid by them to brokers, commission merchants, attorneys or agents in such transactions, as the case may
be, and all other expense and discounts incident thereto.
INTERNAL REVENUE CODE. The Internal Revenue Code in effect on 12-31-2003 exclusive of any
amendments made subsequent to that date, other than amendments that extend provisions in effect on
12-31-2003, that would otherwise terminate.
PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation (domestic and
foreign), trust, estate, assignee, receiver or any other combination acting as a unit.
RECEIPTS FROM SALES IN TRADE OR BUSINESS. Receipts from sales in trade or business, in
addition to meaning a sale of property for money, includes also any transaction, exchange, or barter or
disposal or otherwise, for a consideration. The amount to be reported as receipts from sales in trade or
business is as follows.
(1) If the sale was made for a consideration wholly in cash, the total cash received constitutes the
receipts.
(2) If the sale was made for part in cash, the balance to be paid within a period of time, the
amount of cash plus the amount which was to be paid constitutes the receipts; provided that, the subsequent
receipt of deferred payment does not constitute a receipt under the meaning of this article.
(3) If the sale was made for part in cash, the balance to be paid within a period of time, the
amount of cash plus the amount which was to be paid constitutes the receipts; provided that, the subsequent
receipt of payment of the note or evidence of indebtedness does not constitute a receipt within the meaning
of this article.
12 Radcliff - Licenses and Taxation
(4) If a sale is made for credit the amount of the credit constitutes the receipt; provided, however,
that, the subsequent liquidating of the credit does not constitute a receipt within the meaning of this article.
(5) If the sale is an installment sale, the total amount of the installments paid, or to be paid,
constitutes the receipts, including any interest or carrying charges. In other words, a person who sells or
disposes of personal property in trade or business on the installment plan, whether or not title remains in the
vendor until property is fully paid for and all of the conditions prescribed and fully performed, must return
as receipts the total amount of contracts entered into prior to the period covered by the return, but not the
money collected or contracts entered into prior to the period covered by the return.
(6) If the sale is made by exchange of property of any kind, the fair market value of the property
received in exchange constitutes the receipts. However, where a used article is accepted in part payment of
the purchase price of a new article, such as automobiles, furniture, washing machines, radios, mechanical
refrigerators and the like, the seller of the new article shall report the sales price of the new article less any
allowance made for the used article; provided, however, that when the used article is sold, the sales price of
the used article shall constitute receipts with the meaning of this article.
(7) Accounts receivable actually written off on a taxpayer=s records as uncollectible may be
deducted from gross receipts, but if the accounts shall be collected, the same shall constitute receipts within
the meaning of this article.
RETURN/REPORT. Any properly completed and, if required, signed form, statement, certification,
declaration or any other document permitted or required to be submitted or filed with the city.
SALES REVENUE. Receipts from the sale, lease or rental of goods, services or property.
TAX DISTRICT. Any city of the first to fifth class, county, urban county, charter county, consolidated
local government, school district, special taxing district or any other statutorily created entity with the
authority to levy net profits, gross receipts or occupational license taxes.
TAXABLE GROSS RECEIPTS.
(1) In the case of a business entity having payroll or sales revenues both within and without the
city, gross receipts as defined herein, and as apportioned under ' 10-37 of this chapter.
(2) In the case of a business entity having payroll or sales revenues only with the city, gross
receipts as defined in ' 10-37(A) of this chapter.
TAXABLE YEAR. The calendar year or fiscal year ending during the calendar year, upon the basis of
which net income is computed.
Licenses and Taxation 13
TAXPAYER. Any person liable for any business privilege license fee under the provisions of this
article.
(Ord. passed 12-31-1973; Ord. passed 8-27-1990; Ord. passed 8-17-2000; Ord. 08-04-1030, passed
4-22-2008)
' 10-35 BUSINESS PRIVILEGE LICENSE/GROSS RECEIPTS TAX APPLICATION
REQUIRED.
Every person and business entity engaged in any business in the city shall be required to apply for and
obtain an occupational license from the city before the commencement of business of business or in the
event of a change of business status. Licenses are required to notify the city of any changes in address, the
cessation of business or any other changes that render the information supplied to the city in the license
application inaccurate.
(Ord. 08-04-1030, passed 4-22-2008)
' 10-35.1 APPLICATIONS.
Any applicant for a business license in the city shall be required to provide the city with the following
information as provided by the Finance Office of the city:
(A) Employer identification number as issued by the Federal Internal Revenue Service; and
(B) Any and all other requirements imposed by ordinance.
(Ord. passed 12-31-1973; Ord. passed 12-21-1976; Ord. passed 3-18-1986; Ord. 08-04-1030, passed
4-22-2008)
' 10-36 BUSINESS PRIVILEGE LICENSE/GROSS RECEIPTS TAX PAYMENT REQUIRED.
(A) The fee for the business privilege license required by this article shall be measured by the amount
of gross receipts during the last fiscal year (except for a new business or one that has been sold during the
taxable year which shall come under ' 10-37(B)(1)) of a taxpayer ending prior to April first of the calendar
year for which the business privilege license is required in accordance with the classifications and
schedules set out in this article. The fiscal year of a taxpayer shall be the same used for making an income
tax return to the Kentucky Revenue Cabinet or the IRS.
(B) The business privilege license/gross receipts tax shall be measured by the appropriate business
category percentage (see ' 10-56(D)) of the gross receipts from business conducted in the city by a business
entity.
14 Radcliff - Licenses and Taxation
(C) The business privilege license/gross receipts tax imposed in this section shall not apply to the
following persons or business entities:
(1) Any bank, trust company, combined bank and trust company, combined trust, banking and
title insurance;
(2) Any compensation received by members of the Kentucky National Guard for active duty
training, unit training assemblies and annual field training;
(3) Any compensation received by precinct workers for election training or work at election
booths in state, county and local primary, regular or special elections;
(4) Public Service Corporations that pay an ad valorem tax on property valued and assessed by
the state=s Department of Revenue pursuant to the provisions of KRS 136.120. Licensees whose businesses
are predominantly non-public service who are also engaged in public service activity are required to pay a
license fee on their gross receipts derived from the non-public service activities apportioned to the city;
(5) Persons or business entities that have been issued a license under KRS Chapter 243 to engage
in manufacturing or trafficking in alcoholic beverages. Persons engaged in the business of manufacturing or
trafficking in alcoholic beverages are required to file a return, but may exclude the portion of the gross
receipts derived from the manufacturing or trafficking in alcoholic beverages; and
(6) Life insurance companies incorporated under the laws of and doing business in the
commonwealth.
(Ord. passed 12-31-1973; Ord. passed 2-7-1992; Ord. 08-04-1030, passed 4-22-2008)
' 10-37 PAYMENTS, RETURNS AND APPORTIONMENT.
(A) The business privilege license fee required herein shall be payable as follows.
(1) A minimum fee of $25 annually imposed hereinafter shall be due and payable no later than the
fifteenth day of April of the year due; any minimum license fee not paid within 30 days thereafter shall be
in default.
(2) Any license fee due in excess of the minimum after apportionment has been calculated shall
be based on the classifications and schedules set out in this article and be due and payable on the fifteenth
day of April of each year; provided, however, when the remaining license fee due in excess of the minimum
is in excess of $100, payment of one-half of the amount may be deferred until the fifteenth day of October
of each year, on which date the remaining one-half thereof shall be due and payable. A discount of 5% will
be given on any balance in excess of $100 paid in full by April 15 once the minimum has been deducted.
The 5% discount does not apply to the minimum fee.
Licenses and Taxation 15
(B) Except as provided in division (B)(4) below, taxable gross receipts shall be apportioned as
follows:
(1) For business entities with both payroll and sales revenue in more than one tax district, by
multiplying the gross receipts by a fraction, the numerator of which is the payroll factor, described in
division (B)(3) of this section, plus the sales factor, described in division (B)(4) of this section, and the
denominator of which is two;
(2) For the business entities with sales revenue, but no payroll, in more than one tax district, by
multiply the gross receipts by the sales factor as set forth in division (B)(4) of this section;
(3) The payroll factor is a fraction, the numerator of which is the total amount paid or payable in
the city during the tax period by the business entity for compensation, and the denominator of which is the
total compensation paid or payable by the business entity everywhere during the tax period. Compensation
is paid or payable in the city based on the time the individual=s service is performed within the city;
(4) The sales factor is a fraction, the numerator of which is the total sales revenue of the business
entity in the city during the tax period, and the denominator of which is the total sales revenue of the
business entity in the city during the tax period, and the denominator of which is the total sales revenue of
the business entity everywhere during the tax period. The sales, lease or rental of tangible personal property
is in the city if:
(a) The property is delivered or shipped to a purchaser, other than the United States
government, or to the designee of the purchaser with the city, regardless of the F.O.B. point or other
conditions of the sale;
(b) The property is shipped from an office, store, warehouse, factory or other place of storage
in the city and the purchaser is the United States government;
(c) Sales revenues, other than revenues from the sale, lease or rental of tangible personal
property or the lease or rental of real property, are apportioned to the city based upon a fraction, the
numerator of which is the time spent in performing the income-producing activity within the city and the
denominator of which is the total time spent performing that income-producing activity; and
(d) Sales revenue from the sale, lease or rental of real property is allocated to the tax district
(city) where the property is located.
(5) If the apportionment provisions of this section do not fairly represent the extent of the
business entity=s activity in the city, the business entity may petition the city or the city may require, in
respect to all or any part of the business entity=s business activity, if reasonable:
(a) Separate accounting;
16 Radcliff - Licenses and Taxation
(b) The exclusion of any one or more factors;
(c) The inclusion of one or more additional factors which will fairly represent the business
entity=s business activity in the city; and
(d) The employment of any other method to effectuate an equitable allocation and
apportionment of gross receipts.
(6) All partnerships, S corporations and all other entities where income is Apassed through@ to the
owners are subject to this article. The occupational license tax imposed in this article is assessed against
income before it is Apassed through@ these entities to the owners;
(7) If any business entity dissolves, ceases to operate or withdraws from the city during any
taxable year, or if any business entity in any manner surrenders or loses its charter during any taxable year,
the dissolution, cessation of business, withdrawal or loss or surrender of charter shall not defeat the filing of
returns and the assessment and collection of any occupational license tax for the period of that taxable year
during which the business entity had business activity in the city;
(8) If a business entity makes, or is required to make, a federal income tax return, the
occupational license tax shall be computed for the purposes of this article on the basis of the same calendar
or fiscal year required by the federal government, and shall employ the same methods of accounting
required for federal income tax purposes; and
(9) Whenever the date for a payment deadline falls on a Sunday, the taxpayer shall be given the
next business day which in all cases shall be a Monday unless the Monday shall be a legal holiday in the
city, in which to present payment. Presentment for payment shall be satisfied if payment is made at the
Finance Office before closing time on the last acceptable day for payment, or if payment is tendered by mail
and postmarked prior to midnight on the last acceptable day, and provided further that if payment is made
otherwise than by cash it must be by a good and valid negotiable instrument acceptable for payment when
presented to the bank on which it was drawn. Payment shall not be considered made in such cases where
payment is by an unsigned check, or check made in such cases where payment is made by an unsigned
check, or check that is backed by insufficient funds.
(C) A person subject to the payment of the business privilege license fee shall file a return with the
Finance Office and/or other designated by the City Council on or before April 15 each year. The return shall
be filed on forms to be furnished by the city, which shall be obtained at the Finance Office. Each return
shall show:
(1) (a) Each kind of business, profession, occupation, trade, vocation, calling or activity engaged
in or services rendered; the taxpayer=s gross receipts during the last fiscal year ended prior to April first of
the year for which the business privilege license fee is due; and
Licenses and Taxation 17
(b) Any one time (special construction projects, remodeling project, remodeling project, pool
installation and the like) business, profession, occupation, trade, vocation, calling or activity that is just
beginning its business and has no prior gross receipts upon which to base its business license fee, shall file
the same form as one who is basing its business license fee on the prior fiscal year=s gross receipts, only the
new business shall estimate what its gross receipts will be for the taxable year. The fee shall then be based
on the estimate furnished by the taxpayer. By April 15 of the taxable year ending the preceding December
31, the taxpayer shall file an amended tax return which accurately reflects the actual gross receipts during
the previous period of time which had been estimated. If the taxpayer owes more money, then it shall be
paid upon the filing of the return by April 15. If the taxpayer has overpaid based on estimated gross receipts
which was too high, then the taxpayer shall be refunded their overpayment.
(2) The address or addresses of each place of business being licensed;
(3) The exact name shown or to be shown on the taxpayer=s federal income tax return for the
same fiscal year being reported on to the city; and
(4) Such other information as may be considered necessary by the Director of Finance and/or
other appropriate city employee designated by the City Council to administer the business privilege license
fee.
(D) In order to determine the amount of business privilege license fee due, the Director of Finance or
other designated employee may require any person engaged in any kind of business, profession, occupation,
trade, vocation, calling or activity to furnish such information as deemed necessary under oath or may be
required to verify the return under oath. The return shall be signed by the owner, manager or other
responsible official representing the person filing the return and the title of the person signing shall be
shown.
(Ord. passed 12-31-1973; Ord. passed 8-27-1990; Ord. passed 2-7-1992; Ord. passed 4-13-1995; Ord.
passed 11-15-1996; Ord. passed 8-17-2000; Ord. passed 5-22-2001; Ord. 08-04-1030, passed 4-22-2008)
' 10-37.1 COMPLIANCE WITH LAW REQUIRED.
All persons holding city licenses shall, before the Director of Finance may issue their business licenses,
meet all Building Code and Health Department regulations. Failure to meet any Building Code requirement
or any Health Department requirement or any of the requirements set forth in this chapter shall be sufficient
grounds for the Director of Finance to deny the applicant a business license, whether the applicant is a new
applicant or an applicant for the renewal of his or her business license.
(Ord. passed 12-31-1973; Ord. passed 12-21-1976; Ord. 08-04-1030, passed 4-22-2008)
18 Radcliff - Licenses and Taxation
' 10-38 ENTIRE GROSS RECEIPTS TO BE REPORTED; LIST OF CONTESTED RECEIPTS.
The entire gross receipts derived from a business shall be reported on the required return. If an owner
contends that any such receipts do not constitute the receipts of the business within the meaning of this
article, or if a person questions the taxability of any items reported, there shall be attached to the return a
list of the receipts, the source from which they were derived and the reasons supporting the contentions.
(Ord. passed 12-31-1973; Ord. 08-04-1030, passed 4-22-2008)
' 10-39 REPORTS IN CASES OF MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS AND THE LIKE.
If a person liable for the business privilege license fee under this chapter, during the license year, sells
the assets, or merges or consolidates his or her business with the business of another person, the prior
owner shall be liable for the tax and for reporting the receipts for the portion of the year in which the prior
owner owned the business, based on the actual gross receipts to the date of the selling of the business. The
new owner of the business shall be required to obtain a new business license.
(Ord. passed 12-31-1973; Ord. passed 2-7-1992; Ord. 08-04-1030, passed 4-22-2008)
' 10-40 RETURNS REQUIRED.
(A) All business entity returns for the preceding taxable year shall be made by April 15 of each year,
except returns made on the basis of a fiscal year, which shall be made by the fifteenth day of the fourth
month following the close of the fiscal year. Blank forms for returns shall be supplied by the city.
(B) Every business entity shall submit a copy of its federal income tax return and all supporting
statements and schedules at the time of filing its occupational license tax return with the city. Whenever, in
the opinion of the city, it is necessary to examine the federal income tax return of any business entity in
order to audit the return, the city may compel the business entity to produce for inspection a copy of any
statements and schedules in support thereof that have not been previously filed. The city may also require
copies of reports of adjustments made by the federal government.
(C) Every business entity subject to a business privilege license/gross receipts tax governed by the
provisions of this article shall keep records, render under oath statements, make returns and comply with
rules as the city from time to time may prescribe. Whenever the city deems it necessary, the city may
require a business entity, by notice served to the business entity, to make a return, render statements under
oath, or keep records, as the city deems sufficient to determine the tax liability of the business entity.
(D) The city may require for the purpose of ascertaining the correctness of any return or for the
purposes of making an estimate of the taxable income of any business entity, the attendance of a
representative of the business entity or of any other person having knowledge in the premises.
Licenses and Taxation 19
(E) The full amount of the unpaid tax payable by any business entity, as it appears from the face of the
return, shall be paid to the city at the time prescribed for filing the occupational license tax return,
determined without regard to any extension of time for filing the return.
(F) The information in returns filed by persons subject to license fee under this chapter shall be
confidential as respecting the business of any person and shall be made available only to officers and
employees of the city whose official duties require the use of the information and, on a confidential basis, to
the Kentucky Commission of Revenue or to employees in his or her department in reciprocation for access
to the confidential files under his or her supervision.
(G) Any person divulging such information, except on an order of a court of competent jurisdiction,
shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $50, nor more than $1,000, or to imprisonment
for not exceeding 30 days, or both fine and imprisonment at the discretion of the court or jury. Nothing in
this section shall prohibit the city from publishing statistics based in information in the returns in such
manner as not to reveal data respecting the business of any particular person.
(Ord. passed 12-31-1973; Ord. 08-04-1030, passed 4-22-2008)
' 10-41 INTEREST AND PENALTIES FOR LATE PAYMENTS AND EXTENSIONS.
(A) Any person or business entity failing to file a return or failing to pay the minimum business
privilege license fee due on or before April 15 of the year due; or failing to pay the remaining excess due
under this article on or before April 15 of the year due; or failing to pay the deferred one-half portion of the
excess of the business privilege license fee on or before October 15 or failing to file a corrected return or to
pay an additional business privilege license fee within 30 days after receipt of notice as provided in ' 10-43
hereof, or failing to pay a business privilege license fee before beginning a new business, shall pay a penalty
of 3% of the license fee due for the first month of delay, or any fraction thereof, and 3% of the tax for each
additional month of delay, or any fraction thereof; provided, however, that, the minimum penalty in any
event shall be $25 and the total penalty levied shall not exceed 15% of the total tax due.
(B) The city may grant any business entity an extension of not more than six months unless a longer
extension has been granted by the Internal Revenue Service or is agreed to by the city and the business
entity, for filing its return, if the business entity, on or before the date prescribed for payment of the
occupational license tax, requests the extension and pays the amount properly estimated as its tax.
(C) If the time for filing a return is extended, the business shall pay, as part of the tax, an amount equal
to 12% per annum simple interest on the estimated tax shown due on the return, but previously paid, from
the time the tax was due until the return is actually filed and the tax paid to the city. A fraction of a month is
counted as an entire month.
2015 S-3
20 Radcliff - Licenses and Taxation
(D) In addition to the penalty provided for in division (A) above, a person shall pay interest at the rate
of 12% per annum on the amount of any additional tax found due as a result of an investigation or audit by
the Director of Finance and/or other designated city employee; the interest shall begin to run on the date
when the license tax was to have been paid.
(E) In addition to the penalties prescribed in this section, any business entity or employer shall pay, as
part of the tax, an amount equal to 12% per annum simple interest on the tax shown due, but not previously
paid, from the time the tax was due until the tax is paid to the city. A fraction of a month is counted as an
entire month.
(F) Every tax imposed by this article, and all increases, interest and penalties thereon, shall become,
from the time the tax is due and payable, a personal debt of the taxpayer to the city.
(G) In addition to the penalties prescribed in this section, any business entity or employer who
willfully fails to make a return or willfully makes a false return, or who willfully fails to pay taxes owing or
collected, with the intent to evade payment of the tax or amount collected or any part there, shall be guilty
of a Class A misdemeanor.
(H) Any person who willfully aids or assists in, or procures, counsels or advises the preparation or
presentation under, or in connection with, any matter arising under this chapter of a return, affidavit, claim
or other document, which is fraudulent or is false as to any material matter, whether or not the falsity or
fraud is with the knowledge or consent of the person authorized or required to present the return, affidavit,
claim or document, shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
(I) A return for the purpose of this section shall mean and include any return, declaration or form
prescribed by the city and required to be filed with the city by the provisions of this article or by the rules of
the city or by written request for information to the business entity by the city.
(J) Any person violating the provisions of ' 10-41 of this article by intentionally inspecting
confidential taxpayer information without authorization, shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned
for not longer than six months or both.
(Ord. passed 12-31-1973; Ord. passed 8-27-1990; Ord. passed 11-15-1996; Ord. 08-04-1030, passed
4-22-2008; Ord. 14-03-1152, passed 2-18-2015)
' 10-42 RESERVED.
2015 S-3
Licenses and Taxation 21
' 10-43 REFUNDS.
Where there has been an overpayment of gross receipts tax upon business levied under ' 10-36 of this
article, a refund or credit shall be made to any person or business entity to the extent of overpayment only
upon a written application for refund or credit to the city within two years from the date that overpayment
was made.
(Ord. 08-04-1030, passed 4-22-2008)
' 10-44 COMPUTATION OF TAX WHEN ONE BUSINESS SUBJECT TO SEVERAL
DIFFERENT FEES.
(A) If a person owns, operates or manages a business which is divisible into different types of business
which are subject to different assessment rates, the person must use the highest applicable rate that applies
to gross receipts or any one of those businesses to determine his or her license fee. If separate tax records
are kept for each type of business, the taxpayer may file one return, listing the gross for each category and
determining the amount due by applying the applicable rate for each type of business. Under this option, the
taxpayer will pay the minimum fee for each business category.
(B) If the records are not maintained, the taxpayer may complete the affidavit on the return form
supporting his or her estimate of the gross receipts from each type of business, but in such case the business
privilege license fee applicable to the major portion of his or her business shall be paid on the total gross
receipts of all types of business, and in addition thereto, as penalty for failure to maintain separate records,
he or she shall pay any business privilege license fee applicable to the minor portions of his or her business
on the estimated gross receipts from the minor portions as shown in his or her return.
(C) If separate records on each type of business are not maintained or a sworn estimate is not
submitted as provided in this section, the entire business of the taxpayer shall be subject to the highest
business privilege license fee prescribed for any one type of business engaged in by the taxpayer.
(Ord. passed 12-31-1973; Ord. passed 8-27-1990; Ord. 08-04-1030, passed 4-22-2008)
' 10-45 FEDERAL AUDIT PROVISIONS.
(A) (1) As soon as practicable after each return is received, the city may examine and audit the return.
If the amount of tax computed by the city is greater than the amount returned by the business entity, the
additional tax shall be assessed and a notice of assessment mailed to the business entity by the city within
five years from the date the return was filed, except as otherwise provided in this division.
(a) In the case of a failure to file a return or of a fraudulent return, the additional tax may be
assessed at any time.
22 Radcliff - Licenses and Taxation
(b) In the case of a return where a business entity understates gross receipts, or omits an
amount properly includable in gross receipts, or both, which understatement or omission, or both, is in
excess of 25% of the amount of gross receipts stated in the return, the additional tax may be assessed at any
time within six years of the return was filed.
(c) In the case of an assessment of additional tax relating directly to adjustments resulting
from a final determination of a federal audit, the additional tax may be assessed before the expiration of the
times provided in this division, or six months from the date the city receives the final determination of the
federal audit from the business entity, whichever is later.
(2) The times provided in this division may be extended by agreement between the business entity
and the city. For the purposes of this division, a return filed before the last day prescribed by law for filing
the return shall be considered as extending the last day prescribed by law for filing the return.
(B) Every business entity shall submit a copy of the final determination of the federal audit within 30
days of the conclusion of the federal audit.
(C) The city may initiate a civil action for the collection of any additional tax within the times
prescribed in division (A) above.
(Ord. 08-04-1030, passed 4-22-2008)
' 10-46 BUSINESS CLOSING DURING THE CALENDAR YEAR.
Any business, as defined in ' 10-34, electing to close during the current calendar year shall be assessed
as follows: The minimum fee shall not be included in determining the amount of fees owed by the business,
the fees shall be considered as an administrative fee. The total fees owed by the business as shown on the
business application shall be prorated by the division of 360 (days) into the estimated business license fee
for that year based on prior year=s gross sales based on their application, multiplied by the number of days
the business was in operation during that calendar year.
(Ord. passed 1-4-1993; Ord. 08-04-1030, passed 4-22-2008)
' 10-47 ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.
(A) No suit shall be maintained in any court to restrain or delay the collection or payment of the tax
levied by this chapter.
Licenses and Taxation 23
(B) (1) Any tax collected pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be refunded or credited
within two years of the date prescribed by law for the filing of a return or the date the money was paid to
the city, whichever is the later, except that:
(a) In any case where the assessment period contained in ' 10-45 of this chapter has been
extended by an agreement between the business entity and the city, the limitation contained in this division
shall be extended accordingly; and/or
(b) If the claim for refund or credit relates directly to adjustments resulting from a federal
audit, the business entity shall file a claim for refund or credit within the time provided for in this division
or six months from the conclusion of the federal audit, whichever is later.
(2) For the purposes of this division and division (B)(1) of this section, a return filed before the
last day prescribed by law for filing the return shall be considered as filed on the last day.
(C) The authority to refund or credit overpayments of taxes collected pursuant to this article is vested
exclusively in the city.
(Ord. 08-04-1030, passed 4-22-2008)
' 10-48 LICENSE CERTIFICATES.
(A) A license certificate shall be issued to each person paying a business privilege license fee due
under this article for a calendar year, or remaining portion of a calendar year in the case of a new business.
The certificate shall show the calendar year, or remaining portion of a calendar year in the case of a new
business. The certificate shall show the calendar year for which issued, the name of the person to whom
issued and the address or location of the place of business being licensed. If a taxpayer has more than one
place of business, a license certificate shall be issued for each place of business.
(B) Each taxpayer shall display his or her license certificate in a conspicuous place in each licensed
place of business.
(Ord. passed 12-31-1973; Ord. 08-04-1030, passed 4-22-2008)
' 10-49 RESTRICTION ON LICENSE ISSUANCE.
No license shall be issued under this article for any business that the Director of Finance, with the
approval of the Mayor, shall consider to be detrimental to the public welfare or contrary to the public
welfare or contrary to the public interest, but any such decision to refuse to issue a license may be appealed
to the City Council.
(Ord. passed 12-31-1973; Ord. 08-04-1030, passed 4-22-2008)
24 Radcliff - Licenses and Taxation
' 10-50 LICENSE TRANSFER.
Unless otherwise provided a license issued under this article may be transferred from one person to
another provided that the taxpayer ID# has not changed, if the kind of business is not materially changed,
and may be transferred to cover another location if a taxpayer moves his or her place of business.
(Ord. passed 12-31-1973; Ord. 08-04-1030, passed 4-22-2008)
' 10-51 USE OF LICENSE FEE AND GROSS RECEIPTS TAX.
All money obtained from the payment of the license fees and gross receipts tax provided for in this
article shall be paid into and become a part of the General Fund of the city.
(Ord. passed 12-31-1973; Ord. 08-04-1030, passed 4-22-2008)
' 10-52 ENFORCEMENT.
(A) Investigative powers. It shall be the duty of the Director of Finance to collect and receive all
license fees imposed by this article and to keep records showing the amounts received by him or her from
each business.
(B) Examination of records.
(1) The Director of Finance, or any agent or employee designated in writing by him or her, is
hereby authorized to examine the books, papers, records and tax returns of any business or suspected
business or any taxpayer or suspected taxpayer, in order to determine the accuracy of any return made, or, if
no return was made, to ascertain the amount of tax imposed by the terms of this article. Each business or
alleged business or taxpayer or suspected taxpayer is hereby directed and required to give to the Director of
Finance or his or her duly authorized agent or employee the means, facilities and opportunity for the
examination and investigation that is hereby authorized.
(2) The Director of Finance is hereby authorized to examine any person, under oath, concerning
any gross receipts which were or should have been returned and, to this end, he or she may compel the
production of any books, papers, records, tax returns and the attendance of all persons before him or her,
whether as parties or witnesses, whom he or she believes to have knowledge of the gross receipts to the
extent that any officer empowered to administer oaths in the state is permitted to so order.
(C) Enforcement powers of Director of Finance.
(1) The Director of Finance is hereby charged with the enforcement of the provisions of this
article and is hereby empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce the rules and regulations
relating to any matter or thing pertaining to the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this
Licenses and Taxation 25
article including, but not limited to, provisions for the reexamination and correction of returns to which an
overpayment or underpayment is claimed or found to have been made. The rules and regulations
promulgated by him or her shall be binding upon the businesses and the taxpayers.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Director of Finance to collect and account for the taxes imposed by
this article. He or she shall keep records showing the amount received by him or her from each business and
taxpayer and the date of the receipt.
(Ord. passed 12-31-1973; Ord. passed 8-27-1990; Ord. 08-04-1030, passed 4-22-2008)
' 10-53 TEMPORARY SUSPENSION.
(A) The Director of Finance shall, for probable cause, suspend a license issued pursuant to this article
after a notice in writing is served upon its holder on day in advance of the suspension.
(B) Probable cause for the suspension shall consist of any violation of the laws of the state or city
ordinance, the violation of which in relation to the business privilege license fee so held would tend to
affect the licensee=s ability to serve the public with safety and fairness.
(C) The suspension shall not exceed a period of 30 days, and upon the expiration of the period, the
license suspended shall be automatically reinstated unless action shall be instituted against the licensee or
permittee as provided in ' 10-49.
(Ord. passed 12-31-1973; Ord. 08-04-1030, passed 4-22-2008)
' 10-54 REVOCATION.
(A) The Director of Finance shall revoke a license issued pursuant to this article for the remainder of
the license year after serving notice in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint, time
and place of hearing to the licensee or permittee. The notice shall be served by mail or, at the address given
by the licensee upon application for the license, five days prior to the hearing.
(B) Upon specific findings of fact which meet the allegation of the complaint, the city=s License
Officer shall order the license revoked and forfeited to the city for:
(1) Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license;
(2) Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on the business
or occupation;
(3) Any violation of this article;
(4) Any conviction of any felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; and
26 Radcliff - Licenses and Taxation
(5) Conducting the business or occupation in an unlawful manner or in such manner as to
constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health,
safety or general welfare of the public.
(Ord. passed 12-31-1973; Ord. 08-04-1030, passed 4-22-2008)
' 10-55 APPEALS FROM LICENSE SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
Any person aggrieved by the Director of Finance in the revocation or suspension of his or her license
issued pursuant to this article or in the denial of an application for the same shall have recourse to the City
Council by way of appeal. The appeal shall be perfected by filing within 14 days from the date the final
action was taken from which the person was aggrieved, a statement in writing setting forth in full the
grounds for the appeal. The City Council shall set a time and place for a hearing, which notice of hearing
shall be served on the appellant five days prior to hearing at which time he or she shall be given an
opportunity to be heard by himself, herself or counsel. Upon review of the findings and order of the
Director of Finance, the City Council shall enter an order which shall be final and conclusive upon the
person so aggrieved.
(Ord. passed 12-31-1973; Ord. 08-04-1030, passed 4-22-2008)
' 10-56 COMPUTATION OF LICENSE FEE; MINIMUM.
(A) Except as otherwise provided, the license fee paid by any business, profession, trade, occupation,
vocation, calling or activity for the privilege of doing business in this city shall be its taxable gross receipts
subject to apportionment calculation multiplied by the assessment rate.
(B) The annual business privilege license minimum fee for all businesses shall be $25. The $25 shall
be a credit to the overall license fee assessment rate as outlined in division (D) below.
(C) Any claim for a reclassification of category not filed within one year of the deadline for filing a
return, for the year in which the fees or request for reclassification is claimed, shall be deemed to have been
waived.
(D) The assessment rates in determining the license fee to engage in the businesses, professions,
occupations, vacations, callings, activities or trades shall be as follows:
Annual Business License
Category Assessment Rate
Annual Business License
Category Assessment Rate
Antique shops .0025
Apparel shops .0025
Appliance sales and service .0025
Licenses and Taxation 27
Annual Business License
Category Assessment Rate
Art galleries .0025
Auctioneers .004
Automobile dealers, new and used cars .00094
Automobile parts .00094
Automobile repair shops .00125
Automobile salvage yards .00125
Bakery .00094
Barbershops .0025
Beauty shops .0025
Boat dealers .00125
Bookstore, stationery, card shop .00125
Bowling centers .0025
Building cleaning and maintenance .0025
Cable and other pay television .004
Car wash .00125
Circuses, carnivals and tent shows .0025
Coin operated laundry .00125
Computer processing and data preparation .00125
Computer programming .0025
Computer rental and leasing .004
Computer and software sales .00125
Concrete company .00125
Contractors (carpentry; concrete; electrical; excavating and foundation; floor laying; general
building: single-family and residential buildings; commercial construction, glass and glazing work,
highway and street construction; masonry, stone setting and other stonework; painting and paper
hanging; plastering, drywall, acoustical and insulation work; plumbing, heating and air
conditioning; roofing, siding and sheet metal work; structural steel erection; swimming pool
construction; terrazzo, tile, marble and mosaic work; water, sewer, pipeline, communication and
.00125
Annual Business License
Category Assessment Rate
power line construction)
Credit bureau .004
Dairy products delivery .00125
28 Radcliff - Licenses and Taxation
Annual Business License
Category Assessment Rate
Department stores .0025
Detective, guard and armored car services .00125
Drugstores .0025
Dry cleaners and laundry .00125
Electrical parts .00094
Engravers .0025
Equipment rental and leasing .004
Finance companies .004
Floor coverings .0025
Florist .0025
Fruit stands .00094
Funeral homes .004
Furniture stores .0025
Garden nursery .0025
Grocery stores .00094
Hardware and appliance .0025
Hatchery and feed store .0025
Insurance, real estate, securities agencies .004
Insurance and securities agents, brokers .004
Jewelry store .0025
Leasing-passenger cars .00125
Linen, towel or uniform supply service .00125
Kindergarten and nursery .004
Manufacturing of finished product sold within the city .00094
Licenses and Taxation 29
Annual Business License
Category Assessment Rate
Assembly/manufacturing or distribution of unfinished products sold outside the city. Minimum fee
and discount do not apply. Payment due may not be divided into two installments. License fee is
based on the number of employees:
Over Not Over
0 10 $150.00
11 25 $250.00
26 50 $500.00
51 75 $750.00
76 100 $1,000.00
101 125 $1,250.00
126 150 $1,500.00
151 175 $1,750.00
176 and over $2,000.00
Mobile home dealers .00125
Mobile home parks .005
Mobile home parts .00094
Motorcycle sales/new and used .00094
Motels/hotels/tourist courts .005
Mortgage companies .0025
Moving/storage .0025
Musical instruments sales/supplies .00125
Music/pinball machines and others .0025
Newspaper distributors .00125
Novelty/hobby shops .0025
Nursing homes .0025
Pawn shops .0025
Pest control .0025
Pet shops .0025
Photograph and supplies .0025
Printing shops/publishing .0025
Annual Business License
Category Assessment Rate
Professions (accountant, architect, attorney-at-law, chiropractor, chiropodist, chirosurgeon, civil
engineer, dentist, detective, electrical engineer, exodontist, insurance adjuster, magnetic healer,
masseur, oculist, optician, optometrist, osteopath, pension agent, periodontist, physician, practical
chemist, surgeon, surveyor, title guarantor, title abstractor, veterinarian or any other profession or
calling for which a certificate or license is required before a person can enter such a profession or
calling)
.004
30 Radcliff - Licenses and Taxation
Annual Business License
Category Assessment Rate
Real estate, agents, brokers and dealers .004
Recreational vehicle dealers .00094
Reducing/exercising salon .0025
Rentals, commercial .005
Rentals, residential .005*
* A Radcliff business license is required for those who own two or more residential rental
units in the city limits.
Restaurants .00125
Roller skating rink .0025
Service stations .00094
Service stations/food store .00125
Shoe repair .0025
Shoe store .0025
Sign shops .0025
Sporting supplies .0025
Stereo/TV sales .0025
Tattoo artists and palmists .005
Tax preparation .004
Taxicab company .0025
Telephone communications .00125
Theaters .0025
Thrift shops .0025
Tire sales or service .0025
Towing service .00125
Travel agencies .00125
Vending machine companies .0025
Annual Business License
Category Assessment Rate
Video tape rentals .004
2017 S-4
Licenses and Taxation 31
Annual Business License
Category Assessment Rate
Wholesale sales .00094
Business, profession, trade, occupation, vocation, calling or activities not otherwise listed above .0025
(Ord. passed 12-31-1973; Ord. passed 3-15-1974; Ord. passed 12-26-1974; Ord. passed 12-21-1976; Ord.
passed 12-21-1979; Ord. passed 9-2-1986; Ord. passed 8-29-1990; Ord. passed 2-7-1992; Ord. passed
11-17-1992; Ord. passed 12-21-1994; Ord. passed 11-19-1996; Ord. passed 8-17-2000; Ord. passed
5-15-2001; Ord. passed 12-9-2002; Ord. passed 3-24-2003; Ord. 08-04-1030, passed 4-22-2008; Ord.
16-02-1183, passed 4-19-2016)
' 10-57 TRANSIENT MERCHANTS/PEDDLERS/SOLICITORS.
(A) For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
TEMPORARY OR TRANSIENT BUSINESS. Any business conducted for the sale or offer for sale of
goods, wares or merchandise which is carried on in any building, structure, motor vehicle or real estate in
one locality for a period of less than six months in each year. A TEMPORARY OR TRANSIENT
BUSINESS does not include a business which has a permanent and continuous business license with the
city and operates one business in at least one permanent location.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT. Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or other entity which engages
in, does or transacts any temporary or transient business, either in one locality or in traveling from place to
place in the state, offering for sale or selling goods, wares, merchandise or commodities of any kind, and
includes those merchants who, for the purpose of carrying on such business, hire, lease, use or occupy any
building, structure, motor vehicle or real estate. A TRANSIENT MERCHANT shall not include a person,
firm, corporation, partnership or other entity that has a permanent business license with the city and carries
on a regular continuous business in the city.
(B) The fee paid by a transient merchant for the privilege of doing business in the city shall be its gross
receipts subject to apportionment calculation multiplied by the assessment rate. However, in any case the
maximum gross receipts on which the assessment rate may be levied shall be $8,500,000 for the year 2001
and subsequent years.
(C) The annual business privilege license minimum fee for all businesses to include transient
merchants shall be $25. The $25 shall be a credit to the overall license fee assessment rate.
2017 S-4
32 Radcliff - Licenses and Taxation
(D) The word SOLICITOR shall mean, unless the context requires otherwise, any person engaged in
the business of soliciting orders for magazines, periodicals, encyclopedias, books, Bibles or other printed
matter or material on a cash basis or by contract or note, the delivery of which magazines, periodicals,
encyclopedias, books, Bibles or other printed material is contingent upon a future event, such as a down
payment or one or more installment payments with the following exceptions:
(1) Sales made to dealers or permanent merchants by commercial travelers selling in the usual course
of business;
(2) Sheriffs, constables, bona fide assignees, receivers or trustees in bankruptcy or other public
officers selling goods, wares and merchandise according to law;
(3) Solicitations, sales or distributions made by charitable, education or religious organizations;
(4) The city will allow a Farmer=s Market sale in the City Hall parking lot on Wednesday and Saturday
of each week during the months of April through November for the sale of produce and related items;
(5) Sales made by minors and/or their parents or boosters that involve orders for articles when the
sales are made for the sole purpose of obtaining funds for a school bank, club or other organization, and the
sales are approved by the school system; and
(6) Refusal to leave. Any solicitor who enters upon premises owned, leased or rented by another and
refuses to leave the premises after having been notified by the owner or occupant of the premises, or his or
her agent, to leave the same and not return to the premises, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(E) It shall be unlawful for any solicitor to enter upon any private premises when the same are posted
with a sign stating ANo Solicitors Allowed@ or other words to such effect.
(F) It shall be unlawful for any solicitor to make false or fraudulent statements concerning the quality
or nature of his or her goods, wares, merchandise or services for the purpose of inducing another to
purchase the same.
(G) It shall be unlawful for any solicitor to engage in the business of soliciting within the city between
the hours of one-half hour before sunset and 8:00 a.m. the following morning, or at any time on Sundays,
except by specific appointment with or invitation from the prospective customer.
(H) Solicitors are required to register with Business License Clerk before doing any business within
the city limits. The Clerk shall obtain the name, permanent address and phone number of the solicitor, the
name, permanent address and phone number of the parent company and a general description of the
merchandise being offered. No license is required.
Licenses and Taxation 33
(I) (1) If the applicant does not have a permanent facility attached and known within the law as an
attached improvement to real estate from which to operate the business for which he or she makes
application for license, then and in that event, there shall be a presumption that the applicant is a transient
merchant.
(2) Before a business license is issued by the city and before a transient merchant can begin
conducting his or her business, he must have a permit as required by KRS 365.660.
(Ord. passed 12-31-1973; Ord. passed 12-21-1976; Ord. passed 5-18-1982; Ord. passed 5-15-1990; Ord.
passed 10-10-1991; Ord. passed 2-7-1992; Ord. passed 11-17-1992; Ord. passed 12-6-1999; Ord. passed
8-17-2000; Ord. passed 12-9-2002; Ord. passed 9-8-2003; Ord. 08-04-1030, passed 4-22-2008)
Statutory reference:
Permit required, see KRS 365.660
' 10-58 PENALTY.
(A) Except as otherwise provided, any person violating or failing to comply with any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than $20, nor more than $250, for each offense. Each
day=s violation or noncompliance shall constitute a separate offense. The criminal penalties shall be in
addition to the penalties provided for ' 10-41 hereof. Any persons violating this article may also be found
guilty of a civil offense. The civil fine shall be not less than $20, nor more than $250. The civil fine shall be
paid directly to the city. If the fine is not paid within 30 days of notification, then the city may recover the
fine in a civil action in a court of proper jurisdiction. The city may also obtain injunctions or abatement
orders to insure compliance with this article or pursue administrative remedies when appropriate, including
injunctions and abatement proceedings.
(B) Except as otherwise provided, any person violating or failing to comply with any provisions of
' 10-59 below shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $250. The civil fine shall be paid
directly to the city. If the fine is not paid within 30 days of notification, then the city may recover said fine
in a civil action in a court of proper jurisdiction. The city may also obtain injunctions or abatement orders to
insure compliance with this article or pursue administrative remedies when appropriate, including
injunctions and abatement proceedings.
(Ord. passed 3-16-1993; Ord. 08-04-1030, passed 4-22-2008; Ord. 16-06-1187, passed 6-21-2016)
' 10-59 YARD SALES.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
GOODS. Includes any goods, warehouse merchandise or other property capable of being the object of
the sale regulated hereunto.
PERSON. Individuals, partnerships, voluntary associations, and corporations.
2017 S-4
34 Radcliff - Licenses and Taxation
YARD SALES. Includes all sales entitled, GARAGE SALE, LAWN SALE, ATTIC SALE,
RUMMAGE SALE, YARD SALE, or any similar casual sale of tangible personal property which is
advertised by any means whereby the public at large is or can be made aware of said sale.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a yard sale within the city without first filing with
the city the information hereinafter specified and registering with the city to do so.
(C) (1) Yard sales are permitted to be held for a maximum of ten yard sales per year. Each calendar
day of sale represents one yard sale. Example: You can have five, two-day yard sales or ten, one-day yard
sales, etc.
(2) Prior to each yard sale the citizen must call City Hall and register their yard sale. City Hall will
give them the option of coming to pick up a copy of the rules or they can elect to have them emailed to
them.
(D) The information to be filed with the city pursuant to this section shall be as follows:
(1) Name of person, firm, group, corporation, association or organization conducting said sale;
(2) Name of occupant of the property on which said sale is to be conducted;
(3) Location at which sale is to be conducted;
(4) Number of days of sale; and
(5) Date and nature of any past sale.
(E) The provisions of this section shall not apply to or affect the following persons or sales:
(1) Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction;
(2) Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials; or
(3) Any person selling or advertising for sale an item or items of personal property which are
specifically named or described in the advertisement and which separate items do not exceed five in
number.
(F) (1) Hours of operation. A yard sale shall be held only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m.
(2) Authorized operators. Only the property owner or tenant of the dwelling unit is permitted to
conduct the yard sale.
(3) Restrictions on saleable items.
2017 S-4
Licenses and Taxation 34A
(a) Yard sale items offered for sale shall be limited to secondhand, household, or incidental
personal items owned by the property owner or tenant of the dwelling unit where the yard sale is conducted.
(b) Yard sale items offered for sale shall not include any food or beverages, or items purchased
from a storage unit auction or sale.
(4) Location of saleable items.
(a) Yard sale items shall only be displayed on occupant's property.
(b) Yard sale items shall not be placed in the public right-of-way, which includes sidewalks.
(5) Signs advertising yard sales shall be posted under the following conditions:
(a) No more than four temporary yard sale signs may be posted;
(b) Yard sale signs can be placed no earlier than 24 hours before the sale and shall be removed
immediately at the end of the yard sale; and
(c) Signs must reflect the address of the yard sale.
(Ord. 16-06-1187, passed 6-21-2016)
' 10-60 SEVERABILITY.
Each section and each provision of each section of this article are severable, and if any provision,
section, paragraph, sentence or part thereof, or the application thereof to any person licensee, class or group,
is help by a court of law to be unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, the holding shall not affect or
impair the remainder of this article, it being the legislative intent to ordain and enact each provision,
section, paragraph, sentence and part thereof, separately and independently of the rest.
(Ord. 08-04-1030, passed 4-22-2008)
' 10-61 UNLOADING LICENSE. (RESERVED)
' 10-62 OFF-SITE TEMPORARY MOTOR VEHICLE SALES.
Off-site temporary motor vehicle sales are permitted within the corporate limits of the city upon the
following conditions:
(A) The motor vehicle dealer shall have its principal office and business within the corporate limits of
Radcliff.
2017 S-4
34B Radcliff - Licenses and Taxation
(B) The dealer shall comply with all City and Planning and Zoning requirements and insure that the
site for the temporary motor vehicle sales shall be in compliance with all City Planning and Zoning
requirements.
(C) The site and the dealer shall comply with all proper business regulations and requirements,
including state motor vehicle dealer regulations.
(D) No dealer shall be limited from selling or distributing motor vehicles within the corporate city
limits provided the above conditions and obligations have been met.
(Ord. 08-11-1055, passed 11-12-2008)
' 10-63 EFFECTIVE DATE.
The effective date of this article shall be 1-1-2009, and the filing of the city license return as described
herein for 2009 shall be based on gross receipts as defined herein for calendar year 2008.
(Ord. 08-04-1030, passed 4-22-2008)
ARTICLE IV. FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS
' 10-65 IMPOSED.
There is hereby levied an franchise fee for the purpose of giving the municipality the rights and power
to control original occupation of its streets and public rights-of-way and not for control or regulation on
each utility company and cable television company operating within the city. The rate of the fee shall be as
indicated below and apply to the gross revenue of each utility company and cable television company
received from all customers within the corporate limits. Copies of all franchise ordinances are available for
inspection in their entirety in the City Clerk=s office.
Utility Rate Ordinance
Number
Effective Date Expiration Date
Louisville Gas and Electric 3% 97-02-738 2-1-1998 2-1-2018
Elizabethtown Gas and Electric 3% 97-02-737 3-1-1997 3-1-2017
2017 S-4
Licenses and Taxation 35
Utility Rate Ordinance
Number
Effective Date Expiration Date
Hardin County Water Dist #1 3% 97-07-746 1-17-1998 1-17-2018
Hardin County Water Dist #2 None
Brandenburg Telephone Co. 3% 97-09-753 12-19-1998 12-19-2018
Verizon (GTE) 3% 7-1-1998 6-30-2018
Nolin RECC 3% 302A 2-1-1998 2-23-2018
Kentucky Utilities 3% 93-03-601 3-16-1993 3-16-2013
Insight 5% 09-06-1059 6-18-2009 6-17-2024
Comcast 5% 94-06-666 7-1-1998 6-30-2013
Waste Management of KY 3% 08-11-1052 1-1-2009 12-31-2013
(Ord. passed 3-21-1961; Ord. 09-08-1072, passed 8-10-2009)
' 10-66 PAYMENTS.
The fee imposed by the agreements shall be payable as per the terms of each specific ordinance.
' 10-67 EXEMPTION.
The fee imposed by this article shall not apply on the amounts of bills for service furnished to the city.
This article does not apply to solid waste collection. See Chapter 8, Article II.
(Ord. passed 3-21-1961; Ord. passed 11-19-1997)
' 10-68 PENALTY.
Except as otherwise provided, any person violating or failing to comply with any provision of this
Article IV shall upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than $20, nor more than $250, for each offense.
Each day=s violation or noncompliance shall constitute a separate offense. Any persons violating this article
may also be found guilty of a civil offense. The civil fine shall be not less than $20, nor more than $250.
The civil fine shall be paid directly to the city. If the fine is not paid within 30 days of notification, then the
city may recover said fine in a civil action in a court of proper jurisdiction. The city may also obtain
injunctions or abatement orders to insure compliance with this article or pursue administrative remedies
when appropriate, including injunctions and abatement proceedings.
(Ord. passed 1-21-1975; Ord. passed 3-16-1993; Ord. passed 9-21-1993; Ord. passed 2-10-1997; Ord.
passed 11-19-1997)
36 Radcliff - Licenses and Taxation
ARTICLE V. OCCUPATIONAL PRIVILEGE FEE
' 10-76 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning. The singular shall include the plural and vice versa, and the masculine shall
include the feminine and the neuter.
ASSOCIATION. A partnership or any other form of unincorporated enterprise owned by two or more
persons.
BUSINESS. Any enterprise, activity, profession or under taking of any nature conducted for gain or
profit, whether, conducted by an individual, co-partnership, association, corporation or any other entity; but
shall not include the usual activities of a board of trade, chamber of commerce, trade association, or unions;
community chest funds or foundations; corporations or associations organized and operated exclusively for
religious, charitable, scientific, literary, educational, or fraternal purposes, where no part of the earnings,
income or receipts of the units, groups or associations inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or
other person.
CITY. The City of Radcliff, Kentucky.
COMPENSATION. The amount paid to any natural person for services rendered, in money or money=s
worth, regardless of the form or method of payment. It includes the receipt, actual or constructive, by an
individual of the earnings of an individual business enterprise or of a partnership.
CORPORATION. A corporation of joint stock company organized under the laws of the United States,
Kentucky, another state, territory or foreign country or a dependency thereof.
DIRECTOR OF FINANCE or CLERK. The Director of Finance or Clerk of the city, or his or her
agent, designee or assistant.
EMPLOYEE. Any person who renders services to another person or any business entity for
compensation, including an officer of a corporation and any officer, employee or elected official of the
United States, a state or any political subdivision of a state, or any agency of instrumentality of any one or
more of the above. A person classified as an independent contractor under the Internal Revenue Code shall
not be considered an EMPLOYEE.
EMPLOYER. The person for whom an individual performs or performed any service, of whatever
nature, as the employee of the person, except that: If the person for whom the individual performs or
performed the services does not have control for the payment of wages for the services, the term
Licenses and Taxation 37
EMPLOYER means the person having control for the payment of the wages, and means in the case of a
person paying wages on behalf of a nonresident alien individual, foreign partnership, or foreign corporation,
not engaged in trade or business within the United States, the term EMPLOYER means such person.
FEEPAYER. Any person or business made liable for the occupation privilege fee or for the payment
of amounts withheld from employees under the terms of this article.
GROSS SALARIES, WAGES, COMMISSIONS AND OTHER COMPENSATIONS. The total gross
amount of all salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses or other money payments of any kind, or any other
considerations entitled to be received from an employer for any work done or personal services rendered in
any occupation, trade or profession, including all deductions whether for tax, insurance or other. Amounts
paid to traveling salespersons or other workers as allowance or reimbursement for traveling or other
expenses incurred in the business of the employer are excluded; but to the extent of the excess of the
amounts over the expenses actually incurred and accounted for by the employee to his or her employer, it is
included in the foregoing definition. GROSS SALARIES, WAGES, COMMISSIONS AND OTHER
COMPENSATION shall not mean or include gratuities and tips customarily received by an employee from
persons other than his or her employer.
NONRESIDENT. Any individual, co-partnership, fiduciary, association or other entity domiciled
outside the city.
OBLIGOR. Any person required hereunder to file a separate return or to pay a license fee thereon
under this article.
OCCUPATION, TRADE, PROFESSION OR OTHER ACTIVITY. The doing of any kind of work,
the rendering of any kind of work, the rendering of any kind of personal service or the holding of any kind
of position or job within the city, by any clerk, laborer, trader, manager, official or other employee,
including any nonresident of the city, who is employed by an employer as defined in this article, where the
relationship between the individual performing the services and the person for whom the services are
rendered is, as to those services, the legal relationship of employer and employee, including also a partner
of a firm or an officer of a firm or corporation, and shall also include and mean the holding of any kind of
office or position, either by election or appointment, by the federal, state, county or city government or any
officer or employee thereof where the services of such official or employee are rendered within the city.
PAYROLLS. The total wages, salaries and other personal service compensation.
PERSON. Every natural person, co-partnership, fiduciary, association or corporation, whenever the
term person is used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty in the nature of a fine or
imprisonment, the word, as applied to association, shall mean the partners or members thereof and as
applied to corporations, the officers and directors.
38 Radcliff - Licenses and Taxation
RESIDENT. An individual, co-partnership, association, corporation or other entity domiciled or
having a business situs in the city.
SALES. Gross sales of merchandise or of services, or both, computed by whatever method of
accounting is authorized for federal income tax purposes.
SALES WITHIN THE CITY. Sales of merchandise delivered to a customer within the city or service
performed within the city for a customer.
YEAR. The calendar year or the fiscal year, employed by a business subject to the occupation privilege
fee imposed by this article if the feepayer reports for federal income tax purposes on the basis of a period
other than the calendar year. If, under any of the provisions of this article, a period of less than a full year is
involved, the full-year basis of computation shall be employed, and the fraction of a year allocated by
employing the ratio of the number of full months of tax liability to 12, the number of months in a year.
(Ord. passed 9-2-1986; Ord. 08-04-1031, passed 4-22-2008)
' 10-77 PAYMENT OF OCCUPATION PRIVILEGE FEE, INDIVIDUALS.
(A) On and after 1-1-1987, every individual, that is, every natural person, engaged in any occupation
shall pay into the city treasury for purposes of the general budget contemplated in KRS 92.280 through
92.281, an annual occupation fee for the privilege of conducting the occupation in the city; which
occupation privilege fee shall be measured by 2% of all salaries, wages, commissions and other
compensation earned in the city for work done or service performed in the city.
(B) If salaries, wages, commissions or other compensation are earned for work done or services
performed or rendered, both within and without the city, the occupation privilege fee shall be measured by
that part of the salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation that is earned as a result of work done
or services performed or rendered in the city. The occupation privilege fee shall be computed by obtaining
total compensation for work done or services performed or rendered within the city.
(C) Where compensation is received (paid) in property, its fair market value, at the time of receipt
shall be subject to an occupational privilege fee and/or to withholding, deduction of fee at source. Board
and lodging and similar items, where considered part of the compensation paid, shall be included in
earnings at their fair market value. However, the value accepted for the purpose of the state and federal
payroll taxes may be accepted by the Director of Finance.
(D) (1) In the case of employees who incur and pay expenses directly connected with the performance
of their duties or services and for which no retirement is made by the employer, the reasonable actual
expenses incurred and paid in earning the compensation may be deducted in computing the amount subject
to the occupational privilege fee. To be allowed, however, the expenses must be recognized as deductions
by the federal and state authorities for payroll tax purposes and the federal authorities for income tax
purposes.
Licenses and Taxation 39
(2) Such items as personal, family or living expenses, expenses of commuting to and from work, old
age benefits taxes, deductions for group insurance, hospitalization, pension plans and the like are not
deductible as expenses directly connected with the performance of service.
(E) Payments made to an employee by an employer as vacation pay and paid holidays or any other
type of payments made under an employer=s wage or salary continuation plan during periods of absence by
an employee from work are fully subject to the occupational privilege fee.
(F) Payments made to employees by an employer at the time of a voluntary or involuntary separation,
or dismissal, of the employee from the service of the employer are to be regarded as subject to the license
fee.
(G) The following are subject to the occupational privilege fee:
(1) Salaries, bonuses or incentive payments received by an individual, whether directly or through an
agent and whether in cash or in property, for services rendered:
(a) As an officer, agent or employee, or both, of a corporation (including a corporation of the first
or nonprofit class), joint stock association or joint stock company;
(b) As an officer, agent or employee (as distinguished from a partner or member) of a partnership,
limited partnership, or any other form of unincorporated enterprise owned by one or more persons, where
the person or persons receive a salary in addition to other disbursements, then said salary shall be added
back to the partnership, limited partnership or other unincorporated enterprise to determine the gross profits
of the partnership, limited partnership or unincorporated enterprise;
(c) As an agent or employee (as distinguished from the proprietor) of a business, trade or
profession, conducted by an individual owner;
(d) As an officer, agent or employee (whether elected or appointed, enlisted or commissioned) of
a governmental administration, agency, arm, authority, board, body, branch, bureau, department, division,
section or unit of the commonwealth, or any of the political subdivisions thereof, or those of any of the
political subdivisions thereof, or those of any other state or commonwealth;
(e) As an officer, agent or employee (whether elected or appointed) of a governmental
administration agency, arm, authority, board, body, branch, bureau, department, division, section or unit of
the United States government or a corporation created and owned or controlled by the United States
government or any of its agencies, or those of any foreign country or dependency except those enlisted or
commissioned in the military service; or
(f) As an officer, agent or employee of any other entity.
40 Radcliff - Licenses and Taxation
(2) Wages, bonuses or incentive payments received by an individual, whether directly or indirectly
through an agent and whether in cash or in property for services rendered:
(a) Whether based upon hourly, daily, weekly, semi-monthly, monthly, annual, unit of production
or piece-work rates; and
(b) Whether paid by an individual, partnership, association, corporation (including a corporation
of the first or nonprofit class), a governmental administration, agency, arm, authority board, body, branch,
bureau, department, division, section or unit, or other entity.
(3) Commissions received by a feepayer, whether directly or indirectly through an agent and whether
in cash or in property for services rendered regardless of how computed or by whom paid (if amounts
received as a drawing account exceed the commissions earned, the fee is payable on the amounts received).
If such commissions are included in the net earnings of a trade, business or profession regularly carried on
by such individuals and therefore subject to occupational privilege fee under ' 10-79, they shall not again be
separately charged.
(4) (a) Fees, unless the fees are properly included as part of the gross compensation of a trade,
business, profession or enterprise regularly carried on by the individual and the gross profits are subject to
the occupational privilege fee under ' 10-80.
(b) Fees paid to a director or officer of a corporation are subject to withholding under ' 10-77 as
in the case of any other employee.
(5) Other compensation which will be treated as subject to the occupation privilege fee.
(a) Tips received by waiters and others. Tips received are subject to the occupational privilege
fee and will be reported in the same manner as earnings of an independent contractor.
(b) Vacation and/or holiday benefits. Payments made to employees by an employer as vacation
wages are subject to the occupation privilege fee.
(c) Separation payments. Payments made to employees by an employer at the time of voluntary or
involuntary separation (dismissal) of the employee from the service of the employer, are to be regarded as
subject to the occupational privilege fee.
Licenses and Taxation 41
(H) Computation of percentage which the salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation for
work performed or service rendered within the city bears to the total compensation earned. Compensation
from activities conducted in the city shall be computed as follows:
(1) Multiply the entire compensation from all sources by an allocation percentage to be determined by:
(a) Ascertaining the percentage which wages, salaries and other personal service compensation
period covered by the report for services performed or rendered within the city bears to the total wages,
salaries and personal service compensation for or such period of all the licensee=s employees within and
without the city.
(b) Multiplying the percentage determined in accordance with division (A) above by the total
gross compensation to determine the gross compensation on which the fee is due.
(2) Sales within the city shall be sales of merchandise made within the city and delivered to a
customer within or without the city or services performed within the city for a customer.
(Ord. passed 9-2-1986; Ord. passed 4-13-1995; Ord. passed 3-24-2003; Ord. 08-04-1031, passed
4-22-2008)
' 10-78 SPECIAL OCCUPATIONS.
(A) Nurses.
(1) A registered nurse (except as provided below) is in the same status as any other professional
person and is required to file a return upon his or her compensation. He or she may deduct the actual
expenses incurred from the earning of his or her fees. Deductible items are such expenses as are recognized
as deductions by the Internal Revenue Service and the Kentucky Department of Revenue.
(2) A registered nurse regularly employed by a hospital, institution, business entity or individual is
subject to the withholding provisions of this article.
(B) Executives and directors. An officer or director of a corporation performing services out of
Radcliff, except for occasional visits to a city office to examine correspondence and the like, is not subject
to the occupational privilege fee. Where an organization meets in the city and part of the work required as
officer or director of the organization is performed by him or her in the city, his or her compensation is
subject in the ratio those duties bear to his or her total duties.
42 Radcliff - Licenses and Taxation
(C) Miscellaneous.
(1) Where compensation is received (paid) in property, its fair market value at the time of receipt shall
be subject to this occupational privilege fee and/or to withholding (deduction of fee at source). Board and
lodging and similar items shall be included in earnings at their fair market value, where the board and
lodging is considered part of the compensation paid. However, the value accepted for the purpose of the
state and federal payroll taxes may be accepted by the Director of Finance.
(2) In the case of employees who incur and pay expenses directly connected with the performance of
their duties or services and for which no reimbursement is made by the employer, the reasonable actual
expenses incurred and paid in earning the compensation may be deducted in computing the amount subject
to the occupational privilege fee. To be allowed however, the expenses must be recognized as deductions
by the federal and state authorities for payroll tax purposes.
(3) Such items as personal, family or living expenses, expenses of commuting to and from work, old
age benefits, taxes, deductions for group insurance, hospitalization, pension plans and the like are not
deductible as expenses directly connected with the performance of service.
(D) Insurance agents.
(1) General. Individuals engaged in the sale of insurance may be either employees or independent
contractors.
(a) Where the individual is subject to the direct control of another as to the manner of his or her
conduct and is paid a fixed fee, he or she is considered an employee and the amount of the occupational
privilege fee shall be withheld at the source.
(b) Where the individual is not under the direct control of another and may conduct the sale as he
or she sees fit, receiving his or her payment in the form of commission from the sale, he or she is
considered an independent contractor and shall file his or her own return and make payment as an
independent contractor.
(2) Commissions subject to occupational privilege fee.
(a) In determining whether the commissions payable by reasons of the selling of any policy by an
agent resulting from work done or services performed or rendered in the city, the test shall be the residence
of the insured at the time of issuance of the policy, rather than the actual place of solicitation, except where
the solicitation is in the city and the agent=s established place of business is within the city, the commission
is subject to the occupational privilege fee regardless of the residence of the insured.
(b) If an agent has an office outside the city, as well as an office within the city, the commission
on policies sold to nonresidents, if handled through the outside office, are not subject to an occupational
privilege fee, since, under such circumstances, they are not earnings or profits of an independent city
business.
Licenses and Taxation 43
(3) Group insurance commissions. Commissions paid on the sale of contracts of group insurance are
subject if the group is located within the city as a unit without regard to the residence of the writing agent.
(4) Bonuses and incentive payments subject to occupational privilege fees. Proportionate part of all
bonuses and incentive payments received by an agent which bears the same ratio to the total amount of
bonuses and incentive payments received by him or her as the amounts of commissions received by him or
her on policies sold to residents bears to the total amount of commissions received by him or her on all
policies sold to him or her by both residents and nonresidents is subject to the occupational privilege fee.
(5) Advances and drawing accounts.
(a) There are two main types of advances and drawing accounts payments:
1. Those which impose upon the agent a written obligation to repay if they are not in fact
earned; and
2. Those which (though offset by commissions as earned) cannot be recovered at law even
though the agent fails to produce enough business to justify them.
(b) The first of these two types of advance and drawing account payments is in the nature of a
loan and accordingly is never subject to an occupational privilege fee. All commissions or bonuses applied
toward the repaying of these types of advances and drawing accounts are subject in accordance with the
rules set forth above.
(c) The second type of advance and drawing account payments is subject to an occupational
privilege fee when received to the extent that it exceeds compensation earned after 1-1-1987.
(6) Collection of an occupational privilege fee at source. It is the duty of all companies doing business
in the city (or general agents in the cases of agents whose contracts are with a general agent alone and to
whom payment is made by general agent out of his or her fund) to deduct or withhold monthly or more
often the amount of occupational privilege fee due on all compensation paid to agents who are considered
employees.
(E) Railroad and train service employees.
(1) Railroad employees who perform all of their work within the limits of the city are subject upon
their entire gross earnings.
(2) Where such employees serve both within and without the city, the occupational privilege fee shall
be measured by the proportionate share of their gross earnings representing service within the city.
44 Radcliff - Licenses and Taxation
(3) Where the work of such employees is preponderantly outside the city, the employee shall not be
deemed to be engaged in a service within the city.
(4) Officers and supervisory personnel whose headquarters is in the city and whose occupations
regularly require part of the work to be done outside the city shall be allowed to prorate the compensation
on which an occupational privilege fee is due, for that part of the work done within the city. There shall be
no proration of compensation for employees headquartered within the city where travel is only incidentally
connected with the occupation. Individual cases of claimed exemption under this division (E)(4) shall be
subject to review by the Director of Finance.
(5) The fact that any particular railroad employee affected by the foregoing regulations may be
engaged in interstate commerce, is not relevant in determining the applicability of this article to
compensation received by him or her.
(F) Motor freight and commercial transportation other than railroads. Since the circumstances
involved in the employment of such employees are substantially analogous to those of railroad employees,
the regulations applicable thereto shall apply to employees in the aforementioned category.
(G) Federal, state or municipal employees.
(1) Compensation received from the federal government for services performed within any federal
reservation or building situated within the geographical limits of the city, title to which may or may not be
in the federal government, is subject income, even though exclusive jurisdiction thereof was granted to the
federal government by the commonwealth and/or the city.
(2) Compensation received from state, county and municipal governmental agencies is subject to the
provisions of this article.
(3) Refund of fees withheld and paid covering activities outside the city will be made to employees
upon application on form provided by the Director of Finance.
(H) Real estate salespersons and brokers.
(1) Real estate salespersons or brokers who engaged in the business as employees rather than
independent contractors are not required to file a return for commissions earned by them. The employer is
required to deduct the fee from the commissions earned and remit the same to the Director of Finance.
(2) Real estate salespersons or brokers acting as independent contractors are subject to an
occupational privilege fee on their compensation in accordance with the city=s business license/gross
receipts tax ordinance.
(Ord. passed 9-2-1986; Ord. passed 4-13-1995; Ord. 08-04-1031, passed 4-22-2008)
Licenses and Taxation 45
' 10-79 EXEMPTIONS.
The following classes of persons shall be exempt to the extent herein set forth from the provisions of
the city=s occupational privilege fee and no occupational privilege fee shall be due from them.
(A) Domestic servants to the extent of their salaries, wages or other compensation received from the
rendering of domestic services in private homes.
(B) All state, county and district officers directly named and designated in the text of the constitution
to the extent of their salaries, wages or other compensation received for work or services received in the
performance of the duties and obligations of their respective offices.
(C) The following money receipts are not deemed to be Asalaries, wages, commissions and other
compensation and net profits@ within the meaning of this article.
(1) Old age or retirement payments. Periodical payments, commonly recognized as old age or
retirement pensions, made to persons retired from service after reaching a specified age or after a stated
period of employment, are not subject to the occupational privilege fee.
(2) Disability, accident benefits and unemployment compensation. Payments made to employees by an
employer under a disability or accident plan are not subject to the occupational privilege fee.
Unemployment compensation payments by the commonwealth or any other agency are not subject.
(3) Death benefits. Death benefits payable by an employee to the beneficiary of an employee or to his
or her estate, whether payable in a single sum or, otherwise, are not subject to the occupational privilege
fee.
(4) Benefits arising under the Workers= Compensation Act. Amounts received by employees under the
Workers= Compensation Act as compensation for a disability sustained during the course of employment,
together with any amount of damages received by suit or agreement on account of the disability, are not
subject to the occupational privilege fee.
(5) Income received from royalties, patents and copyrights.
(D) Full-time elementary or secondary students or students who are regularly employed for 15 hours or
less by all of their employers, are exempt from the occupational privilege fee imposed in this article by
means as follows: In the case of elementary or secondary students, any student who can furnish to the
director a certified statement by the Superintendent of the Board of Education that the student is enrolled in
a full-time study.
(E) Applicability of the foregoing regulations to employees whose compensation is not wholly subject.
In the case of individuals whose compensation is earned for services performed both within and without the
city and who receive subject payments as set forth in the foregoing rules and regulations,
46 Radcliff - Licenses and Taxation
they are subject to the occupational privilege fee in the same proportion that services performed within the
city bear to their total employment time.
(Ord. passed 9-2-1986; Ord. passed 4-13-1995; Ord. 08-04-1031, passed 4-22-2008)
' 10-80 PAYMENT OF OCCUPATIONAL PRIVILEGE FEE BY EMPLOYERS; RETURN.
(A) Each employer who employs one or more persons within the city shall deduct monthly, or more
often than monthly, at the time of the payment thereof, the occupation privilege fee due from each
employee, measured by the amount of salaries, wages or other compensation due by the employer to the
employee, and shall pay to the Director of Finance the amount of the occupation privilege fee so directed.
The payment required to be made on account of deductions by employers shall be made quarterly, for the
quarterly periods ending March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31 of each year or on or before
the last day of each month next following the quarter of the deduction to the Director of Finance.
(B) The employer shall, annually, by the end of February of each year, make a return to the Director of
Finance, in which is set forth the name and residence of each employee of the employer during the
preceding calendar year, giving the amount of salaries, wages or other compensation earned during the
preceding year by each employee, together with any pertinent information as the Director of Finance may
require to include federal forms W-2 and W-3, or a detailed listing with the equivalent information.
However, the failure or omission by an employer to deduct the occupational privilege fee shall not relieve
the employee from the payment of the occupational privilege fee and compliance with these regulations
with respect to making returns and payments thereof, as may be fixed in this article or established by the
Director of Finance.
(C) Where an employee receives compensation for personal services rendered or performed partly
within and partly outside the city, the withholding agent shall deduct and withhold that portion of the
compensation which is earned within the city in accordance with the following rules of appointment:
(1) If the obligor is a traveling salesperson, agent or other employee, whose compensation on the basis
of commissions depends directly on the volume of business transacted by him or her, the deducting and
withholding shall attach to the portion of the entire compensation which the volume, of business transacted
by the employee within the city bears to the volume of business transacted by him or her both within and
outside the city.
(2) The deducting and withholding of personal service compensation of all other employees (including
officers of corporation) shall attach to the portion of the personal service compensation of the employee
which the total number of working days employed within the city bears to the total number of working days
employed within and outside the city.

Licenses and Taxation 47
(3) If it is impossible to apportion the earnings as provided above because of the peculiar nature of the
services of the employee or of the unusual basis of compensation, apportionment shall be made in
accordance with the facts and the fee deducted and withheld accordingly. With respect to each such
employee (or group of employees similarly or identically circumstanced) the employer shall furnish the
Director of Finance a detailed statement of facts.
(4) The occasional entry into the city of an employee who performs the duties for which he or she is
employed entirely outside the city, but enters the city for the purpose of reporting, receiving instruction,
accounting and the like, incidental to his or her duties outside the city, shall not be deemed to take such
employee out of the class of those rendering their services entirely outside the city.
(D) An employer is required to withhold the occupational privilege fee on the full amount of any
advances made to an employee on account of commissions where in excess of commissions earned.
(E) An employer, required to withhold the occupational privilege fee (on compensation paid to an
employee) may, in determining the amount on which the fee is to be withheld:
(1) Ignore any amount allowed and paid by the employer to the employee for expenses necessarily and
actually incurred by the employee in the actual performance of his or her services; or
(2) Deduct any amount necessarily incurred and expended by the employee in the actual performance
of his or her services, for which expense he or she has not been and is not to be reimbursed by the
employer; provided that, in either case, the expense must be recognized by the federal and state authorities
for payroll tax purposes and the federal authorities for income tax purposes, and the employee shall furnish
the employer, before the deduction is made, an itemized statement of the expenses claimed.
(F) The employer shall, however on or before February 28 of each year furnish the Director of Finance
a list of employees, in such form as the employer may choose, setting forth the following information in
respect to the preceding calendar year: name, address, gross wages paid and Social Security number of each
employee.
(Ord. passed 9-2-1986; Ord. passed 4-13-1995; Ord. 08-04-1031, passed 4-22-2008)
' 10-81 FILING OF RETURN; PAYMENT OF FEE OR REFUND CLAIM.
(A) Each person subject to the occupation privilege fee imposed by this article and who is
compensated by salaries or wages shall, on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month following the
close of each year, make and file with the Director of Finance a return, in finance, setting forth the
aggregate amount of salaries, wages and other compensation earned during the preceding year, with any
other pertinent information as the Director of Finance may require. However where the entire occupation
privilege fee due and payable under this article has been withheld under the provisions of this article and no
refund is claimed by the feepayer, the Director of Finance may waive the filing of the return by the obligor.
If the fiscal year of the business, profession or other activity differs from the calendar year and
48 Radcliff - Licenses and Taxation
the obligor files state income tax returns for the other fiscal period, the occupational privilege fee shall be
measured by the gross of the fiscal year; and where the return is made for a fiscal year or any other period
different from a calendar year, the return shall be made on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month
following the end of the fiscal year or other period. The return shall also show the amount of the occupation
privilege fee imposed by this article.
(B) The person making the return shall, at the time of filing thereof, pay to the Director of Finance the
amount of occupation privilege fee shown as due thereon. However, where any portion of the occupation
privilege fee due has been deducted at the source, credit for this amount shall be deducted from the amount
shown to be due and only the balance, if any, shall be due and payable at the time of filing of the return. It
shall be the duty of each employer who has deducted the occupation privilege fee from the wages, salaries
or other compensation referred to in this article to furnish the employee a statement showing the amount of
salary earned and occupational privilege fee deducted and paid by the employer during the preceding
calendar year on or before February 15 of each year.
(C) Feepayers who are entitled to deductions for employee expenses provided for in the definition of
Anet annual salaries or wages@ in this article and who have had the occupation privilege fee withheld by the
employer on the basis of gross salary, shall be entitled to file a return, pursuant to this section, setting forth
the expenses. The excess fee withheld over and above actual liability shall be refunded by the Director of
Finance in a reasonable time.
(D) Where there has been an overpayment of occupational fees under ' 10-77 of this article, a refund or
credit shall be made to the employer to the extent of the overpayment only if a written application for
refund or credit is received by the city from the employer within two years from the date of the
overpayment was made.
(E) An employee who has compensation attributable to activities performed outside the city, based on
time spent outside the city, whose employer has withheld and remitted to this city, the occupational license
tax on the compensation attributable to activities performed outside the city, may file for a refund within
two years of the date prescribed by law for the filing of a return. The employee shall provide a schedule and
computation sufficient to verify the refund claim and the city may confirm with the employer the percentage
of time spent outside the city and the amount of compensation attributable to activities performed outside
the city prior to approval of the refund.
(Ord. passed 9-2-1986; Ord. 08-04-1031, passed 4-22-2008)
' 10-82 RETURNS TO BE FILED BY EMPLOYEE.
When a return to form and substance satisfactory to the Director of Finance is not filed by an employer
and the occupational privilege fees are not paid to the city by the employer, the employee for whom no
return has been filed and no payment has been made shall file a return with the Director of Finance on or
before January 31 of each year showing in the return his gross salaries, wages, commissions and other
compensation subject to occupational privilege fees during all or any part of the preceding calendar year.
The return may be made by completing the original copy of the statement
Licenses and Taxation 49
furnished him or her by his or her employer in accordance with this article if the statement shows all of the
salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation earned by him or her, wherever employed, during the
period for which the return is made. If for any reason all occupational privilege fees of a person subject to
the provisions of this article were not withheld by his or her employer, the person shall file the return
required by this section on a form obtainable at the Director of Finance=s office. In addition to the gross
salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation earned by him or her, the return shall show such
other pertinent information as may be required by the Director of Finance. Each person making a return
required by this section shall at the time of filing thereof pay to the Director of Finance the amount of
occupational privilege fee due under this article; provided, however, that, any portion of the occupational
privilege fee deducted at the source shall be deducted on the return and only the balance if any, shall be due
and payable at the time of filing the return. The amount of any occupational privilege fee which was due on
March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31, as provided herein, shall bear interest from the date the
same became due at the rate of 12% per annum until paid, and the employer failing to pay the same when
due shall also pay the penalty imposed under this article.
(Ord. passed 9-2-1986; Ord. 08-04-1031, passed 4-22-2008)
' 10-83 DUTIES OF DIRECTOR OF FINANCE.
(A) Investigative powers. It shall be the duty of the Director of Finance to collect and receive all
occupational privilege fees imposed by this article and to keep records showing the amounts received by
him or her from each employer.
(B) Examination of records.
(1) The Director of Finance or any agent or employee designated in writing by him or her is hereby
authorized to examine the books, papers and records of any employer or supposed employer or any obligor
or supposed obligor, in order to determine the accuracy of any return made, or, if no return was made, to
ascertain the amount of occupational privilege fee imposed by the terms of this article. Each employer, or
supposed employer or, obligor or supposed obligor is hereby directed and required to give to the Director of
Finance or his or her duly authorized agent or employee the means, facilities and opportunity for the
examination and investigation that is hereby authorized.
(2) The Director of Finance is hereby authorized to examine any person under oath concerning any
wages, salaries, commissions or other compensation or gross receipts which were or should have been
returned and, to this end, he or she may compel the production of books, papers, records and the attendance
of all persons before him or her, whether as parties or witnesses, whom he or she believes to have
knowledge of the wages, salaries, commissions or other compensation or gross receipts, to the extent that
any officer empowered to administer oaths in the state is permitted to so order.
(Ord. passed 9-2-1986; Ord. 08-04-1031, passed 4-22-2008)
50 Radcliff - Licenses and Taxation
' 10-84 ENFORCEMENT POWERS OF DIRECTOR OF FINANCE.
(A) The Director of Finance is hereby charged with the enforcement of the provisions of this article
and is hereby empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to any
matter, or thing pertaining to the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article including,
but not limited to, provisions for the reexamination and correction of returns to which an overpayment or
underpayment is claimed or found to have been made. The rules and regulations promulgated by him or her
shall be binding upon the obligor and the employers.
(B) It shall be the duty of the Director of Finance to collect and account for the occupation privilege
fee imposed by this article. He or she shall keep records showing the amount received by him or her from
each obligor and employer and the date of the receipt.
(Ord. passed 9-2-1986; Ord. 08-04-1031, passed 4-22-2008)
' 10-85 CONFIDENTIALLY OF RETURNS, INFORMATION AND THE LIKE.
Any information gained by any official or agent or employee of the city as a result of any returns,
investigations, hearings or verification required or authorized by this article shall be confidential, except for
official purposes and except in accordance with proper judicial order, or as otherwise provided by law. Any
person or agent divulging such information shall, upon conviction, be subject to a Class A misdemeanor.
However, the Director of Finance may disclose to the Commissioner of Revenue of the state or his or her
duly authorized agent such information and give the Commissioner the right to inspect any of the books
and records of the city if the Commissioner of Revenue of the state grants to the Director of Finance the
reciprocal right to obtain information from the files and records of the Department of Revenue of the state
and maintains the privileged character of the information so furnished to him or her.
(Ord. passed 9-2-1986; Ord. 08-04-1031, passed 4-22-2008)
' 10-86 USE OF OCCUPATIONAL PRIVILEGE FEES.
All money derived from fees under the provisions of this article shall be paid to the Director of Finance
and placed to the credit of the General Fund of the city and shall be used and expended for:
(A) Defraying the current, general and incidental expenses of the city; and
(B) For capital improvement.
(Ord. passed 9-2-1986; Ord. 08-04-1031, passed 4-22-2008)
Licenses and Taxation 51
' 10-87 UNLAWFUL IMPOSITION OF OCCUPATIONAL PRIVILEGE FEE.
It is not the intention of the city or of this article to impose and require an occupational privilege fee for
any occupation.
(Ord. passed 9-2-1986; Ord. 08-04-1031, passed 4-22-2008)
' 10-88 UNPAID OCCUPATIONAL PRIVILEGE FEES; INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
All occupational privilege fees imposed by this article remaining unpaid after they become due shall
bear interest at the rate of 12% per annum, and the person from whom the occupational privilege fees are
due shall further be charged a penalty of 1% of the amount of the unpaid occupational privilege fee for each
month the fee remains unpaid. Any employer who fails or refuses to withhold monthly the occupational
privilege fee measured by a percent of salaries, wages and the like or who fails to pay the money, after
withholding the same, to the Director of Finance at the time it is due as provided under the terms of this
article, shall be liable for the amount due, and shall bear interest at the rate of 12% per annum in addition to
which a penalty of 1% of the amount shall be added for each month or fraction of a month the occupational
privilege fees remain unpaid.
(Ord. passed 9-2-1986; Ord. 08-04-1031, passed 4-22-2008)
' 10-89 CRIMINAL PENALTY.
(A) Any person who shall fail, neglect or refuse to make any return as to any occupational privilege fee
required by this article; any employer who shall fail to withhold the occupational privilege fee or pay over
the city the fee so withheld under the terms of this article; any person who shall refuse to permit the
Director of Finance or any agent or employee designated by him or her, in writing, to examine his or her
books, records and papers; any person who shall knowingly make any incomplete, false or fraudulent
return, or any person who shall attempt to do anything whatever to avoid the full disclosure of the amount
of earnings or profits in order to avoid the payment of the whole or any part of the occupational privilege
fee shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor in addition to the occupational privilege fee
due.
(B) The failure of any employer or obligor to receive or procure returns or other forms is not an excuse
for failure to make any return or to pay the occupational privilege fee.
(C) Any person who shall violate this section shall be fined not less than $20, nor more than $500,
and/or 12-months= imprisonment for each offense; a separate offense shall be committed for each day the
violation occurs. Any person violating this article may also be found guilty of a civil offense. The civil fine
shall be not less than $20, nor more than $250. The civil fine shall be paid directly to the city. If the fine is
not paid within 30 days from the date of notification, then the city may recover the fine in
52 Radcliff - Licenses and Taxation
a civil action in a court of proper jurisdiction. The city may also obtain injunctions or abatement orders to
ensure compliance with this article or pursue administrative remedies when appropriate, including
injunctions and abatement proceedings.
(Ord. passed 9-2-1986; Ord. passed 3-16-1993; Ord. 08-04-1031, passed 4-22-2008)
' 10-90 CLAIM FOR REFUND OF OVERPAYMENT.
Any claim for refund of overpayment of occupational privilege fees paid under this article not filed
within one year of the deadline for filing a return for the year in which the fees are claimed to have been
paid, shall be deemed to have been waived.
(Ord. passed 9-2-1986; Ord. passed 7-15-1993; Ord. 08-04-1031, passed 4-22-2008)
ARTICLE VI. TRANSIENT ROOM TAX
' 10-95 ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMISSION; IMPOSITION.
(A) The City Council establishes the ARadcliff Convention and Tourism Commission@ and levies a
transient room tax per KRS 91A.350 and 91A.390.
(B) The imposition and collection of this transient room tax shall be on the day beginning 7-1-1988,
and each day thereafter.
(Ord. passed 3-21-1988; Ord. passed 3-21-1991; Ord. 16-02-1182, passed 4-19-2016)
Cross-reference:
Administration, see Chapter 2
Annual occupation (income) tax, see '' 10-76 et seq.
Editor=s note:
A nonamendatory ordinance of 3-21-1988, '' 1 through 11, amended by ordinance 16-02-1182, '' 1
through 14, has been codified herein as Art.VI, '' 10-95 through 10-107, at the editor=s discretion.
Sections 13 and 14 of said ordinance, pertaining to severability and repeal, respectively, have not been
included.
' 10-96 MONTHLY COLLECTION BY COMMISSION TREASURER; DELINQUENCY
CHARGES.
(A) These transient room tax returns and revenues collected shall be filed and paid to the Treasurer of
the Convention and Tourism Commission no later than the thirtieth day following the previous month in
which the tax was charged and collected. Each entity shall file a return, in duplicate, on the transient tax
forms furnished by the Commission to be authorized, together with the tax due. The tax return form shall be
accompanied by a check for the total amount of the tax and penalties then due.
2017 S-4
Licenses and Taxation 53
(B) Any tax imposed by this article which shall remain unpaid after it becomes due and payable, as set
forth herein, shall have added to it a penalty of 10%, regardless of the period of any delinquency, together
with interest at a rate of 2% for each month of delinquency or fraction thereof, until paid. For example,
taxes to be paid in the sum of $1,00 for a particular month would then result in a tax bill of $100 for the
principal sum of tax, plus $10 for the 10% penalty, plus $24 for 12 months delinquency, totaling to $134, if
the original $100 tax was not paid for a period of 12 months past its due date. The tax imposed by this
article shall be in addition to other general taxes and the occupational privilege fee or business license tax
presently in force.
(Ord. passed 3-21-1988; Ord. passed 2-22-1989; Ord. passed 3-21-1991; Ord. 16-02-1182, passed
4-19-2016)
' 10-97 PERCENTAGE RATE IMPOSED.
The imposition and levy of a transient room tax of 3% of the rent for every occupance of a suite, room
or rooms, charged by all persons, companies, corporations or other like or similar persons, groups or
organizations doing business as motor courts, motels, hotels, inns or like or similar accommodations
businesses, as approved, shall apply to transient guests who occupy a room in motor courts, motels, hotels,
inns or like or similar accommodations businesses. Transient guests are occupants or users of the room(s),
units or similar accommodations of any of the subject businesses, regardless of the period of stay at the
subject establishment.
(Ord. passed 3-21-1988)
' 10-98 COLLECTION AND PAYMENT BY ACCOMMODATIONS BUSINESS
ESTABLISHMENTS.
All persons, companies, corporations or other like or similar persons, groups or organizations doing
business as motor courts, motels, hotels, inns or like or similar accommodations businesses shall collect and
pay the transient room tax as stated above.
(Ord. passed 3-21-1988)
' 10-99 TAXATION OF ROOM AND/OR SPACE CHARGES.
The tax shall be for room and/or space charges only.
(Ord. passed 3-21-1988)
' 10-100 BONDING OF COMMISSION TREASURER OR OFFICER HANDLING FUNDS;
QUARTERLY REPORT.
(A) The Treasurer and any other officer of the Commission writing checks and handling funds shall be
bonded by the city in an amount commensurate to the largest amount of money on hand in any given month.
2017 S-4
54 Radcliff - Licenses and Taxation
(B) The Commission Treasurer shall make an itemized quarterly report to the City Council, showing
expenses and outlays for each month.
(Ord. passed 3-21-1988)
' 10-101 DEPOSITORY DETERMINED BY CITY COUNCIL.
The City Council will determine the depository of the Commission funds.
(Ord. passed 3-21-1988)
' 10-102 COMMISSION TO SUBMIT A REQUEST FOR FUNDS FOR OPERATION.
The Commission shall annually submit to the City Council a request for funds for the operation of the
Commission. The City Council shall include the Commission in the annual budget and shall provide funds
for the operation of the Commission from the transient room tax collected. Money not expended by the
Commission, from the budget approved by the City Council, during any fiscal year shall be used to make up
a part of the Commission=s budget for its next fiscal year per KRS 91A.390.
(Ord. 16-02-1182, passed 4-19-2016)
' 10-103 COUNCIL TO APPROVE COMMISSION=S ISSUING OF REVENUE BONDS AND
BORROWING OF MONEY BEYOND FISCAL YEAR; EFFECTIVE DATE.
(A) The City Council forbids the Commission to issue revenue bonds or to borrow money beyond the
fiscal year, without the express approval of the City Council. Effective 7-1-1988, the fiscal year will begin
July 1 of each year and terminate on June 30 following.
(B) This article will become effective upon publication.
(Ord. passed 3-21-1988; Ord. 16-02-1182, passed 4-19-2016)
' 10-104 COUNCIL TO APPOINT CERTIFIED PUBLIC ACCOUNTANT FOR AUDIT;
ENFORCEMENT IN ABSENCE OF VOLUNTARY COMPLIANCE.
The City Council will name a certified public accountant to make an annual or specific audit. The City
Council shall enforce this article through the Commission in the absence of voluntary compliance and shall
agree in advance with the officers of the Commission on a fee from Commission funds for such a service
when the service is necessary.
(Ord. passed 3-21-1988; Ord. 16-02-1182, passed 4-19-2016)
2017 S-4
Licenses and Taxation 55
' 10-105 COMMISSION TO AUDIT BUSINESSES; TO BRING CIVIL ACTION.
The Commission shall have the privilege of auditing the subject businesses= books for enforcement
purposes. If the transient room tax return is not filed nor paid within 90 days of the due date, the
Commission may bring a civil action to enforce this article.
(Ord. passed 3-21-1988; Ord. passed 2-22-1989; Ord. 16-02-1182, passed 4-19-2016)
' 10-106 COMMISSION TO BRING CRIMINAL ACTION.
Any violation of any section of this article shall be deemed to be a violation of the Kentucky Revised
Statutes and each day of noncompliance or violation shall be considered a separate offense. This criminal
violation shall be in addition to any other civil remedies available to the city.
(Ord. passed 2-22-1989)
' 10-107 COMMISSION MEMBERSHIP DETERMINED BY LAW.
Membership in the Convention and Tourism Commission shall be determined in accordance with KRS
91A.360 and all other relevant and appropriate statutes and laws.
(Ord. passed 3-21-1988; Ord. passed 2-22-1989; Ord. passed 3-21-1991; Ord. 16-02-1182, passed
4-19-2016)
2017 S-4
56 Radcliff - Licenses and Taxation
CHAPTER 11: MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
1
2 Radcliff - Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks
CHAPTER 11: MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
Section
11-1. Reserved
11-2. Reserved
11-3. Manufactured homes must be habitable
11-4. Manufactured home installation
 11-1 RESERVED.
 11-2 RESERVED.
 11-3 MANUFACTURED HOMES MUST BE HABITABLE.
As of this date, no manufactured home shall be brought into a manufactured home park or placed
on a single lot within the city limits unless the home has been certified habitable and a Class B1 seal
affixed as described in KRS 227.600.
(Ord. passed 5-9-2005)
 11-4 MANUFACTURED HOME INSTALLATION.
All manufactured homes shall be installed by a certified installer as required by KRS 227.570(3).
(Ord. passed 5-9-2005)
3
4 Radcliff - Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks
CHAPTER 12: MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
1
2 Radcliff - Motor Vehicles and Traffic
CHAPTER 12: MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Section
Article I. In General
12-1. Traffic-control signs, signals and the like
12-2. Authority to regulate
Article II. Operation Generally
12-16. Regulation of one-way traffic
Article III. Parking, Stopping and Standing
12-27. General parking regulations
12-28. Parking in fire lanes
12-29. Regulation of parking for the handicapped
12-30. Reserved
12-31. Regulation of roadblocks for charitable solicitations
12-32. Unattended vehicles; locking and braking
12-33. Skating and coasting; obstructions to the flow of traffic
12-34. Parking on off-street facility
12-35. Parking in parks
12-36. Obstructional parking, double parking
12-36.1. Parking on easements and rights-of-way
12-37. Penalty for violation of  12-32 and 12-34 through 12-36
12-38. Uniform citation
12-39. Prepayment of fines
Cross-reference:
Streets and Sidewalks, Chapter 18
Editors note:
For the convenience of the user, and to more accurately classify the provisions included in this
chapter, the editor has added article heads and, in addition to including ordinances adopted
5-16-1978, 10-16-1979 and 11-20-1979, none of which were amendatory of the Code, has
renumbered the existing provisions of Chapter 12 as follows: Former number: 12-1, new
number:
12-28; former number 12-2, new number 12-30; former number 12-3, new number 12-1.
Statutory reference:
Motor vehicles and traffic, see KRS 186 through 190
3
4 Radcliff - Motor Vehicles and Traffic
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 12-1 TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNS, SIGNALS AND THE LIKE.
The existence and location of every traffic-control sign, signal, device or marking in the city as of
the adoption date of this code, is hereby ratified and shall be considered to have been authorized by the
Mayor and Council.
 12-2 AUTHORITY TO REGULATE.
The City Council hereby delegates to the Mayor, upon recommendation by the Chief of Police, the
power to determine the existence and location of every traffic-control sign, signal, device or marking,
and the power to determine the speed limit on all city streets, in the city. The Mayor shall enter an
executive order when any such designation, location or speed limit is determined. The recommendation
of the Chief of Police to the Mayor shall be in writing and shall contain the reasons for the
recommendation.
(Ord. passed 2-19-1991)
ARTICLE II. OPERATION GENERALLY
 12-16 REGULATION OF ONE-WAY TRAFFIC.
(A) Authorized. There may be established, by proper motion and vote at a meeting of the City
Council, a public way or ways upon which all vehicular traffic shall be required to travel in one
direction (one-way).
(B) Marked. Upon establishment of a one-way public way, the public way shall be conspicuously
marked in such manner as to give the public making use of the public way reasonable notice that all
traffic is one-way, and shall include notice prohibiting entrance onto the public way from the wrong
direction.
(C) Penalty. On and after completion of divisions (A) and (B) above, there shall be a penalty for
each violation of not less than $10, but not more than $100, for each violation.
(D) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
PUBLIC WAY. Any public area dedicated and/or used for ingress, egress and/or for
movement of vehicular traffic.
Motor Vehicles and Traffic 5
VEHICULAR TRAFFIC. All agencies for the transportation of person(s) or property over or
upon a public street within the city which are propelled otherwise than by muscular power.
(Ord. passed 10-16-1979)
ARTICLE III. PARKING, STOPPING AND STANDING
 12-27 GENERAL PARKING REGULATIONS.
(A) Authority to regulate. The City Council hereby delegates to the Mayor, upon recommendation
by the Chief of Police and Fire Chief, what streets may be added and deleted, or parts thereof, upon
which parking may be prohibited or allowed according to the requirements of this article. The Mayor
shall enter an executive order when any such prohibition against parking is allowed on any city streets
or parts thereof. The recommendation of the Chief of Police and Fire Chief to the Mayor shall be in
writing and shall contain the reasons for the recommendation.
(B) Definitions; designation.
(1) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
STOP, STOPPING or STANDING. When prohibited, any stopping or standing of a
vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with directions of a police officer or traffic-control sign or signal.
VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway or street, except devices moved by human power.
(2) Designation. The Mayor, by executive order, shall designate any street on which parking
is prohibited as to whether the parking is prohibited on the traveled portion of the street or whether the
parking is prohibited on the entire right-of-way. The designation of no-parking areas by signs shall be
printed as follows: NO PARKING ON PAVEMENT or NO PARKING ON PAVEMENT AND
RIGHT-OF-WAY.
(C) Places where parking prohibited. At any time, it shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to
stop, stand or park in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic signal device:
(1) On a sidewalk;
(2) In front of a public or private driveway;
6 Radcliff - Motor Vehicles and Traffic
(3) Within an intersection;
(4) At any curb within ten feet of a fire hydrant;
(5) On a crosswalk;
(6) Within 25 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
(7) Within 30 feet of a traffic signal; and
(8) At any place where official signs prohibit stopping, standing or parking.
(D) Designation of no-parking areas. Except as provided in divisions (C)(1) through (7) above,
whenever parking is prohibited on designated streets in areas of the city, the City Council shall cause
the erection of appropriate signs giving notice thereof or by the placing of yellow lines thereat; and no
such regulation shall be effective unless the signs are erected and in place or the yellow lines are in
place at the time of any alleged offense.
(E) Parking to make repairs regulated. No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway or street
for the purpose of repairing or maintaining the vehicle except when repairs are necessitated by an
emergency.
(F) Parking of semitractors, semitrailers and trucks exceeding five tons.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to park any semitractor, semitrailer or truck exceeding
five tons on any public street right-of-way.
(2) The public street right-of-way shall include the entire width between the boundary lines
of every way publicly maintained, including the shoulders of the road and any grassy areas that may be
within the public right-of-way, when any part of that public street or right-of-way is open to use by the
public for purposes of vehicular traffic as a matter of right.
(3) The parking prohibitions of this section shall not apply to service or delivery vehicles
which are being used to provide services or make deliveries or for the purpose of delivering materials
to be used in the repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure for which a
building permit has been obtained.
(G) Penalty for violation of section. Each violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of
not less than $20, nor more than $250, for each offense. Any person violating this section may also be
found guilty of a civil offense. The civil fine shall be not less than $20, nor more than $250. The civil
fine shall be paid directly to the city. If the fine is not paid within 30 days from the date of notification,
Motor Vehicles and Traffic 7
then the city may recover the fine in a civil action in a court of proper jurisdiction. The city may also
obtain injunctions or abatement orders to ensure compliance with this section or pursue administrative
remedies when appropriate, including injunctions and abatement proceedings.
(Ord. passed 3-16-1993)
 12-28 PARKING IN FIRE LANES.
(A) No person shall park a vehicle of any kind in an area which has been designated as a fire lane
as hereinafter provided.
(B) The owners and occupants of any shopping center wishing to have fire lanes designated in the
parking area of the shopping area and wishing to have this section apply shall submit to the City Clerk
for approval by the Chief of Police and Fire Chief, a map of the parking area clearly showing the
parking spaces, thoroughfares, the areas to be designated as fire lanes and the number of signs needed.
(C) Upon approval of the map by the Chief of Police and the Fire Chief, the owner or occupant
shall install the required amount of striping and number of signs stating the following information near
the designated fire lanes.
(1) Curbs shall be identified by a six-inch wide yellow paint stripe on the top and side.
(2) Rolled curbs shall be identified by a six-inch wide yellow stripe on the top.
(3) Roads with no curbs shall be identified by a six-inch wide yellow stripe.
(4) The markings on the ground shall be as follows: The words NO PARKING  FIRE
LANE shall be at least 18 inches tall in yellow paint with a three-inch stroke and placed eight inches
as measured perpendicular to the yellow paint stripe. There shall be an eight-inch stripe both above and
below the words NO PARKING  FIRE LANE. The total depth of the fire lane markings to include
lines and letters shall be eight feet. Diagrams may be obtained from the Fire Department.
(5) Highway grade metal (aluminum) signs that read NO PARKING FIRE LANE shall be
located at 50- to 75-foot intervals. Signs shall be a minimum of 12 inches wide by 18 inches tall with
red letters on a white background. Posts for support can be either two-inch galvanized metal or four by
four treated wood. The bottom of the sign shall be a minimum of seven feet above the curb. Signs shall
be installed nominally parallel to the road, facing the direction of travel. Where signs are adjacent to
buildings, the Fire Official may allow an alternate means of placement. Diagrams may be obtained
from the Radcliff Police Department.
(D) Any person guilty of violating division (A) above after the proper signs have been installed
shall be fined not more than $100.
8 Radcliff - Motor Vehicles and Traffic
(E) The Police Department is hereby authorized to have vehicles parking in fire lanes in violation
of this section towed away and impounded at the owners expense.
(Ord. passed 12-19-1973; Ord. passed 7-25-1990; Ord. 08-03-1025, passed 3-10-2008)
 12-29 REGULATION OF PARKING FOR THE HANDICAPPED.
(A) Tag required. It shall be unlawful for any person, or agent thereof, to park a motor or other
vehicle in any parking space in the city designated for use by the handicapped or reserved for
handicapped persons, unless the vehicle shall have procured a handicapped car license tag from the
commonwealth or any other state and unless the vehicle being parked had been occupied by a
handicapped person. The absence of any such license tags shall be prima facie evidence of a violation.
(B) Violations to be reported. The owner, occupant or operator of any facility whose parking lot
contains a handicapped parking space shall report violations of this section to the Police Department,
which shall, upon the reports or upon their its observation, issue appropriate citations.
(C) Impounding of illegally parked vehicles. Any vehicle in violation shall be withdrawn from that
parking space and transported to any local garage, service station or detaining facility. An owner or
driver may redeem his or her vehicle by paying towing and storage charges and any fines or fees
levied.
(D) Penalty for violation of section. Each violation of this section shall be deemed a violation,
misdemeanor, and upon conviction, the violator shall be fined not less than $20, nor more than $250,
for each offense plus court costs. Any person violating this section may also be found guilty of a civil
offense. The civil fine shall be not less than $20, nor more than $250. The civil fine shall be paid
directly to the city. If the fine is not paid within 30 days from the date of notification, then the city may
recover the fine in a civil action in a court of proper jurisdiction. The city may also obtain injunctions
or abatement orders to ensure compliance with this section or pursue administrative remedies when
appropriate, including injunctions and abatement proceedings.
(Ord. passed 3-16-1993; Ord. 07-10-1021, passed 10-16-2007)
 12-30 RESERVED.
 12-31 REGULATION OF ROADBLOCKS FOR CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS.
(A) Permit required. No person, firm, corporation or charitable organization shall conduct
solicitations on the streets of the city or state highways within the city limits without first applying for
and obtaining a permit from the Chief of Police.
(B) Application for permit. An application for the solicitation permit shall be delivered to the
Police Department at least seven days prior to the solicitation activity and will be accompanied by a fee
payment of $10.
Motor Vehicles and Traffic 9
(C) Contents of application. The application or request shall specify the times, dates, locations and
mode of solicitation desired and the charitable purpose benefitted.
(D) Right to appeal denial of permit. The applicant may appeal any denial by the Chief of Police
of a permit to the Mayor and thereafter to the City Council.
(E) Police Chief designated enforcing officer. The Chief of Police shall be the agent of the City
Council in establishing reasonable requirements in each case as to locations, times, dates and methods
to be used by solicitors. These limitations may include requirements for special clothing easily
observable or additional emergency lighting to alert the public and will be set out in writing in the
permit issued.
(F) Penalty for violation of section. Any such solicitation upon the streets of the city without a
permit as provided for herein shall be a violation and, upon conviction therefor, a penalty of not more
than $50 may be imposed.
(Ord. passed 11-20-1979; Ord. passed 7-25-1990)
 12-32 UNATTENDED VEHICLES; LOCKING AND BRAKING.
It shall be unlawful for any person driving, or in charge of a motor vehicle, to permit it to stand
unattended without stopping the engine, locking the ignition, and removing the key, or when standing
on any perceptible grade without setting the brake thereon and turning the front wheels to the curb.
(Ord. passed 7-25-1990)
 12-33 SKATING AND COASTING; OBSTRUCTIONS TO THE FLOW OF TRAFFIC.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person on skates or riding on a coaster, skateboard or sled, or toy
vehicle of any kind, to go on any roadway except at a crosswalk.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to place any obstruction (ramps, bridges, basketball goals,
barrels, cones, ropes, chains and the like) that obstructs, or causes to be obstructed, the flow of traffic
on any public way within the city, either during the day or night, except those items required to ensure
safety during construction or maintenance of the public way unless excepted by the Chief of Police,
Police Department. A written copy of the exception will be provided to the Mayor and to the Planning
Department Director and will be filed in the appropriate street file.
(C) It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian having legal custody of a minor to allow the
minor to engage in any activity on any public way with the city that obstructs, or causes to be
obstructed, the flow of traffic on any public way within the city, either during the day or night, and
endangers the well being of the minor or the operator of, or passengers in, a motor vehicle on any
public way.
10 Radcliff - Motor Vehicles and Traffic
(D) A police officer upon finding or being notified of any minor in or upon any public assembly,
building, place, parking lot, street or highway reasonably believed to be in violation of this section,
shall follow the duties of a police officer set forth in KRS 610.200 through 610.280 which governs the
taking or receiving of a child into custody on a charge of committing an offense. All other provisions
of the states Unified Juvenile Code shall apply.
(E) Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent
offenders age and reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an
arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that,
based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in division (C) above is present.
(F) A police officer upon finding or being notified of any minor in or upon any public assembly,
building, place, parking lot, street or highway, whose parent is believed to be in violation of this
section shall confront the minor and request such information as his or her name, age, address of his or
her parent or legal guardian.
(G) Violation by a minor of the provisions of  12-33 shall constitute a public offense as
contemplated in the provisions of KRS 635.10 et seq. and a complaint filed against a minor for such a
violation shall be proceeded against in accordance with the provisions of KRS 635.010, 635.020,
635.060, 635.070, 635.080, 635.085 and 635.100.
(H) Any parent or guardian violating this section shall be subject to a fine of no more than $500 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months or both. Any parent or guardian violating this  14-
9 may also be found guilty of a civil offense. The civil fine shall not be more than $500. The civil fine
shall be paid directly to the city. If the fine is not paid within 30 days of notification, then the city may
recover the fine in a civil action in a court of proper jurisdiction. The city may also obtain injunctions
or abatement orders to ensure compliance with this section or pursue administrative remedies when
appropriate, including abatement proceedings.
(I) A person who violates a provision of this chapter is guilty of a separate offense for each day
or part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued or permitted.
(J) Violation of  12-32, 12-34, 12-35 and 12-36 shall be deemed a violation and, upon
conviction, the violator shall be fined not more than $50.
(Ord. passed 7-25-1990; Ord. passed 8-23-1994; Ord. passed 8-12-2002)
 12-34 PARKING ON OFF-STREET FACILITY.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of a motor vehicle to park or abandon the vehicle or drive on or
otherwise trespass on anothers property, or on an area developed as an off-street parking facility,
without the consent of the owner, lessee or person in charge of any such property or facility. If at any
time a vehicle is parked, abandoned or otherwise trespasses in violation of the provisions of this
section,
Motor Vehicles and Traffic 11
a warrant may be obtained in district court by the owner, lessee or person in charge of the property or
facility, and the police division, or law enforcement officer as authorized by the city on written
complaint of the owner, lessee or person in charge, shall remove or cause to be removed, the vehicle.
(Ord. passed 7-25-1990)
 12-35 PARKING IN PARKS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle in or on any section of any public
park, playground, plat lot or tot lot within the city not designed as a parking area or designed and
regularly maintained as a roadway. However, nothing contained in this section shall be construed as
prohibiting the parking of a motor vehicle parallel to a designated and regularly maintained roadway in
any such park or playground where at least two wheels of the motor vehicle are resting on the roadway.
(Ord. passed 7-25-1990)
 12-36 OBSTRUCTIONAL PARKING, DOUBLE PARKING.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any commercial or industrial vehicle or any other
thing that may be a nuisance, obstruction or hindrance in or on any public way within the city, either
during the day or night, except while the vehicle is being loaded or unloaded and the loading or
unloading operation is actually taking place, or while the cab of the vehicle is occupied by the driver
thereof.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to stop or park any vehicle on the roadway side of any
other vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street.
(Ord. passed 7-25-1990)
 12-36.1 PARKING ON EASEMENTS AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
(A) (1) Parking any motor vehicle in or on any section of any public easement or right-of-way
not designed as a parking area or designed and regularly maintained as a roadway that results in
damage to said easement or right-of-way shall be unlawful.
(2) Any vehicle in violation shall be withdrawn from that parking space and transported to
any local garage, service station or detaining facility. An owner or driver may redeem his or her vehicle
by paying towing and storage charges and any fines or fees levied.
(B) Each violation of this section shall be deemed a violation misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
the violator shall be fined not less than $20, nor more than $250 for each offense plus court costs. Any
person violating this section may also be found guilty of a civil offense. The civil fine shall be not less
than $20, nor more than $250. The civil fine shall be paid directly to the city. If the fine is not paid
12 Radcliff - Motor Vehicles and Traffic
within 30 days from the date of notification, then the city may recover the fine in a civil action in a
court of proper jurisdiction. The city may also obtain injunctions or abatement orders to ensure
compliance with this section or pursue administrative remedies when appropriate, including injunctions
and abatement proceedings.
(Ord. 07-10-1021, passed 10-16-2007)
 12-37 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF  12-32 AND 12-34 THROUGH 12-36.
Violation of  12-32 through 12-36 shall be deemed a violation and, upon conviction, the violator
shall be fined not more than $50.
(Ord. passed 7-25-1990)
 12-38 UNIFORM CITATION.
(A) The Police Department shall design, print and distribute to all law enforcement officers in the
city a uniform citation.
(B) The Police Department shall maintain a system of accountability on all citations issued to
assure that the citations are not wrongfully destroyed, tampered with or otherwise compromised in any
manner. The citations shall be serially numbered in such a manner that the year of the issue and the
individual citation number may be readily ascertained.
(C) All police officers shall use the uniform citations for all violations outlined in this article.
(Ord. passed 7-25-1990)
 12-39 PREPAYMENT OF FINES.
(A) All violations under this article are designated as subject to prepayment and may be prepaid
by the violator subject to the terms and conditions as approved by the City Council.
(B) An offense which is designated as subject to prepayment is subject to the following
conditions:
(1) Designation as subject to prepayment does not preclude a physical arrest by a police
officer for that offense if it is an offense for which the violator can be arrested;
(2) Designation as subject to prepayment does not preclude a requirement that the defendant
make a court appearance when so indicated on a uniform citation;
Motor Vehicles and Traffic 13
(3) For any offense designated as subject to prepayment, the defendant may elect to pay the
minimum fine for the offense to the city without appearing in court and without paying court costs if
the officer issuing the citation has not required the defendant to make a court appearance on the
citation. If the defendant elects not to pay the minimum fine for the offense, then the defendant must
appear in the proper court;
(4) Prepayment of the fine as shown on the citation or accompanying schedule shall be
considered as a plea of guilty to all purposes; and
(5) The City Council shall approve the amount of prepayment of all fines after a
recommendation is submitted to the City Council by the Chief of Police for all fines that may be
prepaid.
(Ord. passed 7-25-1990)
14 Radcliff - Motor Vehicles and Traffic
CHAPTER 13: NUISANCES
1
2 Radcliff - Nuisances
CHAPTER 13: NUISANCES
Section
Article I. Nuisances
13-1. Definition
13-2. Illustrative enumeration
13-3. Prohibited
13-4. Notice to abate
13-5. Contents of notice
13-6. Service of notice
13-7. Abatement by city
13-8. City=s costs declared lien
13-9. Penalty
Article II. The Prohibition Against Noise Pollution in the City
13-10. Noise pollution
13-11. Definitions
13-12. Unlawful conduct
13-13. Standards for noise pollution
13-14. Exemptions
13-15. Penalties
Article III. Rules and Regulations for City Parks and Facilities
13-26. Rules and regulations for city parks and facilities
13-26(b). Reserved
13-27. Penalties
Article IV. Registration Required of Foreclosed and Certain Vacant Residential Properties
13-30. Purpose
13-31. Definitions
13-32. Registration
13-33. Maintenance
13-34. Enforcement
3
2017 S-5
4 Radcliff - Nuisances
ARTICLE I. NUISANCES
' 13-1 DEFINITION.
For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning.
BOAT. Any vehicle designed for travel on water.
MOTOR VEHICLE. Any vehicle (such as a car, truck or motorcycled that is powered by a motor.
NUISANCE. Any person doing an unlawful act, or omitting to perform a duty, or suffering or
permitting any condition or thing to be or exist, which act, omission, condition or thing either:
(1) Injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others;
(2) Offends decency;
(3) Is offensive to the senses;
(4) Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct or renders dangerous for passage any
public or private street, highway, sidewalk, stream, ditch or drainage;
(5) In any way renders other persons insecure in life or the use of property; or
(6) Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property or tends to
depreciate the value of the property of others.
TRAILER. Any vehicle without motive power, designed to be towed by a motor vehicle but not
designed for human occupancy and which may include a utility trailer, boat trailer, or horse trailer.
(Ord. 17-09-1209, passed 9-19-2017)
' 13-2 ILLUSTRATIVE ENUMERATION.
The maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving or permitting to be or remain on any public or
private property of any of the following items, conditions or actions are hereby declared to be and constitute
a nuisance; provided, however, this enumeration shall not be deemed or construed to be conclusive,
limiting or restrictive:
(A) Noxious weeds and other rank vegetation;
2017 S-5
Nuisances 5
(B) Accumulation of rubbish, trash, refuse, junk and other abandoned materials, metals, lumber or
other things, and the storage of motor vehicles in an inoperative condition, motor vehicles unfit for further
use, automobile parts or scrap metal within the city limits except on premises authorized by the city for
such purposes;
(C) Any condition which provides harborage for rats, mice, snakes and other vermin;
(D) Any building or other structure including any mobile or manufactured home which is in such a
dilapidated condition that it is unfit for human habitation, or kept in such an unsanitary condition that it is a
menace to the health of people residing in the vicinity thereof, or presents a more than ordinarily dangerous
fire hazard in the vicinity where it is located. The absence of the Class B1 seal shall be prima facie proof
that the mobile or manufactured home is uninhabitable;
(E) All unnecessary or unauthorized noises and annoying vibrations, including animal noises;
(F) All disagreeable or obnoxious odors and stenches, as well as the conditions, substances or other
causes which give rise to the emission or generation of the odors and stenches;
(G) The carcasses of animals or fowl not disposed of within a reasonable time after death;
(H) The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or body of water by sewage, dead
animals, creamery, industrial wastes or other substances;
(I) Any building, structure or other place or location where any activity which is in violation of local,
state or federal law is conducted, performed or maintained;
(J) Any accumulation of stagnant water permitted or maintained on any lot or piece of ground;
(K) Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, soot or cinders, in unreasonable quantities; and
(L) Any dead trees on or near a public right-of-way.
(M) Parking of motor vehicles, boats, and trailers in the front yard of private residential property must
be located on paved driveways or parking lots. Parking will be permitted in the side yard next to residence,
as long as it is supported by a hard surface and doesn't become a nuisance. A drip pan must be placed
underneath motor areas to catch any hazards from contaminating soil and water ways.
(Ord. passed 5-9-2005; Ord. 17-09-1209, passed 9-19-2017)
Cross-reference:
Animals and Fowl, see Chapter 3
Building, Fire, Housing and Safety Standards, see Chapter 4
Explosives and Blasting, see Chapter 7
Garbage and Trash, see Chapter 8
Health Clubs, Massage Salons and the Like, see Chapter 9
2017 S-5
6 Radcliff - Nuisances
' 13-3 PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit, maintain or allow the creation or maintenance of a
nuisance.
' 13-4 NOTICE TO ABATE.
Whenever a nuisance is found to exist within the city or within the city=s extraterritorial jurisdiction,
the City Inspector or some other duly designated officer of the city shall give five days= written notice to the
owner or occupant of the property upon which the nuisance exists or upon the person causing or
maintaining the nuisance.
' 13-5 CONTENTS OF NOTICE.
The notice to abate a nuisance issued under the provisions of this chapter shall contain:
(A) An order to abate the nuisance or to request a hearing within a stated time, which shall be
reasonable under the circumstances;
(B) The location of the nuisance, if the same is stationary;
(C) A description of what constitutes the nuisance;
(D) A statement of acts necessary to abate the nuisance; and
(E) A statement that if the nuisance is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made within
the prescribed time, the city will abate the nuisance and assess the cost thereof against the person.
' 13-6 SERVICE OF NOTICE.
The notice to abate a nuisance shall be served as any other legal process may be served pursuant to law.
' 13-7 ABATEMENT BY CITY.
Upon the failure of the person upon whom notice to abate a nuisance was served pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter to abate the same, the City Inspector or other duly-designated officer of the city
shall proceed to abate the nuisance and shall prepare a statement of costs incurred in the abatement thereof.
2017 S-5
Nuisances 7
' 13-8 CITY=S COSTS DECLARED LIEN.
Any and all costs incurred by the city in the abatement of a nuisance under the provisions of this
chapter shall constitute a lien against the property upon which the nuisance existed, which lien shall be
filed, proven and collected as provided for by law. The lien shall be notice to all persons from the time of
its recording and shall bear interest at the legal rate thereafter until satisfied.
' 13-9 PENALTY.
In addition to the right of the city to abate the nuisance or nuisances, whoever violates any provision of
this chapter shall be fined not less than $20, nor more than $250, for each offense; a separate offense shall
be committed for each day the violation occurs. The citation for a violation shall only be issued after the
individual has not abated the nuisance and the administrative process of abatement has been completed by
the city. Any person violating this article may also be found guilty of a civil offense. The civil fine shall be
not less than $20, nor more than $250. The civil fine shall be paid directly to the city. If the fine is not paid
within 30 days from the date of notification, then the city may recover the fine in a civil action in a court of
proper jurisdiction. The city may also obtain injunctions or abatement orders to ensure compliance with this
article or pursue administrative remedies when appropriate, including injunctions and abatement
proceedings.
(Ord. passed 3-16-1993)
ARTICLE II. THE PROHIBITION AGAINST NOISE POLLUTION IN THE CITY
' 13-10 NOISE POLLUTION.
Unreasonably loud, harsh or excessive noise is a hazard to the public health and welfare and the quality
of life in the city. Each city citizen has the right to an environment free from noise that jeopardizes one=s
health or welfare or degrades the quality of life or lowers property values. It is the policy of the City
Council to promote and protect the environment for all people free from noise that unnecessarily
jeopardizes the citizenry=s health or welfare, degrades the quality of life and lowers property values.
8 Radcliff - Nuisances
' 13-11 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning.
CONSTRUCTION OR DEMOLITION ACTIVITY. The erection (including excavation), demolition,
alteration or repair of any building, structure or roadway, or any utility related construction, for which all
necessary and proper governmental permits have been obtained.
HIGHWAY. Any road, street, avenue, alley, boulevard, lane, court or bridge, viaduct or trestle and the
approaches to them.
NOISE. The intensity, frequency, duration and character of sound or sounds from a source or sources.
PARKING LOTS. Any off-street parking facility for public use, and the approaches to same, whether
publicly or privately owned, and shall include, but not be limited to: Parks, shopping centers, restaurants,
entertainment centers, car washes, banking or financial institutions, whether publicly or privately owned,
operated or controlled.
PERSON. Any person, firm, association, partnership, joint venture, corporation or any private entity of
any nature.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE. Capable of being distinctly heard by a person with normal hearing:
(1) A danger warning with a horn or other audible signaling device; or
(2) The preservation or protection of property or the life, safety or welfare of a person or persons
by use of an audible signaling device.
ROADWAY. The portion of the highway designed for ordinary use for vehicular travel, including the
berm, shoulder or any public property adjacent thereto.
UNREASONABLE PERIOD OF TIME. A period of time in excess of that necessary to accomplish.
UNREASONABLY LOUD, HARSH OR EXCESSIVE NOISE. Any noise plainly audible at a
distance of 50 feet from its point of origination or emanation.
VEHICLE. Any machine or device in, on or by which, any person or property is or may be transported
or drawn on any highway, roadway or parking lot.
Nuisances 9
' 13-12 UNLAWFUL CONDUCT.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to make, continue or cause to be made or
continued, any unreasonably loud, harsh, excessive or unnecessary or unusual noise which either annoys,
disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others unless the making and
continuing of the noise is necessary for the protection or preservation of property or the life, health or safety
of a person or persons.
(B) The following acts are hereby declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation
of this article, but the enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
(1) The sounding of any horn or other such audible signaling device on any automobile,
motorcycle or other vehicle on any highway, roadway, parking lot or other public place, except as a danger
warning, for an unreasonable period of time;
(2) The use or operation of any radio, stereo or other machine or device for the producing,
reproducing or amplification of sound in any vehicle in such a manner as to create an unreasonably loud,
harsh or excessive noise, that disturbs the peace, quiet or comfort of others;
(3) The use or operation of, or allowing the use or operation of, any radio receiving set, musical
instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a
manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of others by creating or allowing a louder volume than is
necessary for the convenient hearing of the person or persons who are voluntarily in the room, chamber or
vehicle in which any above described machine, device or musical instrument is located. The operation of
any such machine, device or musical instrument between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a
manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is
located, shall be prima facia evidence of a violation of this section;
(4) Use or operate any vehicle on any highway, roadway or parking lot in such a manner as to
produce any unreasonably loud, harsh or excessive noise, or to discharge into the open air the exhaust of
any vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises
therefrom;
(5) Create any unreasonably loud, harsh or excessive noise in connection with the loading or
unloading of any vehicle, or by the operation of any such vehicle; and
(6) Use any mechanical loud speaker, amplifier, sound system, stereo or radio on any moving or
standing vehicle for advertising, entertainment or any other purpose, in such a manner as to create an
unreasonably loud, harsh or excessive noise.
10 Radcliff - Nuisances
' 13-13 STANDARDS FOR NOISE POLLUTION.
The standards which shall be considered in determining whether a violation hereof exists shall include,
but not be limited to, the following:
(A) The volume of the noise;
(B) The intensity of the noise;
(C) Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual;
(D) The volume and intensity of background noise, if any;
(E) The proximity of the noise to a residential area or place of public accommodation such as a hotel,
motel, inn, campground and the like;
(F) The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates;
(G) The density of inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates;
(H) The time of day or night the noise occurs;
(I) The duration of the noise; and
(J) Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant.
' 13-14 EXEMPTIONS.
The following uses and activities shall be exempt herefrom:
(A) Noises originating or emanating from safety signals, warning devices and emergency pressure
relief valves;
(B) Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle or law enforcement training facilities;
(C) Noises resulting from construction or demolition activity;
(D) Noises from the use of farm machinery, lawn mowers or other machinery properly muffled utilized
for agricultural or landscaping purposes;
(E) Noises originating or emanating from religious activities, public recreational facilities such as, but
not limited to, fairgrounds, sport arenas, sports stadiums, amusement parks and other public amusement
establishments; and
Nuisances 11
(F) The operation of any aircraft in conformity with, or pursuant to, federal law, federal air regulations
and/or air traffic control instructions.
' 13-15 PENALTIES.
Any person violating this article shall be fined in an amount not less than $20, nor more than $250.
Each day the violation is continued shall constitute a separate offense. Any person violating this article may
also be found guilty of a civil offense. The civil fine shall be not less than $20, nor more than $250. The
civil fine shall be paid directly to the city. If the fine is not paid within 30 days from the date of notification,
then the city may recover the fine in a civil action in a court of proper jurisdiction. The city may also obtain
injunctions or abatement orders to ensure compliance with this article or pursue administrative remedies
when appropriate, including injunctions and abatement proceedings.
(Ord. passed 8-9-1993)
Cross-reference:
Motor Vehicles and Traffic, see Chapter 12
ARTICLE III. RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR CITY PARKS AND FACILITIES
' 13-26 RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR CITY PARKS AND FACILITIES.
As a measure to promote the general health, education and welfare of the citizens of the city, the
following rules and regulations for various city recreational parks, facilities and Saunders Springs Nature
Preserve are herein adopted:
(A) No alcoholic beverages will be allowed on city property except under the following circumstances.
For Colvin Community Center:
(1) The entire Colvin Community Center facility must be rented by the party wishing to have
alcohol at their event;
(2) All Colvin Community Center rental contract requirements must be adhered to and followed;
(3) Events at which alcohol is being given away must be private occasions not open to the public;
2015 S-2 Repl.
12 Radcliff - Nuisances
(4) All appropriate state and local licenses and permits (i.e., business licenses, ABC licenses, and
the like) must be obtained, where applicable;
(5) Alcoholic beverages can only be brought in, sold or distributed by a state and locally licensed
caterer;
(6) Proof must be provided that those who sell and serve alcohol have received the proper
training and are age appropriate;
(7) The renting party must execute prior to its event being approved a Waiver of Liability and
Indemnification for the benefit of the city;
(8) Events must have liability insurance coverage with the city as a named insured;
(9) No later than 60 days prior to the planned event, a security plan must be submitted by the
renting party for the event to the city; the event will not be permitted without the approval of the security
plan by the City Police Department;
(10) No later than 60 days prior to the planned event, an alcoholic beverage sale and serving plan
must be submitted by the renting party for the event to the city. The event will not be permitted without the
approval of the alcoholic beverage sale and serving plan by the city;
(11) Events shall not be allowed to charge a cover charge or admission fee unless the renting party
is a non-profit tax exempt entity under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code as amended or other
applicable law;
(12) The city alone may, under special temporary licenses, serve malted alcoholic beverages, wine
and distilled spirits at city-owned parks, real property, and facilities, with said alcoholic beverages being
served by all persona authorized by law, during any city-sponsored or city-organized event, fair, exposition,
party, festival, reception, or other similar occasion.
(B) No smokeless tobacco usage of any kind will be allowed in the city parks or Saunders Springs
Nature Preserve. However, tobacco smoking will be allowed only in designated areas, and the city shall
post conspicuous signs giving notice to the public where smoking is permitted.
(C) No animals shall be allowed except for a service animal used by an individual with a disability
under the control of the animal=s handler by harness, leash, tether, or other effective means of control.
(D) No climbing on any fences located in the city parks;
(E) No disorderly conduct;
2015 S-2 Repl.
Nuisances 13
(F) No profanity;
(G) No skate boarding or skating, except in Radcliff City Park North located on U.S. 31-W in
designated skateboard area;
(H) No bike riding;
(I) No ball playing or warming up in the parking areas;
(J) No music during ball games;
(K) No loud music allowed in city parks at any time;
(L) All vehicles must be parked in designated parking areas only. Vehicles/riding devices are not
permitted in grass areas. Vehicles may not be left overnight;
(M) There shall be no blocking of the flow of traffic or entrance or exits to/from parking areas;
(N) No fireworks;
(O) No fires except in grills except at Dawley Park or Radcliff City Park North and only in designated
areas. There shall be no open fires except on grills which must be extinguished after their use. Fires may
not be left unattended;
(P) Trash must be deposited into the trash barrels located throughout the parks;
(Q) No destruction of vegetation;
(R) Children are not to be left unattended;
(S) Destruction or theft of city property will not be tolerated;
(T) No non-firearm weapons will be permitted unless authorized by the Kentucky Revised Statutes or
other applicable law;
(U) Use of park facilities or organized activities must have prior written approval from the city=s Parks
and Recreation Department; and
(V) Play at your own risk. The city assumes no liability for injuries or loss/damage of property.
(Ord. passed 3-11-2002; Ord. 10-07-1096, passed 7-12-2010; Ord. 12-05-1127, passed 5-15-2012; Ord. 13-
05-1138, passed 5-30-2013; Ord. 13-05-1139, passed 5-30-2013)
' 13-26(b) RESERVED.
2015 S-2 Repl.
14 Radcliff - Nuisances
' 13-27 PENALTIES.
Violation of this article shall be deemed a violation, and upon conviction the violator shall be fined not
less than $20, nor more than $250, plus court costs. Any person violating this article may also be found
guilty of a civil offense. The civil fine shall be not less than $20, nor more than $250. The civil fine shall be
paid directly to the city. If the fine is not paid then the city may recover the fine in a civil action in a court
or board of proper jurisdiction. The city may also obtain injunctions or abatement orders to ensure
compliance with this article or pursue administrative remedies when appropriate, including injunctions and
abatement proceedings.
(Ord. passed 6-17-1997; Ord. passed 3-11-2002; Ord. 10-07-1096, passed 7-12-2010)
ARTICLE IV. REGISTRATION REQUIRED OF FORECLOSED
AND CERTAIN VACANT RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES
' 13-30 PURPOSE.
It is the purpose and intent of this article to establish a vacant residential property registration and
maintenance program as a mechanism to protect neighborhoods and minimize hazards to persons and
property as a result of the vacancy.
(Ord. 17-03-1200, passed 3-21-2017)
' 13-31 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
CREDITOR. A federal or state chartered bank, savings bank, savings and loan association, or credit
union, and any entity acting on behalf of the creditor named in the debt obligation including, but not limited
to, servicers.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. Real property with one or more dwelling units.
VACANT. A residential property with no legal resident or tenant. Evidence of vacancy includes any
condition that on its own, or combined with other conditions present, would lead a reasonable person to
believe that the property is vacant. Such conditions include but are not limited to overgrown or dead
vegetation, accumulation of flyers, mail, or trash, disconnected utilities, the absence of window coverings
or furniture, and statements by neighbors, delivery persons, or government employees.
(Ord. 17-03-1200, passed 3-21-2017)
2017 S-5
Nuisances 15
' 13-32 REGISTRATION.
(A) Prior to filing a complaint of foreclosure or executing a deed in lieu of foreclosure on a residential
property located in the city, a creditor shall inspect the property to determine whether the property is vacant.
If the property is vacant, the creditor shall, on the same day the complaint of foreclosure is filed or the deed
in lieu of foreclosure is executed, register the property as a vacant property with the Fire Department of the
city in which the property is located for the purpose of minimizing hazards to persons and property as a
result of the vacancy.
(B) If a residential property becomes vacant at any time after a creditor files a complaint of foreclosure
or executes a deed in lieu of foreclosure, but prior to vesting of title in the creditor or a third party, the
creditor shall, within ten business days after obtaining knowledge of the vacancy, register the property as a
vacant property with the city.
(C) At the time of registration for a residential property hereunder, the creditor shall pay to the city a
registration fee of $250 and increase by $50 annually. Subsequent registrations and fees are due January 1st
of each year and must be received no later than January 31 of the year due.
(D) The annual registration fee shall continue until such time as the foreclosure action is no longer
active and the creditor sells or transfers the residential property for more than a nominal consideration to a
third party, provided the third party is not the creditor's agent, subsidiary or successor. When any such event
happens, the creditor or the third party transferee shall notify the Fire Department in writing with
documentation that is satisfactory to the Fire Chief that the property is no longer vacant. The Fire Chief is
hereby authorized to create documents and official forms for the property owners to remove properties from
the vacant property registration list.
(E) Any changes made to the information contained in the registration shall be submitted to the Fire
Department within ten days of the change.
(Ord. 17-03-1200, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 17-10-1213, passed 10-17-2017)
' 13-33 MAINTENANCE.
(A) Registration of a residential property as a vacant property shall include the address of the property
and the name and contact information of a person located within the commonwealth who is authorized to
accept service on behalf of the creditor.
(B) If a residential property becomes or remains vacant as provided in ' 13-32, but prior to vesting of
title in the creditor or any third party, and the city determines the property is in violation of any ordinance
regulating a nuisance, the city may notify the creditor of the violation by providing notice of the violation
by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the person identified in division (A) of this section, and may
require the creditor to correct the violation to the extent consistent with the terms of the mortgage.
2017 S-5
16 Radcliff - Nuisances
(C) A notice of violation shall include a description of the conditions that give rise to the violation
with the notice of violation and shall provide a period of not less than 20 days from the creditor's receipt of
the notice for the creditor to remedy the violation.
(Ord. 17-03-1200, passed 3-21-2017)
' 13-34 ENFORCEMENT.
(A) If the creditor fails to remedy the violation within the stated period, the city may issue a citation
and impose penalties against the creditor for violation of any ordinance regulating a nuisance.
(B) Any creditor that fails to register vacant residential property with the city shall be subject to a civil
fine of $100 payable to the city for each day of delinquency.
(C) If the civil fine is not paid, a lien shall be placed on the property.
(Ord. 17-03-1200, passed 3-21-2017)
2017 S-5
CHAPTER 14: OFFENSES-MISCELLANEOUS
1
2 Radcliff - Offenses-Miscellaneous
CHAPTER 14: OFFENSES-MISCELLANEOUS
Section
Article I. In General
14-1. Reserved
14-2. Indecent pictures
14-3. Drive-in theaters
14-4. Interference with city officers, employees and the like
14-5. Prohibited conduct on premises of commercial business establishments
14-6. Reserved
14-7. Wearing of hoods or masks
14-8. Firearms defined; discharge in city prohibited; penalty for violation; exceptions
14-9. Curfew; penalty for violation
14-10. Open burning
14-11. Fireworks
Article II. Sale or Exchange of Jewelry, Coins, Precious Stones and Metals
14-26. Duty to keep register; required information; access to/by police
14-27. Retention of articles in same state or condition
14-28. Daily reports
14-29. Penalty for violation
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
' 14-1 RESERVED.
' 14-2 INDECENT PICTURES.
(A) It shall be unlawful to show, display or otherwise exhibit any picture, drawing or other work of art
through any window or door that may be readily viewed by the public from any street, roadway or sidewalk
where the picture, drawing or work of art reveals any person being nude or indecently exposed.
3
2017 S-5
4 Radcliff - Offenses-Miscellaneous
(B) Any person responsible for the showing, displaying or exhibition of any such picture, drawing or
work of art within the city shall be fined no less than $20, nor more than $200, and each day same is
exhibited shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. passed 2-23-1972)
' 14-3 DRIVE-IN THEATERS.
(A) It shall be unlawful to show, exhibit or otherwise project a motion picture upon a screen at an
open-air theater within the city limits at which theater admission is charged to patrons, and where the
screen may be viewed by the general public from any public street or roadway.
(B) Any fence, barrier or other object constructed to prevent such screen from being viewed from a
public street or roadway shall be constructed in a workmanlike manner and of such materials and design
that conform with the contemporary materials and design of other structures in the neighborhood in the
same general locality and shall furthermore comply with the zoning ordinance.
(C) Any fence or barrier so constructed shall, at all times, be kept in a good state of repair.
(D) Any person responsible for the showing of a motion picture in violation of this section shall be
fined no less than $20, nor more than $200, for each offense. Any person permitting a fence or barrier so
constructed to become in a poor state of repair shall be fined no less than $20, nor more than $100, and
each day same is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. passed 2-23-1972)
' 14-4 INTERFERENCE WITH CITY OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES AND THE LIKE.
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder, harass or obstruct any city officer or
employee who is engaged in the official performance of his or her duties.
' 14-5 PROHIBITED CONDUCT ON PREMISES OF COMMERCIAL BUSINESS
ESTABLISHMENTS.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
COMMERCIAL BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT. Any place holding itself out to the general
public as offering goods and/or services for sale to the public and/or for use by the public within the limits
of the city.
MOTOR VEHICLE(S). All agencies for the transportation of person(s) or property over or upon a
public street within the city which are propelled otherwise than by muscular power.
Offenses-Miscellaneous 5
(B) Prohibited conduct.
(1) Noise. It shall be unlawful for any person, while on or adjacent to the premises of a
commercial business establishment, to race the motor of any motor vehicle, to suddenly start or stop any
motor vehicle, or to make or cause to be made any other loud or unseemly noise. It shall also be unlawful
for any person parked on the premises of the commercial business establishment to blow or cause to be
blown any motor vehicle horn at any time while so parked, unless the prohibited activity directly relates to
the business purpose of the commercial business establishment.
(2) Consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages not purchased on premises. It shall be
unlawful for any patron or other person on the premises of a commercial business establishment, whether in
or out of a motor vehicle to drink any beer or other intoxicating liquor or to have in his or her possession
any open bottle, can or other receptacle containing beer or alcoholic beverages of any other type, nature or
description.
(3) Loitering. It shall be unlawful for a person to congregate and/or linger at any location on the
premises of a commercial business establishment where the congregating and/or lingering is unrelated to
the business purpose of the commercial business establishment or not having any other specific legitimate
reason for being there.
(4) Driving onto and leaving premises without parking. No person shall drive a motor vehicle
onto the premises of a commercial business establishment and then depart from the premises without
parking the motor vehicle, unless there is no unoccupied parking space available on the premises, and
where the driving onto and departing the premises is not for the purpose of availing the occupant or
occupants of the motor vehicle of the use of the commercial business establishment and its business
purposes.
(5) Leaving motor vehicle on parking lot without permission. It shall be unlawful for any person
to leave any unoccupied motor vehicle on any commercial business establishment parking lot and to leave
the premises thereof except with the knowledge and consent of the operator of the commercial business
establishment.
(6) Display of warning signs. Prior to enforcement of this section as to a specific commercial
business establishment, it shall be the duty of that commercial business establishment operator who
furnishes parking for patrons to post on the premises in a conspicuous location one or more signs bearing
the following legend:
ACRUISING IN OR CONGREGATING AND LINGERING OUTSIDE OF A MOTOR
VEHICLE IS UNLAWFUL. NO UNOCCUPIED VEHICLE MAY BE LEFT ON THESE
PREMISES WITHOUT THE CONSENT OF THE OPERATOR OF THE COMMERCIAL
BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT.@
6 Radcliff - Offenses-Miscellaneous
(C) Penalty for violation of section. Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this
section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100 or imprisoned for
not more than 30 days, or be given both such fine and imprisonment at the discretion of the court.
(Ord. passed 8-21-1979)
Cross-reference:
Nuisances enumerated, see ' 13-2
Editor=s note:
Inclusion of Art. I, '' 1 and 2, and Art. II, '' 1 through 7, of an ordinance adopted 8-21-1979,
as ' 14-5 was at the discretion of the editor, the ordinance being non-amendatory of the code.
' 14-6 RESERVED.
' 14-7 WEARING OF HOODS OR MASKS.
(A) Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
PUBLIC PLACE. All walks, alleys, streets, boulevards, avenues, lanes, roads, highways or other
ways or thoroughfares dedicated to public use or owned or maintained by public authority; all grounds and
buildings owned, leased or operated for the use of organizations enjoying all tax exempt privileges as a
charitable use.
(B) Wearing hoods or masks in a public place. No person or persons shall, while wearing any hood,
mask or device whereby a substantial portion of the face is hidden or covered so as to conceal the identity
of the wearer, enter, be or appear in any public place within the city.
(C) Wearing hoods or masks on the property of another. No persons shall, while wearing any hood,
mask or device whereby a substantial portion of the face is hidden or covered so as to conceal the identity
of the wearer, demand entrance or admission, enter or come upon or into or be upon or in the premises,
enclosure or house of any other person in the city unless he or she shall have first obtained the permission
of the owner and the occupant of the property.
(D) Exemptions. The following are exempted from the provisions of divisions (B) and (C) of this
section:
(1) Any person under 16 years of age;
(2) Any person wearing traditional holiday costumes in season;
(3) Any person using masks in theatrical productions including use in New Year=s celebrations,
masquerade balls and the Golden Armor Festival Parade;
Offenses-Miscellaneous 7
(4) Any person lawfully engaged in any activity, trade, employment or sporting activity where a
mask or facial covering is worn for the purpose of ensuring the physical health and safety of the wearer or
because of the nature of the occupation, trade or professional or sporting activity; and
(5) Any person wearing a gas mask in drills, exercises or emergencies.
(E) Penalties. Any person who violates divisions (B) or (C) of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined no more than $250 and/or imprisoned for no longer than 90 days for each
offense.
(Ord. passed 1-20-1981)
Editor=s note:
See the editor=s note to ' 14-5.
' 14-8 FIREARMS DEFINED; DISCHARGE IN CITY PROHIBITED; PENALTY FOR
VIOLATION; EXCEPTIONS.
(A) A firearm is any weapon which will expel a projectile by the action of an explosive.
(B) Any person who shoots or discharges a firearm in the city, unless necessary or proper for
protection of person or property, shall be fined not less than $10, nor more than $100.
(C) The Chief of Police may, as an exception, grant permits upon request for shooting firearms in
special areas set aside for the purpose and conducted under safe conditions.
(Ord. passed 2-26-1980)
Editor=s note:
See the editor=s note to ' 14-5.
' 14-9 CURFEW; PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ALLOW. Either permit or neglect to refrain or prevent. It requires actual or constructive
knowledge on the part of the parent or guardian, that is, the parent or guardian must actually know about
the child violating this section, or the circumstances must be such that a reasonable, prudent parent or
guardian should have known the child was violating this section.
MINOR. Any person under the age of 18 or, as may be otherwise phrased, any person of the age of
17 or under.
8 Radcliff - Offenses-Miscellaneous
PARENT. Any person having legal custody of a minor:
(a) As a natural or adoptive parent;
(b) As a legal guardian;
(c) As a person who stands Ain loco parentis@; and/or
(d) Or as a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of the court.
REMAIN. To stay behind, to tarry or to stay unnecessarily upon or in any public assembly,
building, place, parking lot, street or highway.
(B) Curfew.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to be or remain in or upon any public
assembly, building, place, parking lot, street or highway within the city at night during the following
periods:
(a) 12:00 midnight Friday to 6:00 a.m., Saturday;
(b) 12:00 midnight Saturday to 6:00 a.m., Sunday;
(c) 11:00 p.m. Sunday to 6:00 a.m., Monday;
(d) 11:00 p.m. Monday to 6:00 a.m., Tuesday;
(e) 11:00 p.m. Tuesday to 6:00 a.m., Wednesday;
(f) 11:00 p.m. Wednesday to 6:00 a.m., Thursday; and
(g) 11:00 p.m. Thursday to 6:00 a.m., Friday.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian having legal custody of a minor to allow such
minor to be or remain in or upon a public assembly, building, place, parking lot, street or highway in the
city under circumstances not constituting an exception as enumerated in division (C) below during the time
periods contained in division (B)(1) above.
(C) Exceptions. In the following exceptional cases, a minor in or upon any public assembly, building,
place, parking lot, street or highway in the city during the nocturnal hours provided for in division (B)
above shall not be considered in violation of this section:
(1) When a minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian;
Offenses-Miscellaneous 9
(2) When accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent or guardian of the minor;
(3) When exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as
the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly; provided that, written notice
signed by the minor and countersigned by a parent is in the possession of the minor specifying when, where
and in what manner the minor will be exercising the First Amendment rights;
(4) In case of reasonable necessity, but only after the minor=s parent has communicated to the
Police Department the facts establishing the reasonable necessity;
(5) When the minor is on the sidewalk of the place where the minor resides, or on the sidewalk of
either next-door neighbor who has not communicated an objection to a police officer or the Police
Department;
(6) When returning home, by a direct route from, and within one hour of the termination of, a
school activity or any activity or religious or other voluntary association; provided that, justification
indicating the place and time of termination of the event can be given to any investigating officer of the
Police Department;
(7) When attending an official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults
and sponsored by the county=s school system, any duly accredited private school system, a civic
organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home
from, without any detour or stop, and official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by
adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for
the minor;
(8) When engaged in a business or occupation which the laws of the state authorized a person
under 18 years of age to perform;
(9) When the minor is, with parental consent, in a motor vehicle with a lawfully authorized driver
while the vehicle is traveling on a public street or highway;
(10) When the minor, who is a duly authorized and licensed driver, is operating a motor vehicle
within the city for the purpose of passing through, by a direct route, from one location to another either
within or out of the city, including all minors that may also be within the vehicle; and
(11) When the minor is involved in an emergency.
10 Radcliff - Offenses-Miscellaneous
(D) Enforcement.
(1) A police officer upon finding or being notified of any minor in or upon any public assembly,
building, place, parking lot, street or highway reasonably believed to be in violation of this section, shall
follow the duties of a police officer set forth in KRS 610.200 through 610.280 which governs the taking or
receiving of a child into custody on a charge of committing an offense. All other provisions of the state=s
Unified Juvenile Code shall apply.
(2) Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent
offender=s age and reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an
arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based
on any response and other circumstances, no defense in division (C) above is present.
(3) A police officer, upon finding or being notified of any minor in or upon any public assembly,
building, place, parking lot, street or highway, whose parent is believed to be in violation of this section,
shall confront the minor and request such information as his or her name, age and address of his or her
parent or legal guardian.
(E) Penalty.
(1) Violation by a minor of the provisions of this section shall constitute a public offense as
contemplated in the provisions of KRS 635.010 et seq. and a complaint filed against a minor for such a
violation shall be proceeded against in accordance with the provisions of KRS 635.010, 635.020, 636.060,
635.070, 635.080, 635.085 and 635.100.
(2) Any parent or guardian violating this section shall be subject to a fine of no more than $500 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months or both. Any parent or guardian violating this section
may also be found guilty of a civil offense. The civil fine shall not be more than $500. The civil fine shall
be paid directly to the city. If the fine is not paid within 30 days of notification, then the city may recover
the fine in a civil action in a court of proper jurisdiction. The city may also obtain injunctions or abatement
orders to ensure compliance with this section or pursue administrative remedies when appropriate,
including abatement proceedings.
(3) A person who violates a provision of this chapter is guilty of a separate offense for each day
or part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued or permitted.
(Ord. passed 8-23-1994)
' 14-10 OPEN BURNING.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Offenses-Miscellaneous 11
CLEAN LUMBER. Wood or wood products that have been cut or shaped and includes wet,
air-dried and kiln-dried wood products and does not include commercial or industrial waste or wood
products that have been painted, pigment-stained or pressure-treated using any hazardous or toxic
compounds.
FIRE TRAINING. The instruction of industrial, public and private firefighters conducted in
accordance with safety standards and procedures as accepted by the Kentucky State Fire Marshal, the
Kentucky Fire Commission or the National Wildfire Coordinating Group.
GARBAGE. Putrescible animal and vegetable matter accumulated in the course of ordinary
day-to-day living.
HOUSEHOLD RUBBISH. Waste material and trash normally accumulated by a family in a
residence in the course of ordinary day-to-day living, except for garbage, cans, glass, plastic, or other
potentially hazardous waste materials.
LAND CLEARING. Clearing of land for agricultural, residential or commercial development
purposes, including the construction of roads.
OPEN BURNING. Burning of any matter without a burn chamber approved by the Kentucky
Division for Air Quality, or without a stack or chimney with control devices approved by the Kentucky
Division for Air Quality.
RECOGNIZED AGRICULTURAL, SILVICULTURAL, RANGE, ECOLOGICAL OR
WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT PRACTICES. Burning recognized by the Kentucky Department of
Agriculture, the United States Department of Agriculture, the Kentucky Division of Forestry, the United
States Forestry Service, the Kentucky Department of Fish and Wildlife, the Kentucky State Nature
Preserves Commission, or the United States Fish and Wildlife Service as necessary to promote cultivation
of crops, range, and forest lands, weed and understory abatement and pest control and prevention.
(B) Where and when prohibited. It shall be unlawful to kindle or maintain any fire in any form without
the expressed written consent of the Fire Chief or his or her designee:
(1) On any public street, alley, roads or other public grounds;
(2) The burning of garbage, rubbish or flammable and hazardous material that gives off noxious
odors, such as, but not limited to, furniture, tires, bedding, leaves and grass;
(3) Permitted open fires shall be located not less than 50 feet (15 m) from any structure and 75
feet from any wood line [2006 NFPA 1 - 10.11.2.1.];
12 Radcliff - Offenses-Miscellaneous
(4) Where burning is conducted on public property or the property of someone other than the
permit applicant, the permit applicant shall demonstrate that permission has been obtained by the
appropriate government agency, the owner or the owner=s authorized agent [2006 NFPA 1-10.11.1.2]; and
(5) Within 15 feet of fence or property line.
(C) Non permit-required open burning. No person shall cause, suffer or allow any open burning
except as follows:
(1) Fires set for the cooking of food for human consumption [401 KAR 63:005];
(2) Fires set for recreational or ceremonial purposes [401 KAR 63:005]; and
(3) Small fires set by construction and other workers for comfort heating purposes:
(a) Providing excessive or unusual smoke is not created;
(b) The ambient temperature is below 501 Fahrenheit;
(c) Only clean lumber or vegetative matter is burned; and
(d) The fire is burned in a container not exceeding 55 gallons in size [401 KAR 63:005].
(D) Guidelines for open burning as permitted in divisions (C)(1) through (3) above.
(1) The following guidelines for open burning as permitted in divisions (C)(1) through (3) above
shall apply.
(a) It shall be the responsibility of the person or persons starting the fire to ensure that no fire
contains any potentially hazardous substances (i.e., tires, rubbish, plastics and the like) prior to burning.
(b) Open fires and cooking fires shall be constantly attended by a competent person until the
fire is extinguished. This person shall have a garden hose connected to the water supply or other
fire-extinguishing equipment readily available [2006 NFPA 1 - 10.11.3].
(c) Any and all fires may be required to be extinguished at the discretion of the Fire Chief or
his or her designee. Extinguishment shall be performed by the developer, contractor, landowner and/or
person starting the fire. If they are not capable of extinguishment, the Fire Department shall extinguish the
fire, with the developer, contractor, landowner or person starting the fire being responsible for financial
reimbursement for the cost of extinguishing the fire to the city.
Offenses-Miscellaneous 13
(d) Fires shall be located not less than 50 feet from any structure and 75 feet from any wood
line.
(e) Conditions that could cause a fire to spread to within 25 feet (7.6 m) of a structure shall
be eliminated prior to ignition [2006 NFPA 1 - 10.11.2.4].
(2) The Fire Chief or his or her designee may prohibit, at his or her discretion, any and all
permitted open fires when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make the fire hazardous.
(E) Permit-required open burning. Any person who causes, suffers or allows any open burning of the
following types shall first obtain permission from the Fire Chief or his or her designee:
(1) Fires set for the purpose of bona fide instruction and training of public and industrial
employees in the methods of fighting fires;
(2) Fires set for recognized agricultural, silvicultural, range and wildlife management practices;
(3) Fires set for the purpose of disposing of accidental spills or leaks of crude oil, petroleum
products or other organic materials, and the disposal of absorbent material used in their removal, where no
other economically feasible means of disposal is available and practical;
(4) Fires set for the disposal of trees and/or limbs where no other alternative is available; and
(5) Fires set for disposal of natural growth for land clearing for construction purposes.
(F) Guidelines for open burning as permitted in divisions (E)(1) through (5) above.
(1) The following guidelines for open burning as permitted in divisions (E)(1) through (5) above
shall apply.
(a) It shall be the responsibility of the person or persons starting the fire to ensure that no fire
contains any potentially hazardous substances (i.e., tires, rubbish, plastics and the like) prior to burning.
(b) Open fires and cooking fires shall be constantly attended by a competent person until the
fire is extinguished. This person shall have a garden hose connected to the water supply or other
fire-extinguishing equipment readily available [2006 NFPA 1 - 10.11.3].
(c) Any and all fires may be required to be extinguished at the discretion of the Fire Chief or
his or her designee. Extinguishment shall be performed by the developer, contractor, landowner and/or
person starting the fire. If they are not capable of extinguishment, the Fire Department shall extinguish the
fire, with the developer, contractor, landowner or person starting the fire being responsible for financial
reimbursement for the cost of extinguishing the fire to the city.
14 Radcliff - Offenses-Miscellaneous
(d) Fires shall be located not less than 50 feet from any structure.
(e) Conditions that could cause a fire to spread to within 25 feet (7.6 m) of a structure shall
be eliminated prior to ignition [2006 NFPA 1 - 10.11.2.4].
(2) The Fire Chief or his or her designee may prohibit, at his or her discretion, any and all
permitted open fires when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make the fire hazardous.
(G) Enforcement. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the Fire Chief, his or her designee
or city police officers.
(H) Penalty for violation. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
section, or neglecting to comply with the order issued pursuant to this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than $75, nor more than $500, or imprisoned for not more than 12
months, or both the fine and imprisonment. Each day=s violation shall constitute a separate offense. Any
persons violating this section may also be found guilty of a civil offense. The civil fine shall be not less
than $50, nor more than $500. The civil fine shall be paid directly to the city. If the fine is not paid within
30 days of notification, then the city may recover the fine in a civil action in a court of proper jurisdiction.
The city may also obtain injunctions or abatement orders to ensure compliance with this section or pursue
administrative remedies when appropriate, including injunctions and abatement proceedings.
(Ord. passed 9-21-1993; Ord. passed 11-19-1997; Ord. passed 9-9-2002; Ord. 09-08-1074, passed
8-10-2009)
Cross-reference:
Building, Fire, Housing and Safety Standards, see Chapter 4
Editor=s note:
An ordinance of 2-15-1983, '' 1 through 6, enacted the provisions codified as ' 14-10 above.
Since the ordinance did not expressly amend this code, the manner of codification has been at
the discretion of the editor.
' 14-11 FIREWORKS.
(A) Definitions. The following words, terms and/or phrases, when used in this section, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
FIREWORKS. Shall have the same meaning as in KRS 227.700.
CONSUMER FIREWORKS. Shall have the same meaning as in KRS 227.702, and shall include
ground and hand-held sparkling devices such as dipped-stick sparklers, wire sparklers, cylindrical
fountains, cone fountains, illuminating torches, wheels, ground spinners, flitter sparklers, and toy smoke
devices as defined in KRS 227.702(1); and shall include aerial devices such as sky rockets, bottle
2017 S-5
Offenses-Miscellaneous 15
rockets, missile-type rockets, helicopters, aerial spinners, Roman candles, mines, shells, aerial shell kits
with reloadable tubes as defined in KRS 227.702(2); and shall include audible ground devices such as
firecrackers, salutes, and chasers as defined in KRS 227.702(3).
(B) Use of fireworks. The use of fireworks, including consumer fireworks, is allowed only as set forth
herein. The use of any fireworks other than consumer fireworks, including display fireworks as defined in
KRS 227.706, are subject to the applicable restrictions of state and federal law and are further allowed
within the city only with written approval of the city's Fire Chief or his designee.
(C) Fireworks in city limits. Fireworks and consumer fireworks shall be used, ignited, fired, or
exploded in the city limits of the city, only as follows:
(1) Fireworks and consumer fireworks must be handled, stored, used, possessed, and sold in
accordance with all applicable federal, state, and local law.
(2) Consumer fireworks may only be used, ignited, fired, or exploded on the following days: July
3; July 4; the Friday and Saturday immediately preceding July 4; and the Friday and Saturday immediately
following July 4. On these days, consumer fireworks may only be used, ignited, fired, or exploded during
the thirteen-hour period from 11:00 a.m. until midnight (12:00 a.m.) the same day. Consumer fireworks
may also be used, ignited, fired, or exploded during the three-hour period from 10:00 p.m. December 31
until 1:00 a.m. January 1. Fireworks other than consumer fireworks, including display fireworks as defined
in KRS 227.706, may only be used, ignited, fired, or exploded at dates and times within the City as
delineated by written permit issued by the state fire marshal, the City's Fire Chief or his designee.
(3) No person may use, ignite, fire, or explode any fireworks or consumer fireworks as defined in
KRS 227.702(2) and (3) if they are under the age of eighteen (18), or within two hundred (200) feet of any
structure, motor vehicle (whether operational or non-operational), or any person other than the person who
is using, igniting, firing, or exploding the fireworks or consumer fireworks as defined in KRS 227.702(2),
or where the use of such fireworks places that person in violation of any other law, regulation or ordinance.
(D) Prior to the sale of permissible consumer fireworks, every person, partnership, association,
company, corporation, limited liability company, business, or entity engaged in such sales shall prominently
display a copy of this section on paper no smaller than eight-and-a-half inches by 11 inches with 12-point
font at each cash register and in each area where consumer fireworks are displayed for sale.
(E) Penalties. Violation of this article shall be deemed a violation, and upon conviction the violator
shall be fined not less than $20, nor more than $250, plus court costs. Any person violating this article may
also be found guilty of a civil offense. The civil fine shall be not less than $20, nor more than $250. The
civil fine shall be paid directly to the city. If the fine is not paid then the city may recover the fine
2017 S-5
16 Radcliff - Offenses-Miscellaneous
in a civil action in a court or board of proper jurisdiction. The city may also obtain injunctions or abatement
orders to ensure compliance with this article or pursue administrative remedies when appropriate, including
injunctions and abatement proceedings.
(Ord. 17-08-12-08, passed 8-28-2017)
ARTICLE II. SALE OR EXCHANGE OF JEWELRY, COINS, PRECIOUS
STONES AND METALS
' 14-26 DUTY TO KEEP REGISTER; REQUIRED INFORMATION; ACCESS TO/BY
POLICE.
It shall be the duty of all persons dealing in the purchase, sale or exchange of secondhand or antique
jewelry, coins, watches, diamonds or other precious stones, cutlery, old gold, silver, platinum, other
precious metals or any other secondhand manufactured articles, composed wholly or in part of gold, silver,
platinum or other precious metals, to keep a book in which every article received by them in the course of
their business shall be registered; and in which shall be given as minute a description of every article as is
possible, including the maker=s name and number of every article received by them. The name, age, sex,
color, residence, driver=s license number and general description of each and every individual selling or
exchanging the articles, shall be taken and entered in the register. The register shall at all times be kept at
the place of business of every person engaging in the business aforesaid. Members of the Police
Department and Sheriff=s Department and State Police shall be allowed free access to the register and the
person shall show to such officers all information in his or her possession concerning such articles and all
persons selling or exchanging the same.
(Ord. passed 1-20-1981)
Editor=s note:
Ord. of 1-20-1981, '' I, II, did not specifically amend the code; hence, inclusion as
Art. II, '' 14-26 through 14-29, has been at the discretion of the editor.
' 14-27 RETENTION OF ARTICLES IN SAME STATE OR CONDITION.
All persons engaging in business as described herein shall retain any article received in the same state
or condition in which it was received, and shall not commingle with other articles separately received, and
shall make it available for examination to members of the Police Department, Sheriff=s Department and
State Police, for a period of ten days before a resale or exchange unless written permission is obtained from
the Chief of Police.
(Ord. passed 1-20-1981)
2017 S-5
Offenses-Miscellaneous 17
' 14-28 DAILY REPORTS.
All persons engaging in business as described herein shall furnish to the Chief of Police daily reports at
his or her office, showing fully the name, age, sex, color, residence, driver=s license number and general
description of each person who shall have sold or exchanged any article during the preceding day, together
with a full description of the articles sold or exchanged by the person, including the number of each article
bearing a number and the day and hour of the transaction. Every person engaging in the business shall keep
duplicates of the reports in a well-bound book or register, which book or register shall, at all times, be
subject to the inspection of members of the Police Department, Sheriff=s Department or State Police. Any
person intending to engage in business as described herein who will not operate that business at an
established and permanent location shall give the Chief of Police at least 72 hours= prior notice of the
location and date and hours of the operation of the business. In addition to the written daily reports
described herein, all persons engaging in business as described herein shall also submit electronic reports
regarding said business to L.E.A.D.S. Online, Incorporated, via high speed internet connection. The Chief
of Police shall furnish necessary information to all persons engaging in business as described herein for
purposes of submitting the electronic reports.
(Ord. passed 1-20-1981; Ord. 08-04-1035, passed 4-22-2008)
' 14-29 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.
(A) Failure to comply with the duties and requirements imposed by this article shall be punishable as a
Class A misdemeanor. Any person who violates any of the provisions of '' 14-26, 14-27 or 14-28 shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than $50, nor more than $500,
and/or be subject to 12 months= imprisonment and his or her business license may be revoked by the city.
(B) Any person violating this article shall also be guilty of a civil offense. The civil fine shall be not
less than $50, nor more than $500. The civil fine shall be paid directly to the city. Each day that an offense
occurs shall be treated as a separate violation of law. If the fine is not paid within 30 days from the date of
notification of the fine, then the city may recover the fine in a civil action in a court of proper jurisdiction.
The city may also obtain injunctions or other appropriate judicial orders to ensure compliance with this
article.
(Ord. passed 1-20-1981; Ord. 08-04-1035, passed 4-22-2008)
2017 S-5
18 Radcliff - Offenses-Miscellaneous
CHAPTER 14.1: PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
1
2 Radcliff - Planning and Development
CHAPTER 14.1: PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
Section
Article I. In General
14.114.1-10. Reserved
Article II. Planning Commission
14.1-11. Established
14.1-12. Members generally
14.1-13. Compensation of members
14.1-14. Vacancies in membership
14.1-15. Removal of members
14.1-16. Officers
14.1-17. Meetings
14.1-18. Bylaws and records
14.1-19. Jurisdiction and authority
Article III. Sedimentation and Erosion Control
14.1-30. Purpose and applicability
14.1-31. Definitions
14.1-32. Permit; control plan
14.1-33. Plan review and approval
14.1-34. Exemptions from permit
14.1-35. Existing unvegetated areas
14.1-36. Violations and penalties
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 14.1-114.1-10 RESERVED.
3
4 Radcliff - Planning and Development
ARTICLE II. PLANNING COMMISSION
 14.1-11 ESTABLISHED.
A City Planning Commission of the city is hereby established. A more complete statement of
purposes and authority of this Commission is set out herein.
(Ord. passed 2-26-1980)
 14.1-12 MEMBERS GENERALLY.
The Planning Commission shall consist of six members, being citizen members. The Mayor shall
appoint the members of the Planning Commission with the approval of the City Council.
(Ord. passed 2-26-1980; Ord. passed 7-19-1983; Ord. passed 5-31-1988; Ord. passed 11-20-2001)
Cross-reference:
Subdivisions, see Chapter 19
Editors note:
At the direction of the city, Ord. of 2-26-1980, has been codified as superseding Art. II,  14.1-11,
14.1-25 pertaining to the planning commission and derived from Ord. of 10-5-1976,  1, 2, 5
through 17.
Statutory reference:
Composition of planning commission, see KRS 100.133 et seq.
 14.1-13 COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS.
The City Council may authorize reimbursement for expenses or compensation, or both, for citizen
members of the Planning Commission.
(Ord. passed 2-26-1980; Ord. passed 11-20-2001)
Statutory reference:
Compensation, see KRS 100.153
 14.1-14 VACANCIES IN MEMBERSHIP.
(A) Vacancies on the Planning Commission shall be filled within 60 days by the Mayor.
(B) If the Mayor fails to act within that time, the Planning Commission shall fill the vacancy.
When a vacancy occurs other than through the expiration of a term of office, it shall be filled for the
remainder of that term.
(Ord. passed 2-26-1980)
Statutory reference:
Similar provisions, see KRS 100.147
Planning and Development 5
 14.1-15 REMOVAL OF MEMBERS.
(A) Any members of the Planning Commission may be removed by the Mayor for inefficiency,
neglect of duty, malfeasance or conflict of interest.
(B) The removal shall be in accordance with the procedure set out in KRS 100.157 and in
accordance with all applicable law.
(Ord. passed 2-26-1980)
Statutory reference:
Similar provisions, see KRS 100.153
 14.1-16 OFFICERS.
(A) The Planning Commission shall elect annually its Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and
Secretary-Treasurer.
(B) All officers shall be citizen members and shall be eligible for re-election at the expiration of
his or her term.
(Ord. passed 2-26-1980)
Statutory reference:
Similar provisions, see KRS 100.161
 14.1-17 MEETINGS.
(A) The Planning Commission shall conduct regular meetings as it deems necessary for the
transaction of its business, but there shall be at least six regular meetings annually.
(B) All meetings of the Planning Commission shall be public, except when they involve matters
which are exempt from the states Open Meetings Law.
(Ord. passed 2-26-1980; Ord. passed 12-19-1995)
Statutory reference:
Similar provisions, see KRS 100.163
 14.1-18 BYLAWS AND RECORDS.
The Planning Commission shall adopt bylaws for the transaction of business, and shall keep
minutes and records of all proceedings, including regulations, transactions, findings, determinations
and the number of votes for and against each question; and if any member is absent or disqualifies from
voting,
6 Radcliff - Planning and Development
indicating the facts, all of which shall immediately after adoption be filed in the office of the
Commission.
(Ord. passed 2-26-1980)
Statutory reference:
Similar provisions, see KRS 100.167
 14.1-19 JURISDICTION AND AUTHORITY.
The Planning Commission shall, in addition to its other duties, have the following jurisdiction and
authority:
(A) To prepare and recommend a comprehensive plan for the future development of the city and
to review the provisions of the plan and make a report of its findings and recommendations to the City
Council;
(B) To initiate a review of the provisions of the citys zoning ordinance and to make a report of its
findings and recommendations;
(C) To initiate a review of the provisions of the citys subdivision regulations and to make a report
of its findings and recommendations;
(D) To receive and act on applications for actions authorized and specified herein;
(E) To hold public hearings on applications for zoning changes and for approval of subdivision
plats and for proposed amendments to all pertinent ordinances in the manner hereinafter described;
(F) Following public hearings, to submit to the City Council as required herein, a report and
recommendations on all such public hearings and any and all such amendments;
(G) To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement,
decision or determination made by any city official in the interpretation or enforcement of all pertinent
ordinances; and
(H) To do any and all acts which the City Council directs and which are authorized by the
Kentucky Revised Statutes.
(Ord. passed 2-26-1980)
Planning and Development 7
ARTICLE III. SEDIMENTATION AND EROSION CONTROL
 14.1-30 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY.
The purpose of this article is to reduce the probability that lands adjacent to sinkhole drains will
flood, and to assist in the preservation and protection of the Radcliff water quality and natural
environment by regulating the alteration of land and topography, regulating the removal of vegetation,
requiring revegetation, and reducing erosion and sedimentation through control requirements. This
article shall apply to all land within the city and is intended to complement the 1973 and 1983 editions
of the Subdivision Regulations.
(Ord. passed 8-30-1983)
Cross-reference:
Building, Fire, Housing and Safety Standards, see Chapter 4
Editors note:
Article III,  14.1-30, 14.1-36, is derived from an ordinance read, passed and approved
8-30-1983. The ordinance did not specifically amend this code, and hence has been
so codified at the discretion of the editor.
 14.1-31 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
EROSION. The process by which the ground surface is worn away by the action of water or wind.
LAND DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY. Any activity involving the clearing, grading, transporting,
filling and any other activity which causes land to be exposed to the danger of erosion.
SEDIMENT. Soil or other surface materials that are transported by wind or water as a result of
erosion.
(Ord. passed 8-30-1983)
 14.1-32 PERMIT; CONTROL PLAN.
(A) Permit required. Prior to any person engaging in a land disturbance activity within the
corporate boundaries of the city, he or she shall possess a city-issued permit for the land disturbance
activity. A land disturbance/development permit will be issued by the city once a sedimentation and
erosion control plan has been submitted and approved.
8 Radcliff - Planning and Development
(B) Contents of sedimentation and erosion control plan. Contents of sedimentation and erosion
control plan shall include:
(1) The size, finished and existing slope and location of any proposed cut or fills;
(2) A general description of the predominant soil types to be disturbed as indicated by the
area soil and water conservation district or other reliable sources;
(3) The general location and size of the land area to be disturbed and the extent to which the
vegetation and topsoil will be removed;
(4) The general location, volume and type of soil or other materials to be used for fill in areas
other than the roadway;
(5) Location and description of existing natural features on the site such as contours,
vegetation and drainage ways;
(6) Measures that will be taken to contain the sedimentation to the subject property, both
during and after construction;
(7) Measures that will be taken to limit erosion of the subject property both during and after
construction;
(8) The approximate length of time that specific portions of the proposed development will
lie unvegetated, including the approximate date it will be denuded and the approximate date it will be
reseeded or planted; and
(9) The type of plant material that will be planted, the approximate time frame for planting
and the persons who will be responsible for the planting.
(C) Review of plan. The City Engineer shall review the sedimentation and erosion control plan.
The plan will be approved and a permit issued if he or she finds that it complies with the following land
disturbance activity standards.
(1) Land disturbance activities shall be done in a manner which will minimize soil erosion:
(a) The extent of the disturbed area and the duration of its exposure shall be kept within
reasonable limits.
(b) Cut and fill operations shall be kept to a minimum. Developments calling for
excessive cutting and filling may be refused a permit if it is determined that the land use proposed for
the site can be reasonably constructed with less alteration of the natural terrain.
Planning and Development 9
(2) Land shall be developed in increments of workable size which can be completed during a
single construction season. Erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be coordinated with the
sequence of grading, development and construction operations.
(3) When feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented.
(4) Topsoil shall be saved where practical and reapplied to the site after grading has been
finished.
(5) Provisions shall be provided which minimize the damage from surface water to the cut
face of excavations or the sloping surface of fills.
(6) Disturbed soils shall be stabilized as quickly as possible; however, no area shall be left
disturbed for more than 12 months.
(7) Temporary seeding, mulching or other suitable methods of stabilization shall be used to
protect exposed areas which have been disturbed longer than 12 months.
(8) Water runoff shall be minimized and retained on-site, wherever possible, to facilitate
groundwater recharge and reduce erosion.
(9) Measures shall be taken to contain as much sedimentation as practical on-site:
(a) Sedimentation shall be trapped by the use of debris, basins, sediment basins, silt traps
or similar measures approved by the City Engineer until the area has been stabilized.
(b) All required sedimentation and erosion reduction measures and structures shall be in
place prior to any land disturbance.
(c) Sedimentation shall be kept out of sinkhole throats/outlets.
(d) All necessary soil erosion and sedimentation control measures installed shall be
adequately maintained by the developer until the land has been completely stabilized as verified by the
City Engineer.
(10) The type of stabilization or revegetation shall be appropriate for the slope and soil type of
the site;
(11) Provisions shall be made for reseeding areas which do not vegetate the first time.
(12) Difficult areas, such as ditchlines and other slopes, may have to be sodded or stabilized in
some other approved manner.
10 Radcliff - Planning and Development
 14.1-33 PLAN REVIEW AND APPROVAL.
(A) The City Engineer shall review the plan within 30 days of its receipt and notify the applicant
of his or her action. In the case of a denial, the reasons for the denial shall also be given. An applicant
may appeal a denial of a permit to the Planning Commission. All appeals shall be made in writing
within ten days of the denial and the applicant shall be entitled to a hearing before the Planning
Commission within 30 days of the date of the appeal.
(B) A land disturbance/development permit will be issued on the basis of approved plans. No fee
will be charged for the permit.
(Ord. passed 8-30-1983)
 14.1-34 EXEMPTIONS FROM PERMIT.
The following land disturbance activities are specifically exempt from this article:
(A) Land disturbance associated with existing one- and two-family dwellings;
(B) Use of land for home gardening;
(C) Agricultural use of land which is used in accordance with a farm conservation plan approved
by the local soil conservation service or which has been determined by the service that the use will not
cause excessive erosion or sedimentation; and
(D) Land disturbance activities covered under an approved subdivisions sedimentation and
erosion control plan. (NOTE: Often these plans will cover only the land disturbance associated with lot
arrangement and street development and not the individual lot development.)
(Ord. passed 8-30-1983)
 14.1-35 EXISTING UNVEGETATED AREAS.
Within six months of the passing of this article, all existing unvegetated areas within the city shall
submit and have approved a sedimentation and erosion control plan and possess a land disturbance
permit. Within 18 months of the passage of this article, all areas of the city shall be vegetated or
stabilized in accordance with this article. The existing unvegetated areas shall institute measures to
keep their sedimentation on-site and out of sinkhole outlet areas while the erosion control and
revegetation measures are in progress.
(Ord. passed 8-30-1983)
Planning and Development 11
 14.1-36 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article for which no other penalty is provided
shall upon conviction be fined an amount not less than $20, nor more than $250. A separate offense
shall be committed for each day the violation occurs. Any person violating this article may also be
found guilty of a civil offense. The civil fine shall be not less than $20, nor more than $250. The civil
fine shall be paid directly to the city. If the fine is not paid within 30 days from the date of notification,
then the city may recover the fine in a civil action in a court of proper jurisdiction. The city may also
obtain injunctions or abatement orders to ensure compliance with this article or pursue administrative
remedies when appropriate, including injunctions and abatement proceedings.
(Ord. passed 3-16-1993)
12 Radcliff - Planning and Development
CHAPTER 15: RESERVED
1
2 Radcliff - Reserved
CHAPTER 16: POLICE DEPARTMENT
1
2 Radcliff - Police Department
CHAPTER 16: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
Article I. In General
16-1. Established
16-2. Police Chief
16-3. Police officer
16-4. Weapons
16-5. Basic law enforcement training; authority of Mayor to contract with newly hired,
uncertified probationary patrol officers
Cross-reference:
Motor Vehicles and Traffic, see Chapter 12
Offenses-Miscellaneous, see Chapter 14
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 16-1 ESTABLISHED.
There is hereby established a Police Department to be governed and staffed as provided by state
law and the Mayor and City Council.
 16-2 POLICE CHIEF.
(A) There is hereby created the Office of Chief of Police of the city.
(B) The powers and duties of this Office are hereby established as follows:
(1) Plans, organizes, directs coordinates and evaluates the activities and programs of the
Police Department;
(2) Formulates Department policies and procedures, rules and regulations following
consultation with higher authority and subordinate officers;
3
4 Radcliff - Police Department
(3) Develops organizational structure of the Department in accordance with professional
standards and city policy;
(4) Prepares and authorizes work schedules;
(5) Furnishes technical advice on police problems;
(6) Maintains constant surveillance of criminal and traffic reports in addition to activity
reports;
(7) Initiates corrective action when and where necessarily indicated;
(8) Supervises and evaluates the use of police equipment;
(9) Instructs and evaluates Department personnel;
(10) Reviews and recommends acceptable standards and procedures for the recruitment,
selection, promotion and training of Departmental personnel;
(11) Requests purchase requisitions of supplies and equipment for the Department within the
constraints of the budget and subject to approval of the Mayor;
(12) Confers with representatives of federal, state and local agencies on various police
problems;
(13) Prepares memoranda and reports on activities of the Department, orally and in writing,
and supervises others in the preparation of reports;
(14) Attends all Council meetings;
(15) Receives complaints from the general public;
(16) Studies and reviews all laws, official opinions and guidelines;
(17) Maintains a proper record system pertaining to citations, arrest and investigations;
(18) Participates in approved law enforcement courses and schedules subordinates for the
training;
(19) Represents the Department as needed; and
(20) Develops and conducts an effective public relations program.
(C) The individual holding the position of Police Chief shall be compensated for his or her efforts
in accordance with the pay plan adopted by ordinance by the City Council.
Police Department 5
(D) The Chief of Police shall report to the Mayor.
 16-3 POLICE OFFICER.
(A) The position of police officer is hereby established.
(B) The powers and duties of the position of city police officer shall be as stated in the adopted
position description for the position as contained in the classification plan for city employees or as
otherwise provided by Council.
(C) The individual holding the position of city police officer shall take the following oath upon
assuming office:
I, (state your name), so solemnly swear to faithfully execute the duties and fulfill the
responsibilities of the office of Radcliff Police Officer to the very best of my abilities and with
honesty, dependability and integrity. I do solemnly swear to uphold in the conduct of my office, all
ordinances of the City of Radcliff and all laws of the Commonwealth of Kentucky and of the
Government of the United States. I do further solemnly swear to conduct myself at all times with a
dignity of purpose and manner which will bring credit to the citizens of the City of Radcliff.
(D) The individual holding the position of police officer shall be compensated for his or her efforts
in accordance with the pay plan adopted by ordinance by the City Council.
Editors note:
Section 16-3 is derived from  1 through 3 of an ordinance enacted 6-22-1982. Since the
ordinance
did not provide for the specific manner of inclusion of its provisions into this code, it has
been codified as  16-3 at the discretion of the editor.
 16-4 WEAPONS.
(A) All sworn members of the Police Department that carry deadly weapons on or about their
persons in their regularly scheduled duties as patrol/law enforcement officers for the city, may carry
concealed deadly weapons on or about their persons at all times within the state.
(B) Deadly weapons that may be carried by all sworn members of the Police Department within
the state are those weapons that are usually carried by the officers in performing their duties while on
regularly scheduled shift of duty for the city.
(C) This section is enacted for the express purpose of protecting the sworn police officers of the
city from prosecution under the provisions of KRS 527.020 and KRS Ch. 237 when they may be
outside the corporate limits of the city and for no other purpose.
(Ord. passed 11-17-1970; Ord. passed 12-18-1996)
6 Radcliff - Police Department
 16-5 BASIC LAW ENFORCEMENT TRAINING; AUTHORITY OF MAYOR TO
CONTRACT WITH NEWLY HIRED, UNCERTIFIED PROBATIONARY PATROL
OFFICERS.
(A) The Mayor, on behalf of the city, is hereby authorized and directed to execute a contract with
each newly hired, uncertified probationary patrol officer of the city, whereby the city agrees to advance
the officers salary and expenses while completing the program of basic law enforcement training by
the Bureau of Training, Department of Justice, Commonwealth of Kentucky, at Eastern Kentucky
University, pursuant to the Kentucky Law Enforcement Foundation Program Fund, and the newly
hired, uncertified probationary patrol officer agrees to reimburse the city for such sums as advanced on
his or her behalf, while completing the training, if he or she voluntarily terminates employment with
the city as a patrol officer within three years of completion of this training.
(B) This section, and any contract executed pursuant thereto, shall be subject to the provisions of
Kentucky Revised Statutes and ordinances of the city regarding probationary status of newly hired
patrol officers, and shall in no way be construed as a modification of the statutes or ordinances.
(C) If a patrol officer bound by a contract executed pursuant to this section shall be terminated by
the city for any reason during the probationary period or the three-year period following completion of
basic law enforcement training, the provisions of the contract shall be null and void.
(Ord. passed 6-22-1982; Ord. passed 12-18-1996; Ord. passed 2-15-2000)
CHAPTER 17: RESERVED
1
2 Radcliff - Reserved
CHAPTER 17.5: STORM WATER UTILITY AND MANAGEMENT
1
2 Radcliff - Storm Water Utility and Management
CHAPTER 17.5: STORM WATER UTILITY AND MANAGEMENT
Section
Article I. In General
17.5-1. Findings
17.5-2. Authority
17.5-2.1. Jurisdiction and authority
17.5-3. Definitions
17.5-4. Establishment of Storm Water Management Fund
17.5-5. Purposes of the Fund
17.5-6. Storm water management fee
17.5-7. Classification of property for purposes of determination of the storm water management
fee
17.5-8. Base rate
17.5-9. Schedule of monthly rates for storm water management fee
17.5-10. Charges for tax-exempt properties; exemptions
17.5-11. Assessment notices
17.5-12. When storm water management fee payable; interest and penalties; lien on real property;
abatement of small amounts due
17.5-13. Requests for correction of the storm water management fee
17.5-14. Request for credit
Article II. Storm Water Runoff Control and Quality Management
17.5-21. Title; purpose; general provisions
17.5-22. Definitions; acronyms
17.5-23. Program objectives; general approach
17.5-24. Authority; right of entry
17.5-25. Illicit discharge detection and elimination
17.5-26. Storm water quality management plan (SWQMP) permit application process
17.5-27. Construction site runoff management
17.5-28. Post-construction storm water management
17.5-29. Storm water quality management plan (SWQMP) permit inspections
17.5-30. Qualified professional
17.5-31. Storm water quality management plan (SWQMP) permit termination
17.5-32. Enforcement; penalties; appeals
17.5-33. Compatibility; severability
3
2011 S-1
4 Radcliff - Storm Water Utility and Management
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
' 17.5-1 FINDINGS.
(A) The city maintains a system of storm and surface water management facilities including, but not
limited to, inlets, conduits, manholes, channels, ditches, drainage easements, retention and detention basins,
infiltration facilities and other components as well as natural waterways.
(B) The storm water system in the city requires regular maintenance and improvements.
(C) Storm water quality is degrading due to erosion and the discharge of nutrients, metals, oil, grease,
toxic materials and other substances into and through the storm water system.
(D) The public health, safety and welfare is adversely affected by poor ambient water quality and
flooding that results from inadequate management of both the quality and quantity of storm water.
(E) All real property in the city either uses or benefits from the maintenance of the storm water
system.
(F) The extent of use of the storm water system by each property is dependant on factors that influence
runoff, including land use and the amount of impervious surface on the property.
2017 S-4
Storm Water Utility and Management 5
(G) The costs of improving, maintaining, operating and monitoring the storm water system should be
allocated, to the extent practicable, to all property owners based on the impact of runoff from the
impervious areas of their property on the storm water management system.
(H) Management of the storm water system to protect the public health, safety and welfare requires
adequate revenues and it is in the interest of the public to finance storm water management adequately with
a user charge system that is reasonable and equitable so that each user of the system pays to the extent to
which they contributes to the need for it.
(I) The city is required to develop a storm water quality program through the NPDES Phase II storm
water program that is required by state and federal law.
' 17.5-2 AUTHORITY.
Authority for the adoption of a system of charges to fund the implementation of storm water
management programs is conferred on the city by KRS Chapters 76, 220 and 262.
' 17.5-2.1 JURISDICTION AND AUTHORITY.
The utility shall, in addition to its other duties, have the following jurisdiction and authority:
(A) To initiate and control a storm water runoff control ordinance and to make recommendations on its
adoption to the City Council;
(B) To initiate and control a storm water design manual to ensure compliance with this and other
related ordinances;
(C) To initiate and oversee a storm water credits policy program and to make recommendations on its
adoption to the City Council;
(D) To receive and act on applications for storm water surcharge credits in accordance with this and
other related ordinances; and
(E) To review, update and initiate changes in the fee structure for the utility and to make
recommendations on those changes to the City Council.
' 17.5-3 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning.
6 Radcliff - Storm Water Utility and Management
ASSESSMENT ROLL. The official listing of assessments of real property maintained by the county=s
Property Valuation Office.
BASE RATE. The storm water management fee charges on a base unit. The monthly storm water
management fee for a single-family residential (SFR) property in the city equals the BASE RATE.
CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER. The Chief Administrative Officer for the city or his or her
designee.
DEVELOPED PROPERTY. Real property which has been altered from its natural state by the
addition of any improvements such as buildings, structures or other impervious areas.
EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT (ERU). The average impervious surface area associated with a
single-family residential property in the city as calculated using standard statistical approximation methods.
FEE or STORM WATER MANAGEMENT FEE. The charge established under this chapter and
levied on owners of parcels or pieces of real property to fund the costs of storm water management and of
operating, maintaining and improving the storm water system in the city.
FISCAL YEAR. July 1 of the calendar year to June 30 of the next calendar year, both inclusive.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. A hard surface area which is compacted or covered with material that is
resistant to infiltration by water including, but not limited to, most conventionally surfaced streets, roofs,
sidewalks, patios, driveways, parking lots and any other oiled, graveled, graded, compacted or other surface
which impedes the natural infiltration of surface water.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE AREA. The number of square feet of hard surface covered by buildings
and other impervious surfaces such as driveways and parking lots. All building measurements shall be
made between exterior faces of walls, foundations, columns or other means of support or enclosure.
MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING. A building with three or more dwelling units.
NON-SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (NON-SFR). Developed property other than single-family
residential property. The property shall include, but not be limited to, multi-family dwellings, commercial
properties, industrial properties, parking lots, hospitals, schools, recreational and cultural facilities, hotels,
offices and churches.
NPDES PHASE II PERMIT. National Pollution Elimination System Phase II storm water permit as
mandated by United States Environmental Protection Agency.
PROPERTY OWNER. The property owner of record as listed in the county=s Property Valuation
Office assessment rolls. A property owner includes any individual, corporation, firm, partnership or group
of individuals acting as a unit, and any trustee, receiver or personal representative.
Storm Water Utility and Management 7
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (SFR) PROPERTY. A developed property which serves the
primary purpose of providing a permanent dwelling unit and which is classified as residential in the Hardin
County assessment rolls. A single-family detached dwelling containing an accessory apartment is included
in this definition. For purposes of this definition, a Aduplex@ shall be considered as two separate SFRs.
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT. The planning, design, construction, regulation, improvement,
repair, maintenance and operation of facilities and programs relating to water, floodplains, flood control,
grading erosion, tree conservation, pollutant capture and/or transformation and sediment control.
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT FUND OR FUNDS. The Fund created by this chapter to operate,
maintain and improve the city=s storm water system.
STORM WATER SYSTEM. The primary system or network of storm and surface water management
facilities including, but not limited to, inlets, conduits, manholes, natural streams and sinkholes, channels,
ditches, drainage easements, retention and detention basins, infiltration facilities and other components, as
well as all natural waterways. Public roads and sidewalks are considered part of the STORM WATER
COLLECTION SYSTEM.
UNDEVELOPED PROPERTY. Any non-SFR property not altered from its natural state.
WATER. Any storm water, surface water, snow melt or ground water.
' 17.5-4 ESTABLISHMENT OF STORM WATER MANAGEMENT FUND.
(A) The storm water management program is established and the storm water system is provided to
protect the waterways and land in the city by managing flooding and to benefit the natural environment.
The costs of designing, developing, improving, operating, maintaining and monitoring the storm water
system required in the city should, therefore, be allocated, to the extent as practicable, to all property
owners based on their impact on the storm water system. In order to provide revenue to fund those costs
and to fairly allocate those costs, a Storm Water Management Fund (Athe Fund@) is established.
(B) All revenues collected from the storm water management fee from grants, permit fees and other
charges collected hereunder, shall be deposited to the Fund. The City Council may make additional
appropriations to the Fund. All disbursements from the Fund shall be for the purposes of the Fund as set
forth in ' 17.5-5.
8 Radcliff - Storm Water Utility and Management
' 17.5-5 PURPOSES OF THE FUND.
The Fund shall be used for the following purposes:
(A) The acquisition by gift, purchase or condemnation of real and personal property, and interests
therein, necessary to construct, operate and maintain storm water management facilities;
(B) All costs of administration and implementation of the storm water management program,
including the establishment of reasonable operating and capital reserves to meet unanticipated or
emergency storm water management requirements;
(C) Engineering and design, debt service and related financing expenses, construction costs for new
facilities and enlargement or improvement of existing facilities;
(D) Operation and maintenance of the storm water system;
(E) Monitoring, surveillance and inspection of storm water control devices;
(F) Water quality monitoring and water quality programs;
(G) Retrofitting developed areas for pollution control;
(H) Inspection and enforcement activities;
(I) Costs of public education relating to storm water and related issues;
(J) Billing and administrative costs; and
(K) Other activities which are reasonably required.
' 17.5-6 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT FEE.
(A) A monthly service charge is imposed upon all real property in the city, beginning no earlier than
7-1-2003, to fund storm water management programs. This service charge shall be known as the Astorm
water management fee@ (Afee@). Any real property completed or added after July 1 or annexed into the city
after July 1 shall be subject to a monthly service charge.
(B) The fee is based on:
(1) The extent to which runoff from each property creates the need for the storm water
management program;
Storm Water Utility and Management 9
(2) The amount of impervious area on each property; and
(3) The cost of implementing a storm water management program.
' 17.5-7 CLASSIFICATION OF PROPERTY FOR PURPOSES OF DETERMINATION OF
THE STORM WATER MANAGEMENT FEE.
(A) Generally. For purposes of determining the storm water management fee, all properties in the city
are classified into one of the following classes:
(1) Single-family residential (SFR) property;
(2) Non-single-family residential (non-SFR); or
(3) Non-developed property.
(B) Single-family residential fee. The Council finds that the contribution to runoff of most parcels of
real property in the city classified as single-family residential is similar and that it would be excessively and
unnecessarily expensive to determine precisely the square footage of the improvements (such as buildings,
structures and other impervious areas) on each parcel. Therefore, all single-family residential properties in
the city shall be charged a flat storm water management fee, equal to the base rate or ERU regardless of the
size of the parcel or the improvements.
(C) Other developed property fee. The fee for non-SFR property in the city shall be the base rate
multiplied by the numerical factor obtained by dividing the total impervious area (square feet) of the
property by one ERU. The impervious surface area for non-SFR property is the square footage for the
buildings and other improvements on the property. At the sole discretion of the Chief Administrative
Officer, the impervious surface area of non-SFR property may be approximated through site examination,
mapping information, aerial photographs and other available information. The minimum storm water
management fee for other developed property shall equal the base rate for single-family residential
property.
' 17.5-8 BASE RATE.
The City Council shall, by ordinance, establish the monthly base rate for the storm water management
fee. The base rate shall be calculated to ensure adequate revenues to fund the costs of storm water
management and to provide for the operation, maintenance and capital improvements of the storm water
system in the city.
10 Radcliff - Storm Water Utility and Management
' 17.5-9 SCHEDULE OF MONTHLY RATES FOR STORM WATER MANAGEMENT FEE.
(A) The following schedule of rates shall apply to each property owner. This schedule includes the rate
for the Storm Water Utility fees.
Rate Category Rate per Month
Single-family residential $4.50
Non-single-family residential $4.50 multiplied by the numerical factor obtained by dividing the total
impervious area (square feet) of the property by one equivalent residential
unit (ERU)
(B) Annual cost of living adjustment will be added to the user charges each year beginning with the
second billing cycle in March. The adjustments will be based upon the Consumer Price Index maintained
and reported by the U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics and reported by the Kentucky
Department of Local Government each February.
(Ord. passed 12-6-2004; Ord. 08-05-1046, passed 5-27-2008)
' 17.5-10 CHARGES FOR TAX-EXEMPT PROPERTIES; EXEMPTIONS.
(A) The City Council finds that all real property in the city contributes to runoff and either uses or
benefits from the maintenance of the storm water system. Therefore, all real property in the city, including
property that is tax exempt from property tax by the Kentucky Revised Statutes, as amended, shall be
charged with the fee.
(B) Property which is owned by the city shall be charged with the fee.
(C) All federal, state, county and city roads are exempt from the fee and are considered to be part of
the city drainage system.
(D) Undeveloped property in its natural state shall be exempt from the fee.
' 17.5-11 ASSESSMENT NOTICES.
(A) The Chief Administrative Officer may, but is not required to, send assessment notices for the fee
to property owners prior to the billing for the fee.
(B) If assessment notices are sent, the notice shall include the following information:
(1) The classification of the property for purposes of determining the fee;
Storm Water Utility and Management 11
(2) For property classified as other developed property:
(a) The impervious surface area of the property; and
(b) The method by which the impervious surface area of the property was determined; that is,
whether the computation of the impervious surface area of the property is based on information in the
county=s Property Valuation Office, site examination, mapping information, aerial photographs or other
methods.
(3) The amount of the base rate (i.e., the single-family residential fee) and, for other developed
property, the number of base units on the property.
' 17.5-12 WHEN STORM WATER MANAGEMENT FEE PAYABLE; INTEREST AND
PENALTIES; LIEN ON REAL PROPERTY; ABATEMENT OF SMALL AMOUNTS DUE.
(A) The fee shall be billed to each user on a monthly basis. Billings for any particular month shall be
made by the due date shown on the bill. Any payment not received within ten days after the bill due date
shall be considered delinquent.
(B) The fee charged to any customer that is due for a fiscal year must be paid within 30 days after the
bill is mailed or issued to the property owner and is overdue after that date. An overdue fee bears interest
and penalties at the rate of 12% per annum or fraction of a month that the fee is overdue.
(C) The fee, including interest and penalties, when overdue is a lien on real property and may be
collected by a suit against the property owner.
(D) The Chief Administrative Officer may abate the fee, including interest and penalties, if the cost of
collection is reasonably estimated to exceed the amount of the fee, including any interest and penalties, due
and payable.
' 17.5-13 REQUESTS FOR CORRECTION OF THE STORM WATER MANAGEMENT FEE.
(A) A property owner may request correction of the fee by submitting the request in writing to the
Chief Administrative Officer within 30 days after the date the assessment notice or the bill is mailed or
issued to the property owner. Grounds for correction of the fee include:
(1) Incorrect classification of the property for purposes of determining the fee;
(2) Errors in the square footage of the impervious surface area of the property;
(3) Mathematical errors in calculating the fee to be applied to the property; and
12 Radcliff - Storm Water Utility and Management
(4) Errors in the identification of the property owner of a property subject to the fee.
(B) The Chief Administrative Officer shall make a determination within 30 days after receipts of the
property owner=s completed written request for correction of the fee. The Chief Administrative Officer=s
decision on a request for correction of the fee shall be final.
(C) A property owner must comply with all rules and procedures adopted by the city when submitting
a request for correction of the fee and must provide all information necessary for the Chief Administrative
Officer to make a determination on a request for correction of the fee. If a property owner alleges an error
under ' 17.5-13(A)(2), the request for correction must include a certification by a registered engineer or
professional land surveyor of the impervious surface area of the property. Failure to comply with the
provisions of this division shall be grounds for denial of the request.
' 17.5-14 REQUEST FOR CREDIT.
A property owner may request credit for a portion of the Storm Water Utility fee in accordance with
the provisions of the city=s Storm Water Runoff Control Ordinance.
ARTICLE II. STORM WATER RUNOFF CONTROL AND QUALITY MANAGEMENT
' 17.5-21 TITLE; PURPOSE; GENERAL PROVISIONS.
(A) Title. This article shall be known as the AStorm Water Quality Management Regulations@ for the
City of Radcliff (Athe city@), Kentucky, and may be so cited.
(B) Purpose. The purpose of this article is to provide regulations and measures that will address storm
water quality in the city and to establish procedures by which these requirements are to be administered and
enforced.
(C) Jurisdiction.
(1) The laws of the Commonwealth of Kentucky shall apply to this article.
(2) This article shall govern all properties within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city.
(3) This article is applicable to all new development and redevelopment activities that result in
the disturbance of 5,000 square feet or more of land including disturbance of less than that if part of a larger
common plan.
(4) The following activities are exempt from the provisions of this article:
2011 S-1
Storm Water Utility and Management 13
(a) Agricultural and silviculture (woodland production) operations according to an
Agricultural Water Quality Plan approved by the City Conservation District or approved as required in the
Kentucky Agricultural Water Quality Plan developed in accordance with the Kentucky Agricultural Water
Quality Authority.
(b) Land reclamation projects regulated by the Kentucky State Department for Surface
Mining Reclamation and Enforcement.
(Ord. 10-06-1090, passed 6-7-2010)
' 17.5-22 DEFINITIONS; ACRONYMS.
(A) For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE. A discharge of spills and dumping or any disposal of materials
other than storm water into the system.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS). Those measures described in the latest edition of
the ANational Menu of Best Management Practices, Post-Construction Storm Water Management in New
Development and Redevelopment@ found at
http://cfpub.epa.gov/KPDES/stormwater/menuofbmps/index.cfm as published by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA), AKentucky Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control Field
Guide@ as published by the Kentucky Division of Water, ABest Management Practices for Construction
Activities@ as published by the Kentucky Division of Conservation and Division of Water and AKentucky
Construction Site BMP Planning and Technical Specifications Manual@ developed by the KDOW and
KYTC. This shall also include related documents published and distributed by the city.
BUILDER. A person, partnership, contractor, or corporation constructing one or more buildings
for occupancy or any other use.
CERTIFICATION. A signed, written statement that specific construction, inspections or tests
(when required) have been performed and that such comply with the applicable requirements of this article.
CITY. The City of Radcliff government.
CITY REPRESENTATIVE. The person or persons currently designated by the Mayor to
administer the storm water program and any related permit activities.
CLEAN WATER ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C ' 1251 et seq.)
CONTRACTOR. A person who contracts with the permittee, landowner, builder, developer or
another contractor to undertake any or all of the land-disturbing activities covered by this article.
2011 S-1
14 Radcliff - Storm Water Utility and Management
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Land-disturbance activities subject to state KPDES general
construction permits or local permits. Such activities include, but are not limited to clearing and grubbing,
grading, excavating, and demolition.
CONSTRUCTION WEATHER DAYS. Days in which a needed activity could occur.
DETENTION BASIN. A drainage facility constructed to restrict the runoff of storm water to a
prescribed maximum rate and to detain for a specified period of time the excess waters that accumulate
upstream from the outlet structure.
DEVELOPMENT. The planning or construction project involving substantial property
improvement and, usually, a change of land-use character within the site; the act of using land for building
purposes.
DIRECTLY CONNECTED IMPERVIOUS AREA (DCIA). Surface area that drains/discharges
to an outfall without passing through a BMP.
DRAINAGE AREA. The surface area from which water drains to a point of consideration.
ENGINEER. A person licensed as a professional engineer in the Commonwealth of Kentucky in
accordance with KRS 322.
EROSION PREVENTION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL (EPSC) MEASURE. The practice, or
a combination of practices, to prevent erosion and to abate the resulting off-site sedimentation.
FEMA. The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FINAL STABILIZATION.
(a) All soil-disturbing activities at the site have been completed;
(b) There are no areas of active erosion evident; and
(c) A uniform perennial vegetative cover with a density of 85% of the cover for the area has
been established or equivalent measures, i.e. mulches or geotextile fabrics, have been employed.
FLOODPLAIN. Any area inundated by a 100-year flood or as determined by the FEMA Flood
Insurance Rate Map(s) or an engineering study.
FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the
channel that are required to carry and discharge the peak flow of the regulatory flood of any river or stream.
The FLOODWAY is where the water is likely to be fastest and not include the channel and the portion of
the adjacent floodplain.
2011 S-1
Storm Water Utility and Management 15
ILLICIT DISCHARGE. Any discharge to a Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) that
is not composed entirely of storm water exempted by this article or managed pursuant to a Kentucky
Pollution Discharge Elimination System permit (other than the city=s KPDES storm water permit) or
otherwise defined by this article.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. Activities subject to KPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR
' 122.26 (b)(14).
KDOW. The Kentucky Division of Water.
KENTUCKY POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (KPDES) STORM
WATER DISCHARGE PERMIT. A permit issued by the Kentucky Division of Water (KDOW) under
designated authority by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA), whether the permit
is applicable on an individual, group or general area wide basis.
LAND-DISTURBING ACTIVITY. All clearing and grubbing, clear cutting, construction,
reconstruction, grading, modification, extension or expansion of structures or parking areas, placement of
fill and dumping that change the natural cover or topography, thereby creating the potential for erosion and
contribution of sediment.
LANDOWNER. A person holding legal title who directly or indirectly allows the land-disturbing
activity or who benefits from it.
LAND SURVEYOR. A person licensed as a professional land surveyor in the Commonwealth of
Kentucky according to KRS 322.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4). A conveyance or system of
conveyances, including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches,
manmade channels, or storm drains, that is designed or used for collecting or conveying storm water; not
privately owned; not a combined sewer; and not part of a Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW).
NOI. The Notice of Intent.
NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGE. Any discharge to the storm drainage system that is not
composed entirely of storm water or otherwise allowed by this article.
NOT. The Notice of Termination.
OUTFALL. The point or location where storm water runoff discharges from a BMP, conduit,
stream or drain, storm sewer, channel, or detention/retention facility.
PERIMETER OUTFALL. The locations from which storm water flow(s) from the project
site/disturbed area.
2011 S-1
16 Radcliff - Storm Water Utility and Management
PERIMETER CONTROL PLAN (PCP). A component of the Storm Water Quality Management
Plan that documents how sediment is controlled from leaving the project site.
PERMITTEE. The person responsible for the land-disturbing activity; who must have ownership
interest in the property and is designated on an approved SWQMP permit.
PERSON. Except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm,
association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private
institution, utility, cooperative, city, town, or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or
any other legal entity conducting land-disturbing activities subject to this article.
POLLUTANT. Anything of a chemical component or nature which causes or contributes to
pollution.
POLLUTION. The contamination or other alteration of any water=s physical, chemical, or
biological properties by the addition of a constituent.
POST-CONSTRUCTION STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (P-SWPPP).
A component of the Storm Water Quality Management Plan that illustrates how the pollutants or pollution
will be prevented, treated and otherwise managed in the long-term, beyond that of construction phases.
PREMISES. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or
unimproved.
PROJECT SITE. The area of land-disturbing activity.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL. An individual who is trained and experienced in storm water
treatment techniques and related fields as may be demonstrated by state registration, professional
certification, experience, or completion of coursework, as accepted according to this article, that enables the
individual to make sound, professional judgments regarding storm water control or treatment and
monitoring, pollutant fate and transport, and drainage planning.
REDEVELOPMENT PROJECTS. Classified as any activity that requires the submittal of a
development plan. Existing single family structures are exempt from redevelopment requirements.
RETENTION BASIN. A drainage facility constructed to contain the runoff of storm water to a
prescribed maximum rate/volume to pass into the groundwater system without discharging the retained
volume to surface waters except through an emergency bypass under conditions beyond the designed
capacity.
SITE. The entire area or project site of the land-disturbing activity as proposed in the permit
application.
2011 S-1
Storm Water Utility and Management 17
STOP WORK ORDER. An order by the city directing a permittee to suspend all construction
and/or operations except for work related to remediation of the violation.
STORM SEWER. A channel, ditch, catch basin, inlet pipe, culvert, conduit or other conveyance
used for the purposes of collecting and conveying storm water.
STORM WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN (SWQMP). Illustration and documentation
of how sediment and other pollutants are managed on the project site during and after the construction
phase. This is composed of three primary elements: (1) the Perimeter Control Plan, (2) the Storm Water
Pollution Prevention Plan, and (3) the Post-Construction Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan.
STORM WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN (SWQMP) PERMIT. A legal document
that allows the permit holder to break ground or disturb soil on a site within the provisions of a SWQMP.
STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP). A component of the Storm
Water Quality Management Plan that illustrates how the suspension of sediment and other construction
pollutants will be prevented.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH. Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes,
reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water,
natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the Commonwealth of Kentucky
which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person.
(Ord. 10-06-1090, passed 6-7-2010)
' 17.5-23 PROGRAM OBJECTIVES; GENERAL APPROACH.
(A) Program objectives.
(1) Protection of the short-term and long-term public health, safety, and general welfare. This
objective will be achieved by the following:
(a) Providing for regulation and management of the city=s storm water system, including
public and private facilities in the city=s service area.
(b) Protecting, and preserving storm water quality and thereby fish and wildlife habitat
within the city and in downstream receiving waters.
(c) Protecting those downstream and adjacent properties from storm water quality
impairment.
2011 S-1
18 Radcliff - Storm Water Utility and Management
(2) Compliance with state and federal storm water regulations developed pursuant to the Clean
Water Act Amendments of 1987 and subsequent amendments. This objective will be achieved by the
following:
(a) Benefitting storm water quality to a level of Adesignated use@ as defined by the Clean
Water Act '' 305(b) and 303(d) and minimizing the impacts from new development and/or areas of
significant redevelopment.
(b) Managing the quality of storm water discharged to the MS4 by controlling the
contribution of pollutants associated with new development and redevelopment.
(c) Prohibiting illicit discharges to storm water.
(d) Managing the discharge of spills and dumping or any disposal of materials other than
storm water into the system.
(e) Managing storm water pollution caused by the suspension and transport of soils, sediment
and other construction pollutants.
(f) Minimizing damage to public facilities and utilities.
(g) Managing the use of the public and private storm water/drainage system that will not
result in excessive maintenance costs.
(h) Encouraging the use of natural and aesthetically-pleasing designs that maximize the
preservation of natural areas.
(i) Guiding the construction of storm water management facilities by developing
comprehensive master plans that address storm water quantity, quality, design, operation, and maintenance.
(j) Encouraging the preservation of floodplains, floodways and open spaces to protect and
benefit the community=s quality of life and natural resources.
(k) Encouraging the planning for and use of regional BMPs.
(B) General approach for development.
(1) To most effectively achieve the program objectives, the city promotes an approach that
encourages the consideration and use of:
(a) Regional BMPs.
(b) Low-impact development design principles.
2011 S-1
Storm Water Utility and Management 19
(c) Waterway buffers.
(d) Low maintenance on-site BMPs.
(e) A series of multiple BMP treatment systems.
(2) The city will encourage a primary preference for regional BMPs through:
(a) Enabling and facilitating private partnerships where on-site storm water quantity and/or
quality requirements may be achieved or offset by watershed based solutions.
(b) Enabling and supporting private to public partnerships, offsets and regional BMP
banking, and in-lieu fee funds.
(3) In support of this approach, the city integrates into the planning and construction plan review
processes, when and where available, the use of:
(a) City Council adopted watershed studies.
(b) City Council adopted master plans.
(c) City of Radcliff Storm Water Design Manual.
(d) City of Radcliff Storm Water Credit Policy Program.
(e) FEMA floodplain delineations.
(f) USEPA, KDOW 303(d) reports.
(Ord. 10-06-1090, passed 6-7-2010)
' 17.5-24 AUTHORITY; RIGHT OF ENTRY.
(A) Upon request to the person, the city shall have safe and easy access to the areas to be inspected
and/or monitored.
(1) The city shall have the right-of-entry on or upon the project site. The city shall be provided
access to all parts of the premises subject to this article for the purposes of inspection, monitoring,
sampling, and for the performance of other duties necessary to determine compliance with this article.
(2) Where a project site has security measures in place which require proper identification and
clearance of individuals before entry into its premises, the person shall make necessary arrangements with
its security personnel so that, upon presentation of suitable identification and written request, the city will
be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
2011 S-1
20 Radcliff - Storm Water Utility and Management
(3) The city shall have the right to set up on a project site such devices necessary to conduct
sampling and/or metering of the storm water operations or discharges.
(4) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the areas to be inspected
and/or monitored that can reasonably be moved shall be removed promptly by the person at the written or
verbal request of the city. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the person.
(5) The city or its designated representative may inspect the facilities of any user in order to
ensure compliance with this article. Such inspections shall be made with the consent of the owner,
manager, or signatory official. If such consent is refused, denied or not promptly addressed, the city may
seek issuance of a search warrant.
(6) The city has the right to determine and impose inspection schedules necessary to enforce the
provisions of this article. Inspections may include, but are not limited to, the following:
(a) An initial inspection prior to Storm Water Management Plan approval;
(b) An inspection prior to burial of any underground drainage structures;
(c) Erosion control inspections as necessary to determine effective control of sediment prior
to discharge to the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System;
(d) A finish or closeout inspection when all work, including installation of storm
management facilities, has been completed; and
(e) An inspection to determine the effectiveness or operational viability of a permanent or
long-term storm water quality management practice(s).
(Ord. 10-06-1090, passed 6-7-2010)
' 17.5-25 ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION AND ELIMINATION.
(A) Prohibition of illegal discharges.
(1) Pursuant to the Kentucky Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (KPDES) Municipal
Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) program, illicit discharges to the MS4 are defined as illegal. Except
as hereinafter provided, all non storm water discharges into the MS4 are prohibited and declared to be
unlawful.
(2) It is unlawful for any person to connect any pipe, open channel, or any other conveyance
system that discharges anything except storm water or unpolluted water, which is approved by the city
based on exemptions listed in subsection (B) below, to the storm water system.
2011 S-1
Storm Water Utility and Management 21
(3) It is unlawful for any person to discharge waters from residential construction activities that
are not complying with the Standard of Practice for Residential Construction Storm Water Management as
approved and advertised by the city.
(4) In addition to illicit discharges, the discharge of spills and the dumping and/or disposal of
materials other than storm water, including, but not limited to, unpermitted (KPDES) industrial and
commercial wastes, commercial car wash wastes, sanitary sewage, garbage, yard waste, trash, petroleum
products, including used motor vehicle fluids, as well as leaf litter, grass clippings, and animal wastes into
the MS4, whether directly or indirectly, are prohibited, unless authorized under a KPDES permit.
(B) Allowable discharges.
(1) Unless the city has identified a discharge as an unacceptable source of pollutants to the Waters
of the Commonwealth of Kentucky, the following non-storm water discharges into the MS4 are lawful:
(a) Discharges from emergency fire fighting activities;
(b) Diverted stream flows;
(c) Rising ground waters;
(d) Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration to separate storm sewer systems (as defined by
40 CFR ' 35.2005(20));
(e) Uncontaminated pumped ground water;
(f) Discharges from potable water sources as required for system maintenance;
(g) Drinking water line flushing, de-chlorinated through city accepted BMPs;
(h) Air conditioning condensate;
(i) Uncontaminated landscape irrigation;
(j) Uncontaminated irrigation water;
(k) Lawn watering;
(l) Uncontaminated springs;
(m) Uncontaminated water from crawl space pumps;
(n) Uncontaminated water from footing drains and pumps;
2011 S-1
22 Radcliff - Storm Water Utility and Management
(o) Individual residential car washing;
(p) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
(q) Swimming pool discharges de-chlorinated through city accepted BMPs;
(r) Controlled flushing storm water conveyances (contained and treated by appropriate
BMPs);
(s) Discharges within the constraints of a Kentucky Pollutant Discharges Elimination System
(KPDES) permit from the Kentucky Division of Water (KDOW); and
(t) Discharges approved at the discretion of the city representative.
(C) Accidental discharges.
(1) In the event of any discharge of a hazardous substance in amounts that could cause a threat to
public drinking supplies, a spill having a significant adverse impact as defined by the USEPA and
Kentucky state law, or any other discharge that could constitute a threat to human health or the
environment, as may be asserted by the city, the owner or operator of the facility shall give notice to the city
and the KDOW as soon as practicable, but in no event later than four hours after discovery of the accidental
discharge or the discharger becomes aware of the circumstances.
(2) If an emergency response by governmental agencies is needed, the owner or operator should
call 911 immediately to report the discharge. A written report must be provided to the city within five days
of the time the discharger becomes aware of the circumstances, unless this requirement is waived by the
city for good cause shown as determined by the city or its designee on a case-by-case basis, containing the
following information:
(a) A description of the discharge including volumes and concentrations;
(b) The exact dates and times of discharge; and
(c) Steps being taken to eliminate and prevent recurrence of the discharge.
(3) The discharger shall take all reasonable steps to minimize any adverse impact to the MS4 or
the Waters of the State, including accelerated or additional monitoring necessary to determine the nature
and impact of the discharge. It shall not be a defense, for the discharger in an enforcement action, to claim
that it would have been necessary to halt or reduce the business or activity of the facility in order to
maintain storm water quality and minimize any adverse impact that the discharge may cause.
(Ord. 10-06-1090, passed 6-7-2010)
2011 S-1
Storm Water Utility and Management 23
' 17.5-26 STORM WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN (SWQMP) PERMIT
APPLICATION PROCESS.
(A) The landowner shall obtain from the city a SWQMP permit prior to the initiation of any
land-disturbing activities that result in the disturbance of 5,000 square feet or 2,000 square feet if part of a
larger common plan.
(B) This Storm Water Quality Management Plan (SWQMP) permit alone does not authorize or grant
permission to begin development or redevelopment on subject property. It does not supersede other permits
required by the city, state, and federal governments.
(C) Project site owners, as applicable in subsection (A), shall submit an application for a SWQMP on
forms provided by the city;
(D) Applications must include a Notice of Intent (NOI), Perimeter Control Plan (PCP), Storm Water
Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP), Post-Construction Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan
(P-SWPPP), and any other necessary information or documentation requested by the city. The NOI
requirements are included in subsection (F) below.
(E) The PCP and SWPPP are components of the SWQMP. While both plans may be approved
simultaneously, the provisions of a PCP shall be implemented, inspected and accepted by the city prior to
implementing the SWPPP and P-SWPPP and before other construction proceeds.
(F) The landowner must notify the city and the Kentucky Division of Water (KDOW) within seven
days prior to the commencement of construction activities through the submittal of an updated NOI.
(1) Submittal for a SWQMP permit application shall include a NOI letter, as required by 401
KAR 5:055 and 401 KAR 5:060, with proof of publication of a public notice, construction plans, a
Perimeter Control Plan, a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan, Post-Construction Storm Water Pollution
Prevention Plan, and any other necessary information or documentation requested by the city.
(2) The NOI letter, proof of publication of public notice, and construction plans for the SWQMP
permit shall be submitted to the city.
(G) Upon completion of construction activities, stabilization of the project site and removal of all
temporary erosion protection and sediment control measures, the applicant shall submit a NOT. The city, or
its designated representative, shall inspect the project site to verify that the requirements of the NOT have
been met.
(H) The city reserves the right to require a checklist of necessary items to be completed and included
with the SWQMP permit application submittal. Upon submittal, the SWQMP application shall be rejected
in its entirety should any item on the checklist be incomplete.
2011 S-1
24 Radcliff - Storm Water Utility and Management
(I) The city reserves the right to collect fees associated with SWQMP permit application, plan review,
and inspections from the applicant.
(Ord. 10-06-1090, passed 6-7-2010)
' 17.5-27 CONSTRUCTION SITE RUNOFF MANAGEMENT.
(A) Perimeter control plan. The permittee shall secure the perimeter prior to any land disturbance to
decrease off-site sedimentation once construction begins.
(1) Control plan objectives.
(a) Focus on downstream points and outfall areas and does not necessitate protection of the
entire site boundary.
(b) Protect adjacent properties by the use of vegetated strips along lower perimeters,
sediment barriers, filters, diversion berms, sediment basins or other means acceptable to the city.
(c) Protect all points of discharge from outlets such as pipes, drains, culverts, conduits and
channels.
(d) Minimize erosion and control sedimentation.
(e) Reduce the velocity of flows from the project site.
(2) Control plan requirements.
(a) The permittee shall utilize sediment control measures that consider the type of flow, site
terrain, soil type and other relevant factors.
(b) Buffer strips may only be utilized for sheet flow.
(c) Supplemental control measures shall be utilized when a single control device or measure
proves ineffective.
(d) Location and description of construction entrances and exits that comply, or exceed, the
BMP minimum standards. All sites require sufficient temporary construction entrances to ensure that
sediment is not tracked off of the construction site.
(B) Perimeter and outfall inspections.
(1) The perimeter and outfall protection inspection must be performed prior to the permitee=s
breaking ground or disturbing soil with exception for installation of sediment control practices at the
hydrologic perimeter and outfall(s) of a construction site. The inspection shall include participation by the
city, the permittee and the permittee=s contractor.
2011 S-1
Storm Water Utility and Management 24A
(2) The perimeter and outfall protection inspection may only be performed after the review and
acceptance by the city of a Perimeter Control Plan.
(3) Clearing, except that necessary to establish perimeter sediment control devices, shall not
begin until perimeter and outfall sediment control devices have been installed and have been stabilized.
Activities necessary to establish the perimeter controls are exempt from initial inspection.
(4) The city shall inspect the proposed construction site within seven normal business days after
the submittal of the plan and installation of the perimeter protection devices.
(a) The inspector shall either approve the portion of work completed or notify the permittee
where the work fails to comply with the approved perimeter protection plan.
(b) Failure by the city to perform the inspection within seven normal business days will allow
the permittee to begin land-disturbing activities, but may be subject to subsequent inspections by the city
and revisions in the perimeter protection plan.
(c) Inspection of perimeter and outfall protection measures shall consist of an inspection of
each type of protective measure to ensure that it was installed according to the approved plan and
site-specific conditions.
(d) Measures shown on the plan may be modified at the time of inspection pursuant to
agreement between the city and the permittee=s engineer or qualified professional.
(C) Other inspections. The city may inspect a permitted construction site in order to determine
compliance with this article. The city may determine and establish inspection schedules necessary to
enforce the provisions of this article within access provided in ' 17.5-24.
(D) Storm Water Quality Management Plan (SWQMP) permit (Astorm water permit@).
(1) By accepting the permit, the permittee automatically acknowledges and accepts that the city
has the right to perform inspections of the project site.
(2) The permittee shall complete a permit application that includes a Storm Water Pollution
Prevention Plan (SWPPP), Perimeter Control Plan (PCP), and Post-Construction Storm Water Pollution
Prevention Plan (P-SWPPP) to be completed, sealed and signed by a licensed professional engineer and/or
land surveyor as appropriate and submitted to the city representative.
(3) The plan shall include and/or address the following elements:
(a) Area vicinity map showing current zoning, adjoining property owners, and street lines
within 100 feet of the project boundaries all drawn at a scale not greater than one inch equals 2,000 feet.
(b) North arrow and its basis.
2011 S-1
24B Radcliff - Storm Water Utility and Management
(c) Legend explaining symbols and abbreviations used on the plan.
(d) ADo Not Disturb@ limits for construction activity indicated by a heavy dashed line and
labeled as such.
(e) Boundary of site defined by bearings and distances and indicated by a heavy solid line.
(f) Drawing(s) at a scale not greater than one inch equals 100 feet. In the case of an
unusually large development, a scale of one inch equals 200 feet may be acceptable.
(g) Acreage of the total site and acreage of the project site (if different).
(h) Soil classifications.
(i) Existing and proposed runoff coefficients.
(j) Directly connected impervious area (DCIA).
(k) Impervious areas as measured in square feet.
(l) Benchmark location(s), description(s) and elevation(s) at sea level.
(m) Basis of elevation datum.
(n) Name, address and telephone number of the owner, developer, permittee and project
engineer.
(o) Existing and proposed topography at two-foot contour intervals.
(p) Mapping accuracy shall conform to National Standards of Mapping.
(r) Location of conservation zones, sinkholes, streams, steep slopes, known springs and
watercourses.
(s) Location of any existing buildings or structures.
(t) Location of any pertinent utilities, sanitary sewers, water and storm water facilities on the
property or within 50 feet of the site.
(u) Elevations, dimensions, locations and the extent of all planned grading indicated with
proposed contours.
(v) A grading plan for borrow pits, quarries and material-processing facilities based on the
findings of soil site investigations.
2011 S-1
Storm Water Utility and Management 24C
(w) Design details of temporary and permanent structural controls.
(x) Approximate location of the 100-year floodplain or a statement by a professional
engineer or professional land surveyor that the site is not located in an area subject to flooding. The basis
for this determination shall be shown.
(y) A detailed cost estimate for installation and maintenance of all storm water management
control measures.
(z) Identification of perimeter controls at outfalls and areas where construction site drainage
leaves the property boundary or disturbed area(s).
(aa) Arrows indicating drainage flow patterns.
(bb) Location, dimensions, detailed specifications, and construction details of all temporary
and permanent storm water quality measures.
(cc) Temporary stabilization plans and sequence of implementation including seeding
mixture, method of seedbed preparation and kind and quantity of mulching.
(dd) Permanent stabilization plans and sequence of implementation including seeding
mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seedbed preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of
lime and fertilizer application, and kind and quantity of mulching.
(ee) A sequence of construction of the development site, including stripping and clearing,
rough grading, construction of utilities, infrastructure, and construction of buildings, final grading and
landscaping. Sequencing shall identify the expected date each activity will occur and the expected duration
of each. A description should be given describing the relationship between implementation of storm water
quality measures and phases of construction activities. Phasing of construction should be performed to limit
disturbed areas to 20 acres.
(ff) Anticipated inspection and maintenance requirements for permanent and temporary
measures. This shall include the expected frequency of routine inspections and maintenance activities such
as removal of sediment and waste concrete.
(gg) Name of receiving waters.
(hh) Management practices or other controls to address the following:
1. Waste concrete management.
2. Material delivery, handling and storage.
3. Sanitary/septic waste management.
2011 S-1
24D Radcliff - Storm Water Utility and Management
4. Solid waste/trash and debris management.
5. Vehicle and equipment cleaning, fueling and maintenance.
6. Sensitive and vegetated area preservation.
7. Pit and channel dewatering operations.
8. Contaminated soil management as defined and approved by the Kentucky Divisions
of Water and Waste Management.
9. Hazardous materials and waste management as defined and approved by the
Kentucky Divisions of Water and Waste Management.
10. Pesticides, herbicides and fertilizer use.
11. Long-term storm water quality treatment.
12. Blowing of dust or sediment from the site.
(ii) Plan for stabilizing the entire site at the end of the construction season. If vegetation
cannot be established, site shall have a heavy mulch layer (straw or wood chips) applied to control erosion.
(4) Plan revisions. The permittee shall notify the city in writing of any substantial field changes
made to the approved Storm Water Quality Management Plan. Changes made to the Plan must be approved
by the City Engineer.
(5) Plan review and permit issuance. The city shall review the SWPPP within a reasonable time
frame, typically 30 calendar days, from date of submission and issue or deny the requested permit. Failure
to do so will allow the person to proceed with land-disturbing activities in accordance with BMPs and the
submitted SWPPP. However, the city still reserves the right to review and require changes it determines
appropriate.
(6) Requirements for individual lots.
(a) An Erosion and Sediment Control Permit is required for all individual lots and shall be
completed and signed prior to the issuance of a building permit for the site.
(b) All storm water management measures necessary to comply with this article must be
implemented in accordance with the permitted plan for the larger project and adhere to the general standard
or those of a common area plan.
(c) The individual permittee is responsible for the installation and maintenance of all erosion
prevention and sediment control measures until the site is stabilized.
2011 S-1
Storm Water Utility and Management 24E
(d) The permittee, whether owning the property or acting as the representative of the property
owner, shall submit to the city the following information for review and approval prior to the issuance of a
building permit:
1. Dimensions, existing drainage patterns and swales, location of the proposed or of any
existing buildings and the location of any natural features that are pertinent to this article;
2. Proposed drainage patterns;
3. Location of the construction entrance to the site; and
4. An eight and one-half-inch by 11-inch site plan showing the location of perimeter
erosion and sediment control measures prior to land disturbance.
(e) Temporary erosion prevention and sediment control measures may be removed for
completion of the finish grade. Permanent stabilization to include either sod or mulched-seeding as
appropriate for seasonal conditions shall be completed within 14 days prior to removal of temporary
erosion prevention and sediment control measures.
(Ord. 10-06-1090, passed 6-7-2010)
' 17.5-28 POST-CONSTRUCTION STORM WATER MANAGEMENT.
(A) Storm water quality management. The permittee shall complete a permit application that includes
a Post-Construction Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (P-SWPPP) to be completed, sealed and signed
by a licensed professional engineer and/or land surveyor as appropriate and submitted to the city
representative.
(B) Post-Construction Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan. A SWQMP permit requires a review
and submittal of a Post-Construction Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (P-SWPPP). The P-SWPPP
shall include the following information:
(1) A description of the proposed land use including amount of impervious area, directly
connected impervious area, and nature of the development.
(2) Location, dimensions, detailed specifications, and construction details of all post-construction
storm water quality Best Management Practices (BMPs), as defined in the city guidance documents.
(3) A sequence describing when each post-construction storm water quality BMP will be
installed.
2011 S-1
24F Radcliff - Storm Water Utility and Management
(4) A Long-Term Operation and Maintenance Agreement containing maintenance guidelines for
all post-construction storm water quality measures to facilitate their proper long-term function. This
Agreement shall be made available to future parties, including property owners, who will assume
responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the post- construction storm water quality measures.
(5) The P-SWPPP shall include provisions for buffers.
(a) The waterway buffer will be used to define areas where land disturbance activities shall
be permitted, but construction of any building or structure shall not be permitted.
(b) A waterway buffer shall be applied to all waterways serving more than 25 acres of
tributary area or presented on a United State Geological Survey map as a blue line stream.
(c) The waterway buffer shall be defined as the greater of:
1. Area contained within a boundary established by the floodplain boundary as defined
by FEMA or city master planning: or
2. Where a floodplain is not defined or calculated, the buffer will be 25 feet on each
side from the top of waterway bank as defined by geomorphic shape (not by the current water surface
elevation).
(d) The waterway buffer and floodplain may be used for application of storm water quality
devices. This may only be permitted if erosion prevention and sediment control, water quality, and cut-fill
policies are adequately addressed as determined by the city according to the provisions of this article.
(e) Exemptions are granted so long as, erosion prevention and sediment control, water
quality and cut-fill policies are adequately addressed. Exemptions shall be granted for:
1. Roads and utilities crossing waterways.
2. Pedestrian trails and walkways proximate to waterways.
3. Other exemptions may be made at the discretion of the city representative.
(f) A licensed professional engineer in the Commonwealth of Kentucky shall stamp all
construction plans and long-term maintenance documentation. This shall include all proposed
improvements or modifications to existing or new storm water infrastructure and other related
improvements or modifications.
(g) The city may require the posting of a maintenance bond to secure the structural integrity
of said facilities as well as the functioning of said facilities in accordance with the approved P-SWPPP for a
term of 24 months from the date of acceptance of dedication. An irrevocable letter of
2011 S-1
Storm Water Utility and Management 24G
credit can be used as the financial assurance in lieu of a maintenance bond although the contribution shall
be equivalent to the amount that would be estimated for the maintenance bond. The maintenance bond shall
be calculated as 20% of the estimated construction cost and may be reduced to 10% after 12 months if there
are no concerns by the city representative.
(C) BMP design requirements and criteria.
(1) The city reserves the right to develop or adopt other guidance documents to serve as design
and implementation standards. Other guidance documents distributed by the city should be reviewed and
considered when preparing the P-SWPPP. These documents may be applied as standards by which designs
are to be prepared and controls implemented.
(2) The city shall have authority to implement this article by appropriate regulations, guidance or
other related materials. In this regard, technical, administrative, or procedural matters may be modified as
needed to meet the objectives defined herein, so long as such modifications as to technical, administrative,
or procedural matters are not contrary or beyond the intent of the objectives defined above.
(a) Regulations, guidance or other related materials that may be given authority by this article
may include, but are not limited to: Best Management Practice (BMP) manuals, design regulations and
requirements, submittal checklists, review checklists, inspection checklists, certifications, storm water
management manuals and operation and maintenance manuals.
(b) Materials may include information deemed appropriate by the city including guidance
and specifications for the preparation of grading plans, selecting environmentally sound practices for
managing storm water, minimum specifications and requirements, more complete definitions and
performance standards.
(c) The above-referenced documents may restrict or prevent the use of specific products,
techniques or management practices (that are to be accepted by the public or are deemed to have a negative
impact on public infrastructure or the MS4) that have been identified as unacceptable for performance,
maintenance or other technically based reasons.
(d) Documents referenced above may be updated periodically to reflect the most current and
effective practices and shall be made available to the public. However, the failure to update the manual
shall not relieve any applicant from the obligation to comply with this article, and shall not prevent the city
from imposing the most current and effective practices.
(3) The P-SWPPP shall include provisions for storm water quality BMPs functioning
independently or in combination. Acceptable storm water quality BMPs shall be defined by policy and
guidance documents as approved by the Storm Water Board.
(4) The P-SWPPP shall include provisions for storm water quality BMPs that are designed to
achieve the following design/performance objectives:
2011 S-1
24H Radcliff - Storm Water Utility and Management
(a) Development shall be designed with management measures that are built and maintained
to treat, filter, flocculate, infiltrate, screen, evapo-transpire, harvest and reuse storm water runoff, or
otherwise manage the storm water quality produced from an 80 percentile precipitation event (threequarters
of an inch rainfall).
(b) Reduce or buffer increases in storm water runoff temperature caused by contact with
impervious surfaces.
(c) Reduce or buffer increases in storm water runoff volume and flow rate caused by
increases in directly connected impervious area and overall impervious area.
(d) 1. Storm water detention/ retention facilities shall be designed to address the rate at
which flow is released over the entire runoff discharge period and the volume of discharge over the critical
design-storm period if defined by city storm water master plans. The outlet structure shall be designed as a
v-notch weir or other multiple stage configurations capable of controlling (limiting) the discharge rates for
the first flush, two-, ten-, 25- and 100-year design-storm events to pre-developed levels for new
developments.
2. Redevelopment shall reduce the discharge from their site according to formula
below:
Q (redeveloped) = Q (existing) + Q (undeveloped)
2.0
Q (redeveloped) = maximum discharge rate for the re-development
Q (existing) = current discharge rate of the developed parcel
Q (undeveloped) = discharge rate of the parcel prior to any development
3. The reduction of the existing discharge rate per the above formula shall be limited to
20%.
(e) 1. Storm water hotspots are areas that often produce higher concentrations of certain
pollutants, such as hydrocarbons or heavy metals, than are normally found in urban runoff. These areas will
be reviewed for effective removal of the particular pollutant which they discharge. Effective removal shall
be deemed as that which existed prior to development of the site or in the case of redevelopment that which
existed prior to any development to the site. Review and approval is required prior to commencement of
construction.
2. Examples of storm water hotspots include:
A. Gas/fueling stations;
B. Restaurants;
2011 S-1
Storm Water Utility and Management 24I
C. Vehicle repair facilities;
D. Vehicle washing/steam cleaning facilities;
E. Auto recycling facilities;
F. Outdoor material storage areas;
G. Loading and transfer areas;
H. Landfills;
I. Industrial sites;
J. Industrial rooftops.
(5) Soil bioengineering, Agreen@ and other Asoft@ slope and stream bank stabilization methods shall
receive preference over rip rap, concrete and other hard armoring techniques.
(6) Retention. Supportive data must be submitted to justify the type of facility selected. If the
facility is designed to retain (volume control) all or a significant portion of runoff (as opposed to
temporarily detain), then appropriate soils analyses findings shall be submitted to the city. This submission
shall also discuss the impacts the facility will have on local karst topography as found through a
geotechnical investigation of the site. The facility may be designed to infiltrate runoff to groundwater rather
than transmit it downstream under conditions up to a ten-year storm event. It must be able to bypass all
other storms including 100-year event with a discharge rate equivalent to or less than pre-development
conditions without negatively impacting the 100-year floodplain above or below the site. If data indicates
that the facility can not retain a significant portion of the runoff (95%) then the facility must be designed to
detain runoff.
(7) If available, each P-SWPPP shall be evaluated for consistency with the storm water master
plan or watershed study for the major watershed or watersheds within which the project site is located. The
individual project evaluation will determine if storm water quantity and quality management practices can
adequately serve the property and limit impacts to downstream public and private properties. The presence
of a regional facility(s) will be considered in determining the extent to which storm water quantity and/or
quality controls will be necessary.
(8) The city reserves the right to require superseding or additional treatment criteria or objectives
for specific pollutant(s) as necessary to meet overall storm water quality management program objectives or
directives under a watershed improvement or Total Maximum Daily Load (TDML) program as
administered by the USEPA or Commonwealth of Kentucky.
(9) On-site BMP coordination with regional BMPs.
2011 S-1
24J Radcliff - Storm Water Utility and Management
(a) All properties are expected to implement on-site storm water quality control measures,
but the extent of application may be reduced given the availability, proximity and nature of regional storm
water quality BMPs.
(b) The extent and type of on-site storm water quality management practices implemented
shall be proportionate to the land use, and proximity to regional storm water quality management practices.
(D) BMP ownership and easements.
(1) Any storm water management facility or BMP which services individual property owners
shall be privately owned. General routine maintenance (controlling vegetative growth and removing debris)
shall be provided by the owner(s). The owner shall maintain a perpetual, non-exclusive easement that
allows for access for inspection and emergency maintenance by the city. The city has the right, but not the
duty, to enter premises for emergency repairs.
(2) Any storm water management facility or BMP which services an individual residential
subdivision in which the facility or BMP is within designated open areas or serves as an amenity with an
established homeowners association shall be privately owned and maintained consistent with provisions of
this articles. The owner shall maintain a perpetual, nonexclusive easement which allows access for
inspection and emergency maintenance by the city. The city has the right, but not the duty, to enter premises
for emergency repairs.
(3) Any storm water management facility or BMP which services commercial and industrial
development shall be privately owned and maintained. The owner shall maintain a perpetual, nonexclusive
easement which allows access for inspection and emergency maintenance by the city. The city has the right,
but not the duty, to enter premises for emergency repairs.
(4) All regional storm water management control facilities proposed by the owners, if approved
and accepted by the city for dedication as a public regional facility, shall be publicly owned and/or
maintained. All other storm water management control facilities and BMPs shall be privately owned and/or
maintained unless accepted for maintenance by the city.
(5) The city may require dedication of privately owned storm water facilities, which discharge to
the city storm water system. This shall be at the approval of the City Council.
(E) Regional facilities management.
(1) The objective of a regional storm water management facility, pond or other device, is to
address the storm water management concerns in a given watershed with greater economy and efficiency
than possible through individual facilities. The intended result is fewer storm water management facilities
to maintain in the affected watershed while sustaining efficiency.
2011 S-1
Storm Water Utility and Management 24K
(2) The city encourages regional storm water quantity and/or quality management practices,
serving 25 to 250 acres of tributary area, which may be consistently and efficiently managed and
maintained. These types of practices will be encouraged in order to replace or reduce the implementation of
on-site storm water quantity and/or quality management practices, as determined to be appropriate by the
city.
(3) Where a regional storm water management facility has been established by one or more local
governments, or by an authority operating on behalf of one or more local governments, a development or
property may participate in said program in lieu of runoff control required by this article. This may be
permitted provided that:
(a) Runoff from the development drains to an approved existing or proposed public regional
storm water management facility that will be operational within one year.
(b) Participation in the form of contribution of funds, contribution of land, contribution of
storm water management facility construction work, or a combination of these, the total value of which
shall be in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by the city.
(c) The city finds that the storm water quality management plans are in compliance with all
other applicable requirements and ordinances.
(d) Each fiscal or in-kind contribution from a development owner participating in a regional
storm water quality management facility shall be used for acquisition, design, construction or maintenance
of one or more such facilities in the same watershed in which the development is located.
(4) Detention facilities may, and are encouraged to, be designed to serve multiple purposes. For
example, runoff may be detained under wet-weather conditions, but also serve as common or recreational
areas during dry weather conditions. Where multi-purpose facilities are provided, or where flat grades or
poorly draining soils are encountered, provisions for adequate low-flow storm water management system
may be required. Where the retention/ detention facility is planned to be used as a lake, pond or storm water
quality management practice with a permanent pool, water budget calculations shall be performed and
submitted to demonstrate that an adequate permanent pool depth is expected during dry summer months.
(F) Long-Term Operation and Maintenance Agreements.
(1) Long-Term Operation and Maintenance Agreements shall include a maintenance plan for all
storm water quality BMPs in new development or redevelopment that require more than general
maintenance (e.g., periodic mowing).
(a) The plan will be developed to ensure that the storm water quality BMP(s) is (are) kept
functional. The maintenance agreement will specify minimum operation and maintenance requirements and
intervals to be performed by the property owner.
2011 S-1
24L Radcliff - Storm Water Utility and Management
(b) The plan shall address schedules for inspections and techniques for operation and
maintenance including vegetation clearing or mowing and removing accumulated trash, debris, sediment
pollutants and other forms of pollution.
(c) The Agreement shall be noted on the final plat with the appropriate notation on the
particular lot(s).
(d) The Agreement shall be included with property ownership title documents and shall be
binding on the owner, its administrators, executors, assigns, heirs, and any other successors in interest.
(e) The format for the Long-Term Operational and Maintenance Agreement shall be
provided through example by the city, or through guidance documents.
(f) Storm water detention and retention maintenance. Care must be taken to ensure that any
required facilities do not become nuisances or health hazards. Detention and retention facilities should be
designed to require minimal maintenance, and maintenance expectations must be clearly stated in the
Long-Term Operation and Maintenance Agreement.
(g) When a storm water quality BMP serves more than one parcel, a home or property
owners= association or binding contract for the purpose of operation and maintenance is required. The
owners= association shall be responsible for operation and maintenance as directed by this article.
(2) Single entity ownership. Where the permanent storm water runoff control facilities are
designed to manage runoff from property in a single entity ownership, the maintenance responsibility for
the storm water control facilities shall be with the single entity owner.
(a) A SINGLE ENTITY shall be defined as an association, public or private corporation,
partnership firm, trust, estate or any other legal entity allowed to own real estate exclusive of an individual
lot owner.
(b) The stated responsibilities of the entity shall be documented in the Long-Term Operation
and Maintenance Agreement. Terms including owning, operating and maintaining the facilities shall be
submitted with plans in application for a SWQMP permit for an adequacy determination. Approval of a
SWQMP shall be conditioned upon the approval of these terms. These terms shall be in writing, shall be in
recordable form, and shall, in addition to any other terms deemed necessary by the city, contain a provision
permitting inspection at any reasonable time by the city of all facilities deemed critical in the public
welfare.
(c) Upon approval of the storm water quality BMPs by the city, the facility owner(s) shall
demonstrate the ability to guarantee and apply the financial resources necessary for long-term maintenance
requirements. The funding mechanism shall be in a form approved by the city. The city will only approve
funding mechanism(s) for long-term maintenance responsibilities that can be demonstrated to be permanent
or transferable to another entity with equivalent longevity.
2011 S-1
Storm Water Utility and Management 24M
(d) In the event that proposed funding is through an owners= association, then it must be
demonstrated that the association may not dissolve unless long-term operation and maintenance activities
are accepted by another entity with equivalent longevity and adequate funding. Furthermore, the owners=
association=s responsibility must be stated in the association=s declaration, covenants, or by-laws, as
appropriate.
(e) Unless made specifically clear in the preliminary stages of the site design and
construction plan review procedure, it will be assumed that all storm water detention, retention, treatment
or storage facilities and/or devices shall be owned, operated and maintained by a single entity as defined
above.
(3) City ownership. Where the city has accepted an offer of dedication of the permanent storm
water quality BMPs, the city shall be responsible for operation and maintenance.
(Ord. 10-06-1090, passed 6-7-2010)
' 17.5-29 STORM WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN (SWQMP) PERMIT
INSPECTIONS.
(A) Permittee performed inspections.
(1) Permittee performed inspections (self inspections) shall be performed by a qualified
professional.
(2) The city shall develop standards and a checklist to be used by the permittee for the
inspections.
(3) Documentation of owner performed inspections and inspection findings shall be kept on site,
if appropriate facilities are available.
(4) Documentation of owner performed inspections and inspection findings shall be made
available within two business days for construction and seven days for post-construction of a request by the
city or designated representative. Failure to timely submit documentation, as requested, will be assumed to
indicate that inspections were not performed and may result in corresponding enforcement procedures.
(5) Construction inspections. Maintenance inspections shall be performed at control measures at
least every seven regular calendar days and within 24 hours of a one-half inch rain event. The permittee
shall repair all deficiencies within seven calendar days after deficiencies or failures have been identified.
(6) Post-construction inspections. Inspection and maintenance shall be performed at storm water
quality BMPs on at least an annual basis and as otherwise determined in the Long-Term Operation and
Maintenance Agreement.
2011 S-1
24N Radcliff - Storm Water Utility and Management
(B) Oversight inspections.
(1) The city, or the city=s designated representative, has the authority to randomly and periodically
inspect the storm water quality BMPs. The city may make inspections of the site at its discretion and shall
either approve the condition of the BMP or shall notify the permittee wherein the condition fails to comply
with the approved SWQMP.
(2) The city or its designated representative=s inspections and findings will be presented and
reviewed with the permittee at the time of inspection (if site personnel are available), and be available in
the city public records.
(3) The city shall identify in writing any measures with deficiencies or that are not in compliance
with the objectives of this article and the SWQMP permit. A site inspection will be mailed to the
responsible person for the site listing all deficiencies for the site. The permittee shall repair all deficiencies
within seven calendar days after deficiencies or failures have been identified.
(Ord. 10-06-1090, passed 6-7-2010)
' 17.5-30 QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL.
A qualified professional is required to perform construction and post-construction inspections and to
direct and/or supervise maintenance activities to ensure that the SWQMP permit and Long-Term Operation
and Maintenance Agreement provisions are being implemented properly.
(A) Effect. This section shall be effective and enforced on January 1, 2011.
(B) Registration. Qualified professionals performing inspections or overseeing maintenance activities
under this article must be registered by the city prior to execution of those actions. All applicants must file
an application with the city.
(C) Construction qualified professional prerequisites.
(1) Applicants must demonstrate knowledge and experience in the following areas:
(a) Construction practices;
(b) Operational standards;
(c) Cause and failure indicators; and
(d) Maintenance measures used to prevent and correct failures.
(2) Applicants who can demonstrate one or more of the following will be considered for
registration:
2011 S-1
Storm Water Utility and Management 24O
(a) Successful completion and passage of the Kentucky Erosion Prevention and Sediment
Control course and examination through the University of Kentucky Transportation Center.
(b) Professional engineer license in good standing in the Commonwealth of Kentucky with
demonstrated experience in erosion prevention and sediment control on construction sites.
(c) Landscape architect license in good standing in the Commonwealth of Kentucky with
demonstrated experience in erosion prevention and sediment control on construction sites.
(d) Professional in erosion and sediment control certification in good standing.
(e) EPSC Inspector certification in good standing from the Louisville and Jefferson County
Metropolitan Sewer District.
(f) Similar qualification or certification of any other similar program in the Commonwealth
of Kentucky or in the United States so long as that program required a test and the applicant passed the test.
(3) Documentation demonstrating the above will be required by the city before registration will
be granted.
(4) Post-construction qualified professional prerequisites.
(a) Applicants must demonstrate knowledge and experience in the following areas:
1. Storm water quality treatment practices;
2. Operational standards;
3. Cause and failure indicators; and
4. Maintenance measures used to prevent and correct failures.
(b) Applicants who can demonstrate one or more of the following will be considered for
registration:
1. Professional engineer license in good standing in the Commonwealth of Kentucky
with demonstrated experience in storm water quality treatment BMPs.
2. Landscape architect license in good standing in the Commonwealth of Kentucky
with demonstrated experience in storm water quality treatment BMPs.
3. Professional in storm water quality certification in good standing.
2011 S-1
24P Radcliff - Storm Water Utility and Management
4. Similar qualification or certification of any other similar program in the
Commonwealth of Kentucky or in the United States so long as that program required a test and the
applicant passed the test.
(5) The city may report to the appropriate licensing, certification or qualification authority for
activities not consistent with the policies and procedures identified in this article. This may include
reporting activities that include but are not limited to, the submittal of false or misleading information or
for repeated incompetence or negligent actions by the registrant.
(Ord. 10-06-1090, passed 6-7-2010)
' 17.5-31 STORM WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN (SWQMP) PERMIT
TERMINATION.
(A) The permittee shall submit a Notice of Termination (NOT) of permit letter to the city.
(B) Written acceptance of site conditions shall be made by the city based upon an inspection.
(C) The city shall consider whether conditions are sufficient, appropriate and consistent with the
SWQMP.
(D) A permit shall be considered open and active until the city accepts the site conditions, a
Long-Term Operation and Maintenance Agreement has been accepted, and after the following as-built
requirements have been completed:
(1) Temporary erosion and sediment control measures have been removed.
(2) The remaining, undeveloped acreage that was subject to the permit does not exceed five acres.
(3) The designed public utilities are installed and have been inspected by the appropriate
agencies.
(4) The road(s) have been constructed and the binder course of pavement has been placed in
accordance with the standards in the Subdivision Regulations (Chapter 19).
(5) The remaining undeveloped acreage that was subject to the permit does not pose a significant
threat to the integrity of the infrastructure, adjacent properties or storm water quality.
(6) Permanent storm water quality BMPs and other measures have been implemented and are
operational at the designed levels.
(7) Pipes, channels, catch basins, storm water quality treatment devices and other drainage
features are clear of sediment, obstructions and debris, and are operating as designed and appropriate for
final site conditions.
2011 S-1
Storm Water Utility and Management 24Q
(8) Disturbed slopes are stabilized.
(9) Detention and retention basins are stabilized at designed volumes and conditions.
(10) The city shall have 21 normal business days to perform an inspection and respond to the
request. If the city does not respond within the 21 normal business days, then the request shall be granted
automatic approval.
(E) As-built requirements.
(1) Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, recording of the final plat or final release of
bond, the as-built condition (including: invert elevations, size shape and location) of critical storm water
management features must be identified, approved, and provided in a electronic form to the city
representative.
(2) The volume, slopes, configuration, condition and topographic information of all detention,
retention and water quality practices shall be certified by a professional engineer or land surveyor, as
appropriate, licensed in the Commonwealth of Kentucky. This information shall be provided to the city, in
the form of an as-built drawing or other electronic form accepted by the city. The as-built certification shall
indicate if final conditions are consistent with, or exceed, the SWQMP provisions.
(3) If it is determined that information provided in the as-built drawing, certification, inspection
or survey of the site does not meet or exceed the SWQMP provisions, the city reserves the right to withhold
certification of occupancy or final bond release. Furthermore, other enforcement mechanisms may be
applied to the permittee or persons making certifying statements.
(4) The requirements of this subsection do not apply for individual residential lot development.
(Ord. 10-06-1090, passed 6-7-2010)
' 17.5-32 ENFORCEMENT; PENALTIES; APPEALS.
(A) Responsibility. It will be the responsibility of the permittee to ensure compliance with this article
and implementation of the SWQMP permit and Long-Term Operation and Maintenance Agreement.
However, all responsible persons, regardless of ownership, must comply with the requirements of this
article and may be held accountable to the enforcement provisions herein.
(B) Disconnection of illicit discharges. The person responsible for any connection in violation of
' 17.5-25, with regard to illicit discharges, shall immediately cause the illegal connection to be
disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to the appropriate sanitary sewer system upon approval by the
operating body of said sanitary sewer system and the Kentucky Division of Water.
(C) Liability for expenses incurred. Any person responsible for illicit discharges or noncompliance
with BMPs at any residential, industrial and/or construction site(s), and who fails to correct any
2011 S-1
24R Radcliff - Storm Water Utility and Management
prohibited condition or discontinue any prohibited activity at the order of the city, shall be liable to the city
for expenses incurred in abating pollution. This may include expenses incurred in testing, measuring,
sampling, collecting, removing, treating, and disposing of the polluting materials and preventing further
noncompliance and/or illicit discharges.
(D) Enforcement.
(1) The city shall institute appropriate actions or proceedings by law or equity for the enforcement
of this article within the areas of jurisdiction previously described. Any court of competent jurisdiction
shall have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent injunctions, and other appropriate
forms of remedy or relief. Each day of noncompliance is considered a separate offense; and nothing herein
contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation, including application for injunctive relief.
(2) Any of the enforcement remedies and penalties provided in this article are available to be
applied independently or in a sequence deemed necessary, shall be available to the city in response to
violations of this article. If the person, property or facility has or is required to have a storm water discharge
permit from the KDOW, the city may alert the appropriate state authorities of the violation.
(3) Notice of Violation (NOV).
(a) 1. In instances when the city, based on observations or investigations, finds that any
person owning or occupying a premise has violated or is violating this article or order issued hereunder, the
city will issue an NOV. This written Notice of Violation shall be hand delivered, sent by first-class mail or
delivered by registered or certified mail.
2. This NOV will contain:
A. Date and location of site observation(s) or investigation(s).
B. An itemized list of any deficiencies or failures.
C. A deadline in which the deficiencies are to be eliminated.
(b) It will be the responsibility of the permittee to determine what corrective actions are
needed. If the deadline for eliminating the deficiencies can not be met, it is the responsibility of the
permittee to document that the deadline can not be met and request an extension to be evaluated by the city
on a case by case basis.
(4) Permit denial. At the discretion of the city representative or designated agent, it may withhold
or delay any permit application, inspection requests, appeals, or other plan approvals from person(s) that
have unresolved enforcement matters.
2011 S-1
Storm Water Utility and Management 24S
(5) Stop work order.
(a) Persons receiving an NOV will be required to halt all construction activities.
(b) No construction activities, other than those required to address deficiencies/violations, are
allowed on a project site when a stop work order has been issued.
(c) The written stop work order shall be sent by certified mail to the permittee or may be
hand delivered.
(d) The written stop work order shall specify deficiencies and violations that must be
corrected prior to a city inspection for consideration of removing the stop work order.
(e) The permittee shall notify the city in writing of the anticipated date for completion of the
corrective action(s) and provide at least two normal business days notice for the city to perform a
compliance inspection.
(6) Permit suspension or revocation.
(a) In the event compliance cannot be achieved within the terms of a Notice of Violation
and/or stop work order, the city may proceed with permit suspension or revocation.
(b) Land-disturbing activities are not allowed on a project site when a permit has been
suspended or revoked other than those required to address deficiencies/violations.
(c) The written permit suspension or revocation shall be hand delivered and/or sent by
certified mail to the permittee.
(d) A permit suspension requires that the permittee submit a revised portion of SWQMP as
indicated by the city for review and acceptance by the city of the specific issue of contention. When a
permit suspension is removed, the city shall provide written notice to the permittee.
(e) When a permit is revoked, the permittee must reapply for a permit through the process of
requesting a new permit.
(f) A permit revocation requires that the permittee resubmit a SWQMP for a full review and
acceptance by the city representative.
(7) Compliance order. If a person violates the provisions of this article, the city or its designated
representative may give notice to the owner or to any person in responsible charge of the subject property
ordering that unlawful conditions existing thereupon be abated within a schedule defined from the date of
such notice.
2011 S-1
24T Radcliff - Storm Water Utility and Management
(a) The enforcement official shall have the authority to establish elements of a compliance
SWQMP and require the owner implement such a plan as may be reasonably necessary to fulfill the
purposes of this chapter. The enforcement official may establish the requirements of BMPs.
(b) The notice and order may be given, provided that if in the opinion of the city or its
designated representative, the unlawful condition is such that it is of imminent danger or peril to the public,
then the city or its designated representative shall, with or without notice, proceed to abate the same, and
the cost thereof shall be charged against the property. The city, as described further in this subsection, may
recover the cost of such actions from the property owner.
(8) Fines. A person that has been found to have been in violation of any provision of this article
may be assessed a civil penalty not to exceed the amount presented in this subsection.
(a) The penalty shall increase by 25% of the previous penalty amount for every subsequent,
but separate offense made by the same person. The penalty shall be in addition to other enforcement actions
of this section.
(b) The penalty shall be assessed for each day, beyond schedules applied in compliance
orders or other schedules issued to the property owner or other person responsible, for unauthorized activity
defined in this section.
(c) The maximum fines will be determined by the type of offense. This indicates the
maximum per day that may be imposed for a first offense and does not reflect the increases described above
for repeat offenses.
1. Development without or inconsistent with permit. To engage in any development,
use, construction, remodeling or other activity of any nature in any way without all required permits or
inconsistent with any approved plan, permit, certificate or other form of authorization granted for such
activity. Fines shall be a minimum of $20 but not more than $500 per offense. The following are examples
of offenses that will be cited:
A. One deficient rock check.
B. One deficient inlet protection.
C. One deficient outlet protection.
D. Silt fence deficiency per lot.
E. One deficient construction entrance.
F. Restoration deficiency per lot.
G. One deficient stock pile stabilization.
2011 S-1
Storm Water Utility and Management 24U
H. One similar deficiency.
2. Violation by act or omission - up to $5,000. To violate, by act or omission, any term,
variance, modification, condition or qualification placed by the city or its designated representative upon
any required permit, certificate, or other form of authorization of the use, development, or other activity
upon land or improvements thereon.
3. Illicit discharge - up to $5,000. Any person who is found to have improperly
disposed of any substance defined as an illicit discharge, not an allowable discharge or causes the city to be
in noncompliance with any applicable environmental permit.
(4) Household products - up to $500. Any person who is found to have improperly
disposed of any substance not included in ' 17.5-25(B) that was purchased over-the-counter for household
use, in quantities considered normal for household purposes, which upon discharge to the MS4 or drainage
network would have an adverse impact on water quality or cause the city to be in noncompliance with any
applicable environmental permit.
(d) In the event there are penalties assessed by the state against the city caused by a person,
said person shall be assessed the equivalent amount of civil penalty. This shall include, but is not limited to,
penalties for improper disposal or illegal dumping, or illicit connection into the MS4.
(9) Administrative fee. Any person who undertakes any development activity requiring a storm
water management plan hereunder without first submitting the plan for review and approval shall pay to the
city, in addition to any permit or inspection fee, an administrative fee which reflects the actual cost of the
corrective action.
(10) Order to clean and abate/restore. Any violator may be required to clean and/or restore land to
its condition prior to the violation.
(11) Cost recovery. If corrective action is not taken in the time specified the city may take the
corrective action. The cost of the corrective action abatement and/or restoration shall be borne by the
property owner. If the invoice is not paid within 90 calendar days, the enforcement official shall have the
authority to place a lien upon and against the property. Alternatively, if the invoice is not satisfied within 90
calendar days, the enforcement official is authorized to take all legal measures available to enforce the lien
as a judgment, including, without limitation, enforcing the lien in an action brought for a money judgment,
by delivery to the assessor or a special assessment against the property.
(12) Injunctions and/or proceedings at law or in equity.
(a) Any violation of this article or of any condition, order, requirement, or remedy adopted
pursuant hereto may be restrained, corrected, abated, mandated, or enjoined by other appropriate
proceeding pursuant to state law.
(b) The city shall pursue, through a court of component jurisdiction, any penalties that are not
paid in full.
2011 S-1
24V Radcliff - Storm Water Utility and Management
(13) Civil actions. In addition to any other remedies provided in this article, any violation of this
article may be enforced by civil action brought by the city=s attorney. Monies recovered under this
subsection shall be paid to the city to be used exclusively for costs associated with implementing or
enforcing the provisions of this article and the storm water quality program. In any such action, the city may
seek, as appropriate, any or all of the following remedies:
(a) A temporary and/or permanent injunction;
(b) Assessment of the violator for the costs of any investigation, inspection or monitoring
survey which lead to the establishment of the violation, and for the reasonable costs of preparing and
bringing legal action under this subsection;
(c) Costs incurred in removing, correcting or terminating the adverse effects resulting from
the violation;
(d) Compensatory damages for loss or destruction to water quality, wildlife, fish and aquatic
life.
(14) Emergency orders and abatements. The enforcement official may order the abatement of any
discharge from any source to the storm water conveyance system when, in the opinion of the enforcement
official, the discharge causes or threatens to cause a condition that presents an imminent danger to the
public health, safety, or welfare of the environment or a violation of a KPDES permit. In emergency
situations where the property owner or other responsible party is unavailable and time constraints are such
that service of a notice and order to abate cannot be effected without presenting an immediate danger to the
public health, safety, or welfare of the environment or a violation of a KPDES permit, the city may perform
or cause to be performed such work as shall be necessary to abate said threat or danger. The costs of any
such abatement shall be borne by the owner and shall be collectable in accordance with the provisions of
this subsection.
(15) Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties
provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a
threat to public health, safety, welfare and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be
abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by state and local law.
(16) Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law and the city may seek cumulative remedies.
(E) Appeals.
(1) In order to have an appeal considered, the applicant shall submit a written request within
seven calendar days of the decision made by the city representative to the City of Radcliff Chief
Administrative Officer.
(2) A hearing date shall be set within 30 calendar days from receipt of the appeal.
2011 S-1
Storm Water Utility and Management 24W
(3) A written, final decision shall be rendered no more than five business days after the hearing in
writing.
(Ord. 10-06-1090, passed 6-7-2010)
' 17.5-33 COMPATIBILITY; SEVERABILITY.
Should any article, section, subsection, clause or provision of this article be declared by a court of
competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of this
article as a whole or any part thereof other than the part declared to be unconstitutional or invalid, each
article, section, subsection, clause and provision being declared severable. The laws of the Commonwealth
of Kentucky shall apply to this article. If any provisions of this article and any other provisions of law
impose overlapping or contradictory regulations, or contain any restrictions covering any of the same
subject matter, that provision which is more restrictive or imposes higher standards or requirements shall
govern.
(Ord. 10-06-1090, passed 6-7-2010)
2017 S-4
24X Radcliff - Storm Water Utility and Management
CHAPTER 18: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
1
2 Radcliff - Streets and Sidewalks
CHAPTER 18: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
Article I. In General
18-1. Acceptance of streets
18-2. House numbering
Article II. Street Improvements
18-16. Culverts and drainage
18-17. Property line sidewalks
18-18. Ditchlines
18-19. Building permit restrictions
Article III. Excavations
18-28. Provisions declared supplemental
18-29. Permit required
18-30. Application for permit; fee
18-31. Regulations authorized
18-32. Assets or insurance required
18-33. Filling and surfacing
18-34. Permit revocation
Article IV. Parades and Assemblies
18-45. Definitions
18-46. Permit required
18-47. Application required
18-48. General provisions
18-49. Display of permit
18-50. Parking
18-51. Penalty for violation of article
3
4 Radcliff - Streets and Sidewalks
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 18-1 ACCEPTANCE OF STREETS.
No street which has been dedicated to the city shall be accepted by it unless the street meets the
requirements of the citys subdivision ordinance or subdivision regulations.
(Ord. passed 8-15-1961)
 18-2 HOUSE NUMBERING.
(A) It shall be unlawful for the owner of any house, apartment, mobile home or other place of
residence or any place of business in the city to maintain same without placing or causing to be placed
thereon identifying arabic numerals which shall be clearly visible from the street passing immediately
in front of the place of residence or business.
(B) The identifying arabic numerals shall be that number designated by the United States Post
Office and/or the city as the post office address except that mobile home lots within a mobile home
park shall have a separate lot number notwithstanding the street address assigned to the mobile home
park. All lot numbers shall be clear and visible from the street passing immediately in front of the place
of residence and be of a contrasting color as to the background upon which they are placed.
(C) The identifying arabic numerals shall be a minimum of four inches in height and be clearly
visible from the street passing immediately in front of the place of residence and be of a contrasting
color as to the background upon which they are placed.
(D) The identifying arabic numerals shall be a minimum of six inches in height and be clearly
visible from the street passing immediately in front of the place of commercial or industrial business
and be of a contrasting color as to the background upon which they are placed.
(E) The identifying arabic numerals in the case of newly constructed homes shall be written upon
building permits and placed temporarily within a window visible from the street passing immediately
in front of the residence. Upon occupancy of the home, the homeowner has a period of five working
days to permanently affix proper numbering to the structure.
(F) Any existing building which has Arabic numerals clearly visible from the street passing
immediately in front of the building, even though the Arabic numerals do not meet the standards of
height enumerated in this section shall not be required to place new numbers on the building in
accordance with this section. The Planning and Zoning Office shall have a total and full discretion in
its decision as to whether the old numerals meet the requirement of visibility from the street.
Streets and Sidewalks 5
(G) The penalty for violation of this section, if not corrected within 15 days, shall be a fine of not
less than $20, nor more than $250. Each day of violation shall be a separate offense. The maximum
cumulative fine shall not exceed $250. Any person violating this chapter may also be found guilty of a
civil offense. The civil fine shall be not less than $20, nor more than $250. The civil fine shall be paid
directly to the city. If the fine is not paid within 30 days from the date of notification, then the city may
recover the fine in a civil action in a court of proper jurisdiction. The city may also obtain injunctions
or abatement orders to ensure compliance with this chapter or pursue administrative remedies when
appropriate, including injunctions and abatement proceedings.
(Ord. passed 6-26-1972; Ord. passed 3-21-1991; Ord. passed 3-16-1993)
ARTICLE II. STREET IMPROVEMENTS
 18-16 CULVERTS AND DRAINAGE.
(A) Culverts for all driveways connecting with a public street, wherever any drainage culvert is
required, shall be a minimum of 24 feet in length, 12 inches in diameter; or equivalent; and installed so
that the top of the culvert will be inches below the final grade of the street pavement crown.
(B) Where a drainage culvert is not required a concrete swale shall be constructed such that the
exposed surface of the swale bottom shall be a minimum of six inches below the final grade of the
street pavement crown. The bottom of the swale shall be level with the natural swale grade and in no
way obstruct the flow of drainage water.
(C) The dimensions described in division (A) above are minimums in all cases and shall be
increased a sufficient amount wherever necessary to accommodate the flow of drainage water at the
point of installation.
(D) Where a drainage culvert is utilized and properly installed the fill material whether gravel,
bituminous concrete or portland cement shall be constructed to restrict the flow of water from
driveways into and onto the adjoining street pavement by providing an appropriate swale or depression
in the covering surface. The swale or depression should slope from the center of the driveway to the
edge over the culvert.
(Ord. passed 1-16-1973)
 18-17 PROPERTY LINE SIDEWALKS.
(A) As used in this section, SIDEWALK shall mean a property line sidewalk.
(B) Sidewalks shall be constructed parallel to the adjacent public street.
6 Radcliff - Streets and Sidewalks
(C) Sidewalks shall be located so that the edge nearest the street is at a horizontal distance of not
less than feet from the lip of the adjacent drainage ditch. The size of the drainage ditch will not negate
the requirement for this two-foot setback.
(D) Where curb and gutter is installed, the sidewalks shall be located so that the edge nearest the
street is at a horizontal distance of not less than two feet from the back edge of the curb.
(E) The finished elevation of the sidewalks shall coincide with the finished elevation of the
adjacent public street. The elevation of the sidewalks shall not be lower than nor more than six inches
higher than the final elevation of the crown of the adjacent street at the centerline.
(F) Sidewalks shall be constructed on compacted soil or other compatible material and a
minimum of 48 inches in width.
(G) No more than one-half the thickness of the sidewalks shall be above the final grade elevation
of the ground immediately adjacent thereto on either side.
(Ord. passed 1-16-1973)
 18-18 DITCHLINES.
On all new construction subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance upon which this section
is based, the builder and/or developer responsible for the construction of street side drainage ditchlines
is required to provide a stand of grass in the ditchlines before they will be accepted by the city.
(Ord. passed 1-16-1973)
 18-19 BUILDING PERMIT RESTRICTIONS.
(A) In addition to all other requirements for issuance of a building permit on all new construction,
the following must be accomplished before a building permit is approved.
(1) Drainage culvert or swale in accordance with this article shall be set or provision for same
be made during construction and set by date of occupation of the associated structure.
(2) The driveway must be at least graveled from the pavement edge to the property and
rights-of-way line when the culvert is installed. When a concrete swale is utilized the concrete must be
four inches thick with six inches square reinforcing mesh and must extend from the pavement edge to
the property or rights-of-way line.
(3) The rough grade of the sidewalk must be established and a plan for even transition of the
sidewalk to driveway area be presented and constructed when the driveway is built.
Streets and Sidewalks 7
(4) Shoulder and ditchline must be established and not altered to restrict the flow of water
during construction. Shoulders will be a minimum of two feet in width from edge of pavement to lip of
drainage ditch, the finished elevation of shoulders will coincide with finished elevation of pavement
and seeded in grass.
(B) The Building Inspector will attach a copy of this article to every application for a building
permit.
(Ord. passed 1-16-1973)
ARTICLE III. EXCAVATIONS
 18-28 PROVISIONS DECLARED SUPPLEMENTAL.
The provisions of this article shall be in addition and supplemental to all other provisions of this
code and ordinances.
 18-29 PERMIT REQUIRED.
It shall be unlawful for any person, except city employees in the course of his or her employment,
to open, dig into, remove the surface from, excavate or bore or tunnel under any street, sidewalk, alley,
public way or place without first obtaining a permit therefor from the citys Inspector.
 18-30 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; FEE.
The application for a permit required by this article shall contain such information as the City
Inspector deems necessary, and shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of $5.
 18-31 REGULATIONS AUTHORIZED.
In granting a permit required by this article, the City Inspector may impose reasonable regulations,
including, but not limited to:
(A) The manner of making the excavation, boring or tunneling;
(B) The location of the excavation, boring or tunneling;
(C) Protection of underground utility installations;
8 Radcliff - Streets and Sidewalks
(D) The duration of the excavation, boring or tunneling;
(E) Required safety precautions, such as barricades, lighting, warning devices and the like;
(F) The extent and size of the excavation, boring or tunneling; and
(G) Steps to be taken to protect nearby property owners.
 18-32 ASSETS OR INSURANCE REQUIRED.
When required by the City Inspector the applicant for a permit under this article shall submit
satisfactory evidence that he or she has sufficient assets or insurance to indemnify the city for any
costs, losses or liabilities that it may incur by reason of the excavation, and to satisfy any judgments or
liabilities arising out of the excavation.
 18-33 FILLING AND SURFACING.
(A) It shall be the duty of the person making any excavation or doing any boring or tunneling
hereunder to fill the excavation and restore the surface to a condition at least equal to the surface prior
to the excavation, or, in the case of boring or tunneling, to take such steps or precautions as are
necessary to assure that there will be no sinking or shifting of the surface.
(B) If so required by the City Inspector, any person making an excavation or doing boring or
tunneling shall furnish a deposit, bond or other security sufficient to assure compliance with this
section; provided, however, that, the city may elect to fill and resurface the excavation or take the
necessary precautions and charge the cost thereof against the person making the excavation or doing
the boring or tunneling.
 18-34 PERMIT REVOCATION.
(A) Any person violating any provision of this article shall be fined an amount not less than $20,
nor more than $250, for each violation. Each day the violation exists or occurs shall be a separate
offense. Any person violating this article may also be found guilty of a civil offense. The civil fine
shall be not less than $20, nor more than $250. The civil fine shall be paid directly to the city.
(B) If the fine is not paid within 30 days from the date of notification, then the city may recover
the fine in a civil action in a court of proper jurisdiction. The city may also obtain injunctions or
abatement orders to insure compliance with this article or pursue administrative remedies when
appropriate, including injunctions and abatement proceedings.
Streets and Sidewalks 9
(C) In addition to any other penalty imposed by law, any person violating any provision of this
article shall have this excavation permit revoked.
(Ord. passed 3-16-1993)
ARTICLE IV. PARADES AND ASSEMBLIES
 18-45 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
MEETING. An assembly for a common purpose.
PARADE. Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or procession of any kind, or
any similar display in or upon any street, sidewalk, park or other public place in the city.
(Ord. passed 6-21-1977)
 18-46 PERMIT REQUIRED.
(A) No person, partnership, corporation or political subdivision shall engage, participate in, aid,
form or authorize any parade unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the city.
(B) No person, partnership, corporation or political subdivision shall engage in, participate in, aid,
form or authorize a meeting involving 500 or more persons unless a public meeting permit shall have
been obtained from city.
(C) This chapter shall not apply to:
(1) Funeral processions;
(2) Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities
providing the conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities
and the conduct has been authorized by the proper school authorities;
(3) Meetings held at the City Hall where the meetings have been authorized by the city;
(4) Meetings held in churches where the meetings are reasonably related to the ordinary
purposes of the church and where the meetings have been authorized;
10 Radcliff - Streets and Sidewalks
(5) Meetings held in schools where the meetings are reasonably related to school purposes
and school activities and the meetings are authorized by proper school authorities; and
(6) A governmental agency acting within the scope of its authority provided it does not have
concurrent authority with the city.
(Ord. passed 6-21-1977)
 18-47 APPLICATION REQUIRED.
(A) A person, partnership, corporation or political subdivision seeking issuance of a parade or
meeting permit shall file an application with the City Clerk on forms provided by the city.
(B) The application shall be filed with the City Clerk not less than 20 days, nor more than 30 days,
before the date of the parade or meeting:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the person, partnership, corporation or
political subdivision seeking to conduct the parade or meeting;
(2) If the parade or meeting is proposed to be conducted for or on behalf of any organization,
the name, address and telephone number of the organization;
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be in charge of the
parade or meeting and who will be responsible for its conduct;
(4) Date of the parade or meeting and the hours that the parade or meeting will be in
progress;
(5) The route a parade will follow or the address of the meeting. The route shall include the
starting and termination points;
(6) The approximate number of persons, animals, vehicles or other equipment which will
constitute the parade; the approximate number of persons that will constitute the meeting; and the
description of animals, vehicles or equipment as the city may deem necessary;
(7) The part or parts of the width of any street that will be occupied by the parade; the part or
parts of any building or buildings or grounds the meeting will occupy; and
(8) In the case of a parade, the assembly and disbursal areas for the parade and the times
during which the parade units will be assembling and disbursing; and additional information as the city
shall deem necessary dependent upon the facts and conditions of any parade or meeting.
(C) At the time of filing of the application, there shall be a fee of $5 paid for the issuance of the
parade and/or meeting permit.
(Ord. passed 6-21-1977)
Streets and Sidewalks 11
 18-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
(A) Application for a parade or meeting permit shall be presented by the City Clerk to the Chief of
Police, and the Chief of Police shall decide whether or not the permit shall be issued. If the Chief of
Police determines that the permit should not be issued, then the application for permit must be
presented to the City Council for its review and determination as to whether the permit should be
issued or denied. The City Councils action shall be open to the public and the applicant shall be given
notification of the meeting place and time at least three days in advance and have the right to address
the City Council. The Council shall not unreasonably withhold issuance of a permit considering the
right of the people to peacefully assemble. However, the City Council, under its public health, safety
and welfare powers, shall be and hereby is empowered to:
(1) Take into consideration the effect of the parade or meeting on the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of this community; and
(2) Take into consideration the extraordinary expenses to be incurred by the city as a result of
the need for extraordinary fire, police or auxiliary police activities and police, health, fire and other
safety regulations.
(B) The action taken on the permit by the City Council shall be mailed to the applicant within
three working days after the date upon which the application was considered.
(C) Each parade permit or meeting permit shall state the following information:
(1) Starting time, starting point and assembly area;
(2) Parade route, including the part or parts of the streets or other public places over which
the parade may travel;
(3) The ending point, ending time and disbursal area;
(4) A description of the place where a meeting is to be held; and
(5) Such other information as the City Council shall find reasonably necessary in order to
enforce the provisions of this article.
(D) Each legal entity issued a permit hereunder shall comply with all applicable laws, ordinances
and regulation; and nothing herein shall be construed to supersede any other applicable laws,
ordinances or regulations.
(Ord. passed 6-21-1977; Ord. passed 6-17-1986)
12 Radcliff - Streets and Sidewalks
 18-49 DISPLAY OF PERMIT.
A parade and/or meeting permit shall be available for inspection along the parade route and/or at
the meeting.
(Ord. passed 6-21-1977)
 18-50 PARKING.
The Chief of Police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the
parking of vehicles along a street or other public thoroughfare or part thereof constituting a part of the
route of a parade. The Chief of Police shall post signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any
person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for
parking on street or other public thoroughfare unposted in violation of this article.
(Ord. passed 6-21-1977)
 18-51 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF ARTICLE.
Any violation of any provision of this article shall be punishable by fine, and the fine shall not be
less than $5, nor more than $500. Each separate action shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. passed 6-21-1977)
Editors note:
Ordinance enacted 6-21-1977, did not specifically amend this code, hence inclusion of  1
through 7 as Ch. 18, Art. IV,  18-45, 8-51, was at the discretion of the editor.
CHAPTER 19: SUBDIVISIONS
1
2 Radcliff - Subdivisions
CHAPTER 19: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
Article I. In General
19-1. Regulations adopted
19-2. Bond
19-3. Filing fees
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 19-1 REGULATIONS ADOPTED.
There is hereby adopted by the city that publication known as The Land Subdivision Regulations
of Radcliff, Kentucky, also known as the Subdivision Regulations. The publication is hereby made
a part of the public records of the city.
Statutory reference:
Power of city to adopt by reference, see KRS 83A.060(5)
 19-2 BOND.
Bond shall be required as per the subdivision regulations.
(Ord. passed 1-19-2001)
 19-3 FILING FEES.
To partially defray the cost of subdivision review procedures and other associated administrative
costs, there shall be paid a fee as established by the Mayor and city.
(Ord. passed 1-19-2001 )
3
4 Radcliff - Subdivisions
CHAPTER 20: ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ACTIVITIES
1
2 Radcliff - Adult Entertainment Activities
CHAPTER 20: ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ACTIVITIES
Section
General Provisions
20-1. Findings, declaration of public policy and purpose
20-2. Definitions
20-3. Administration
20-4. Effect and limitation
20-5 through 20-14. Reserved
Restrictions and Operating Regulations
20-15. Signage
20-16. Material not to be subject to public view
20-17. Employee age requirement
20-18. Restricted hours
20-19. Construction requirements
20-20. Location restrictions
20-21 through 20-29. Reserved
20-30. Sale of alcoholic beverages prohibited
20-31 through 20-34. Reserved
20-35. Unlawful activities
Licensing Provisions
20-36. License application; contents
20-37. Information to be current; director to be notified of changes
20-38. Issuance of license
20-39. Inspections
20-40. Prohibited activities
20-41. License year; license fees
20-42. Employee license required
20-43. License denial, suspension, revocation; hearing and appeal
20-44. Reserved
20-45. Scienter necessary to prove liability
20-46. Failure of official to meet time frame not to risk applicant or licensee rights
20-99. Penalty
2015 S-2
3
4 Radcliff - Adult Entertainment Activities
GENERAL PROVISIONS
 20-1 FINDINGS, DECLARATION OF PUBLIC POLICY AND PURPOSE.
(A) The Council finds it has been the experience of other communities, as well as this one, that
certain adult entertainment activities which are located near areas zoned for residential use, near
schools and public parks, and near malls and similar open spaces that cater to use by family groups and
children adversely affect the viability of such nearby properties for their described purposes.
(B) Local governments in the City of Radcliff, the Commonwealth of Kentucky and the United
States government have spent millions of dollars on community development and neighborhood
enhancement projects within the recent past to eliminate blight and to prevent the further deterioration
of city neighborhoods.
(C) (1) The Council relies on such evidence of the adverse secondary effects of adult
entertainment uses that is within the common knowledge of municipalities and is widely reported in
judicial opinions, media reports, land use studies, and crime impact reports made available to the
Council, several of which are set forth herein. Additionally, the Council relies on repeated judicial
findings validating municipalities' reasonable reliance on this body of secondary effects evidence to
support time, place, and manner regulations of sexually oriented businesses. The Council relies upon
and incorporates the findings of secondary effects discussed in the following non-exhaustive list of
cases: Pap's A.M. v. City of Erie, 529 U.S. 277 (2000); City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc.,
535 U.S. 425 (2002); City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v.
American Mini Theatres, 427 U.S. 50 (1976); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991);
FW/PBS, Inc. v. City of Dallas, 493 U.S. 215 (1990); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972); DLS,
Inc. v. City of Chattanooga, 107 F.3d 403 (6th Cir. 1997); Currence v. City of Cincinnati, 2002 U.S.
App. LEXIS 1258; Broadway Books v. Roberts, 642 F. Supp. 486 (E.D. Term. 1986); Bright Lights,
Inc. v. City of Newport, 830 F. Supp. 378 (E.D. Ky. 1993); Ben's Bar, Inc. v. Village of Somerset, 316
F.3d 702 (7th Cir. 2003); Richland Bookmart v. Nichols, 137 F.3d 435 (6th Cir. 1998); Center for Fair
Public Policy v. Maricopa County, 336 F.3d 1153 (9th Cir. 2003); Deja vu v. City Government, 1999
U.S. App. LEXIS 535 (6th Cir. 1999); Bamon Corp. v. City of Dayton, 923 F.2d 470 (6th Cir. 1991);
Triplett Grille, Inc. v. City of Akron, 40 F.3d 129 (6th Cir. 1994); O'Connor v. City and County of
Denver, 894 F.2d 1210 (10th Cir. 1990); Deja vu of Nashville, Inc., et al. v. Citypolitan Government of
Nashville and Davidson County, 274 F.3d 377 (6th Cir. 2001); Z.J. Gifts D-2, LLC v. City of Aurora,
136 F.3d 683 (10th Cir. 1998); ILQ Investments, Inc. v. City of Rochester, 25 F.3d 1413 (8th Cir.
1994); World Wide Video of Spokane, Inc. v. City of Spokane, 227 F. Supp. 2d 1143 (E.D. Wash.
2002); Threesome Entertainment v. Strittmather, 4 F. Supp. 2d 710 (N.D. Ohio 1998); Bigg Wolf
Discount Video Sales, Inc. v. Montgomery County, 256 F. Supp. 2d 385 (D. Md. 2003); Kentucky
Restaurant Concepts, Inc. v. City of Louisville and Jefferson County, 209 F. Supp. 2d 672 (W.D. Ky.
2002); Restaurant Ventures v. Lexington-Fayette Urban County Gov't, 60 S.W.3d 572 (Ct. App. Ky.
2001); Mr. B's Bar & Lounge, Inc. v. Louisville, 630 S.W.2d 564 (Ct. App. Ky. 1981).
2015 S-2
Adult Entertainment Activities 5
(2) The Council further relies on reports concerning secondary effects occurring in and
around sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, Phoenix, Arizona - 1979; Houston,
Texas - 1997; Indianapolis, Indiana - 1984; Amarillo, Texas -1977; Garden Grove, California - 1991;
Los Angeles, California - 1977; Whittier, California - 1978; Austin, Texas - 1986; Seattle, Washington
- 1989; Tucson, Arizona - 1990; Testimony, Warner-Robins, Georgia - 2000; Newport News, Virginia
- 1996; St. Cloud, Minnesota - 1994; New York Times Square study - 1994; Minnesota, State of -
1989; Phoenix, Arizona - 1995-1998; and also on findings of physical abuse from the paper entitled
"Stripclubs According to Strippers: Exposing Workplace Sexual Violence," by Kelly Holsopple,
Program Director, Freedom and Justice Center for Prostitution Resources, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
Based on cases and reports such as these, the Council finds:
(a) Sexually oriented adult entertainment businesses, as a category of commercial uses,
are associated with a wide variety of adverse secondary effects including, but not limited to, personal
and property crimes, prostitution, potential spread of disease, lewdness, public indecency, obscenity,
illicit drug use and drug trafficking, negative impacts on property values, urban blight, pornographic
litter, and sexual assault and exploitation.
(b) Sexual acts, including masturbation, oral and anal sex, sometimes occur at
unregulated adult entertainment businesses, especially those which provide private or semi-private
booths, rooms, or cubicles for view films, videos, or live sexually explicit shows, which acts constitute
a public nuisance and pose a risk to public health through the spread of sexually transmitted diseases.
(c) Adult entertainment businesses should be separated from sensitive land uses to
minimize the impact of their secondary effects upon such uses, and should be separated from other
certain uses, such as other sexually oriented businesses and establishments licensed to sell alcoholic
beverages to minimize the secondary effects associated with such uses and to prevent a concentration
of sexually oriented businesses and such uses.
(d) Each of the foregoing negative secondary effects constitutes a harm which the
Council has a substantial government interest in abating and/or preventing in the future.
(D) Adult entertainment activity tends to attract an undesirable clientele which discourages
neighboring residents from undertaking civic improvements, causes residents and businesses to move
elsewhere and frustrates attempts to attract new residences and businesses to come into an area, all of
which factors contribute to a diminution of property values and to a general deterioration of
neighborhoods.
(E) The small closet-like rooms or "booths" at adult amusement arcades in the city and other
communities have encouraged persons to loiter for the purposes of engaging in unlawful, often
anonymous, sexual conduct and have encouraged lewd conduct in public places, thereby creating
public nuisances and generally unsanitary and unhealthful conditions that create dangers to the public
health, welfare and safety.
2015 S-2
6 Radcliff - Adult Entertainment Activities
(F) The concentration of sexually explicit movies and books and sexual paraphernalia in adult
entertainment establishments which also house sexually explicit movies, as well as hotel rooms rented
by the hour to "couples" afforded free sexually explicit movies in the hotel room, have provided
prostitutes an appealing and visible meeting place to ply their trade and have created public nuisances
in otherwise respectable neighborhoods.
(G) Children, the family environment and residential neighborhoods suffer injury from the
deleterious effects and harmful consequences resulting from the distribution of, and exposure to,
certain sexually explicit items and devices. This is particularly so when such items and devices are
permitted to leave a business's premises and litter the immediate family environment, neighborhood
and certain areas where children are likely to be.
(H) The noise generated by patrons coming and going from adult entertainment establishments
causes a substantial disruption to nearby residents and modest curtailment of the hours during which
entertainment is offered to patrons of such establishments would afford some relief to persons living in
those nearby residences without significantly interfering with the availability of adult entertainment.
(I) Nationally, there is extensive involvement of organized crime in the business of adult
bookstores and the disclosure of persons who own, as well as the names of those persons who operate
adult bookstores and other adult entertainment establishments will aid law enforcement officials in the
enforcement of the federal Racketeer Influences and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO) and the
enforcement of the laws of the Commonwealth of Kentucky, among others, prohibiting the distribution
of obscene matter, the use of minors to distribute obscene matter, the advertising of obscene material,
the distribution of obscene material to minors, promoting the sale of obscenity, the use of a minor in a
sexual performance, the distribution of material portraying a sexual performance by a minor, the
promoting of material portraying a sexual performance by a minor and the advertising of material
portraying a sexual performance by a minor and the use of minors to distribute materials portraying a
sexual performance by a minor.
(J) The Council declares as a matter of public policy that in order to preserve surrounding
neighborhoods, to prevent blight and the deterioration of the neighborhoods of the city, protect
property values, promote the return of residents and businesses to the neighborhoods, protect children
from the deleterious effects of exposure to sexually explicit material and decrease the incidence of
crime and juvenile delinquency, the licensing and regulation of adult entertainment establishments is a
public necessity and is required in the interest of public health, safety and welfare as well as the
economic and aesthetic well-being of the people.
(K) Purposes:
(1) It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to
promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable
and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses
within the city. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a
limitation or restriction on the content or reasonable access to any communicative materials, including
sexually oriented
2015 S-2
Adult Entertainment Activities 7
materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults
to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors
and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor
effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material;
(2) To prevent the unsanitary conditions which exist at "adult amusement arcades" and to
prevent health risks, including AIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases, caused by illicit and
unlawful sexual relations in such public establishments;
(3) To protect children and the family environment from the deleterious and harmful effects
of exposure to certain sexually explicit items and devices; and
(4) To obtain the identity of persons licensed and to be licensed for the operation of
establishments selling, showing, renting or offering certain sexually explicit material or entertainment
to insure proper identification of those persons responsible for the operation of such businesses so as to
assist in the proper enforcement of this chapter.
(L) It is not the purpose of this chapter to establish community standards on obscenity nor to
permit persons to engage in any activity which is in violation of law, including but not limited to, state
laws pertaining to the advertising, promotion, distribution or sale of obscene matter or matters
portraying a sexual performance by a minor, or state laws pertaining to the use of a minor in a sexual
performance or promotion of sexual performance by a minor, or the use of a minor to distribute
material portraying sexual performance by a minor.
(Ord. 11-09-1118, passed 9-20-2011)
 20-2 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ACTIVITY or ACTIVITIES or ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
ESTABLISHMENT. Regular commercial participation in one or more of the following defined
activities:
(1) ADULT AMUSEMENT ARCADE. An establishment having as one of its principal uses
one or more of the following: customer-operated motion picture devices, peep shows, viewing areas
and/or similar devices either coin, token or slug operated or which, in consideration of an entrance fee,
display matter distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on displays of sexual activities, as
hereinafter defined, or which other male or female persons expose to the view of the customer the bare
female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, human genitals, pubic region or
buttocks, even if partially or completely covered by translucent material, or human or simulated male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely or opaquely covered.
2015 S-2
8 Radcliff - Adult Entertainment Activities
(2) ADULT BOOK STORE. An establishment having as one of its principal uses the sale,
rent or display of pictures, books, periodicals, magazines, appliances and similar material which are
distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on displays of sexual activities.
(3) ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. An establishment having as one of its
principal uses the presentation of motion pictures, slide projections and other similar material having as
a dominant theme or characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on matter displaying, describing or
relating to sexual activities, as hereinafter defined, for observation by persons therein.
(4) ADULT STAGE SHOW THEATER. An establishment having as one of its principal
uses the regular presentation of live performances of humans or animals having as a dominant theme or
characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on matter displaying semi-nudity or sexual activities for
observation by persons therein.
(5) ADULT VIDEO CASSETTE RENTAL CENTER. A commercial establishment which
has as one of its principal business uses the rental or sale of video cassettes or other video recordings
which display material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on displays of sexual activities.
(6) CABARET. An establishment which regularly features as one of its principal uses
persons who appear semi-nude before patrons.
(7) COMMERCIAL SEXUAL ENTERTAINMENT CENTER. Any commercial
establishment not otherwise described herein which as one of its principal uses regularly offers matter,
services or entertainment appealing to adult sexual interests if the establishment or its entertainment,
services or goods are advertised by or on behalf of the establishment in a manner patently designed to
appeal to such adult sexual interests.
(8) SELF-DESIGNATED ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CENTER. Any establishment
which designates all or a portion of its premises as for adults only and has a policy of excluding minors
from its premises or from a portion of its premises and which advertises so as to convey the impression
that the services, entertainment, matter or goods available at the premises or at the portion of the
premises designated for adults only are characterized or distinguished by displays of human genitals or
sexual activities.
CITY GOVERNMENT. The City of Radcliff, Kentucky.
DIRECTOR. The Radcliff City Clerk or his/her designee.
EMPLOYEE. Any person hired by or suffered or permitted to work in an establishment engaging
in adult entertainment activities whether that person receives remuneration or compensation directly
from the operator or owner of the establishment, from patrons of the establishment or from any other
source whether by contract of employment or otherwise, for work or services performed for the benefit
of the adult entertainment establishment. EMPLOYEE does not include a person exclusively on the
premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods, such as foods, to the
premises.
2015 S-2
Adult Entertainment Activities 9
ESTABLISHMENT. A business entity or endeavor, fixed, mobile or traveling, including its
owners, operators, directors, shareholders, partners, employees and possessions.
HEARING OFFICER. The Code Enforcement Board as established pursuant to Ordinance of the
City Council of the City of Radcliff, Kentucky.
LICENSEE. A person in whose name a license to operate an adult entertainment establishment
has been issued, as well as the individual or individuals listed as an applicant on the application for an
adult entertainment establishment license. In case of an "employee," it shall mean the person in whose
name the adult entertainment employee license has been issued.
MATERIALS. Any book, magazine, newspapers, or other printed or written matter, or any picture,
drawing, photograph, motion picture, video cassette film, digital video, or other pictorial representation
or mechanical, chemical, digital, or electrical reproduction or any other articles, equipment, machines
or materials.
NUDITY OR STATE OF NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic
area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the
female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple and areola.
OPERATOR. Any individual, partnership, corporation or business entity that establishes and/or
maintains a business as its owner or manager and may also mean LICENSEE as defined hereinabove.
PERSON. Any individual, partnership, corporation or business entity.
PRINCIPAL OWNER. Any person owning, directly or beneficially, 20% of a corporation's equity
securities, 20% or more of the membership interests in a limited liability company, or, in the case of
any other legal entity, 20% or more of the ownership interests in the entity.
PRINCIPAL USE. A substantial or significant use, but not necessarily a majority of the business
activity or stock in trade. The fact that a business may have one or more other principal uses unrelated
to adult entertainment shall not relieve the business from the provisions of this chapter applicable to
adult entertainment establishments. Principal use shall exist in the following circumstances:
(1) Where a business establishment dedicates, or permits the use of, at least 25% of the
utilized square footage of its premises for adult entertainment activity or activities; or
(2) Where at least 25% of the gross receipts of a business establishment, excluding food and
beverage receipts, result from adult entertainment activity or activities.
REAL ESTATE OWNER. Any individual, partnership, corporation or business entity that has
legal title to real estate, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof, or has the beneficial
ownership of any real estate and a right to present use of enjoyment thereof, including a mortgage in
possession.
2015 S-2
10 Radcliff - Adult Entertainment Activities
REGULARLY. As used in the phrases herein such as "regularly features" and "regularly offers,"
the term REGULARLY means a consistent or repeated course of conduct engaged in or permitted by
the operator of the business.
SEMI-NUDE OR STATE OF SEMI-NUDITY. A state of dress in which opaque clothing covers
no more than the genitals, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, pubic area, vulva, and nipple and areola of the
female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. This definition
shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse,
skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel provided that the areola and nipple are not exposed
in whole or in part.
SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Partial or complete male and/or female nudity in conjunction with:
(1) Displays of human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation;
(2) Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; or
(3) Holding or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or breasts.
SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITIES. Any of the following offenses:
(1) KRS 510.040, 510.050, or 510.060 (rape in the first, second, or third degree); KRS
510.070, 510.080, or 510.090 (sodomy in the first, second, or third degree); KRS 510.110, 510.120, or
510.130 (sexual abuse in the first, second, or third degree); KRS 510.140 (sexual misconduct); 510.150
(indecent exposure); KRS 517.050 (falsifying business records); KRS 529.020, 529.030, 529.040, or
529.050 (prostitution, promoting prostitution in the first, second, or third degree); KRS 529.070
(permitting prostitution); KRS 531.020, 531.030, 531.040 (distributing obscene matter, distributing
obscene matter to minors, using minors to distribute obscene matter); KRS 218A.140 et seq. (offenses
relating to controlled substances); any offense listed in KRS 531.300 through 531.370 (sexual
exploitation of minors offenses); engaging in organized crime (KRS 506.120) relating to a sexually
oriented business; criminal attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses
or offenses in other jurisdictions that, if the acts would have constituted any of the foregoing offenses if
the acts had been committed in Kentucky; for which:
(a) Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release
from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a
misdemeanor offense;
(b) Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release
from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony
offense; or
2015 S-2
Adult Entertainment Activities 11
(c) Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of
release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of
two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-
month period.
(2) The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of
the applicant.
(Ord. 11-09-1118, passed 9-20-2011)
 20-3 ADMINISTRATION.
The Director is empowered to enact from time to time such rules and regulations deemed
necessary for the orderly and complete administration of this chapter. All regulations shall be submitted
to the Mayor and shall become effective within 30 days of submission unless disapproved in writing by
the Mayor prior to that date. All licensees and persons with license applications pending shall be
mailed copies of all such regulations and they shall be published one time in the newspaper as soon as
practical after they become effective.
(Ord. 11-09-1118, passed 9-20-2011)
 20-4 EFFECT AND LIMITATION.
It is not the purpose of this section to establish community standards on obscenity nor to permit
persons to engage in any activity which is in violation of law, including but not limited to state laws
pertaining to the advertising, promotion, distribution, or sale of obscene matter or matters portraying a
sexual performance by a minor, or state laws pertaining to use of a minor in a sexual performance or
promotion of a sexual performance by a minor, or the use of a minor to distribute material portraying
sexual performance by a minor.
(Ord. 11-09-1118, passed 9-20-2011)
 20-5 THROUGH 20-14 RESERVED.
RESTRICTIONS AND OPERATING REGULATIONS
 20-15 SIGNAGE.
An adult entertainment establishment, except as otherwise provided by laws which may be more
restrictive, may not have more than one sign outside, flush to the wall, facial style, not to exceed in size
2015 S-2
12 Radcliff - Adult Entertainment Activities
ten feet in length (horizontal to the ground) and three feet in width (vertical to the ground) with no
flashing lights and with no pictorial matter which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
displays of sexual activities.
(Ord. 11-09-1118, passed 9-20-2011)
 20-16 MATERIAL NOT TO BE SUBJECT TO PUBLIC VIEW.
An adult entertainment establishment may not display pictorial representations of sexual
activities in such manner as to be subject to public view from outside the business premises, including
but not limited to view from public sidewalks, streets, arcades, hallways or passageways.
(Ord. 11-09-1118, passed 9-20-2011)
 20-17 EMPLOYEE AGE REQUIREMENT.
(A) An operator or employee of an adult entertainment establishment shall not permit a
person less than 18 years of age to be employed by or to enter the establishment.
(B) An adult entertainment establishment shall, at all times, cause the entrance of the
establishment to be so attended as to insure compliance with the requirements contained in division (A)
above.
(Ord. 11-09-1118, passed 9-20-2011)
 20-18 RESTRICTED HOURS.
No adult entertainment establishment shall be or remain open for business between the hours of
1:00 a.m. and 4:00 a.m. on any day, Monday through Saturday, and at any time on Sundays.
(Ord. 11-09-1118, passed 9-20-2011)
 20-19 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
(A) An adult amusement arcade, except as otherwise provided by laws which may be more
restrictive, shall meet the requirements set forth in this section.
(B) Any wall or partition which is situated so as to create a viewing area in which any amusement
device or viewing screen is located shall be constructed of not less than one hour fire-restrictive
material and shall contain no holes, openings or other perforations. No operator or employee shall
allow openings of any kind to exist between viewing rooms or booths nor shall any person make or
attempt to make an opening of any kind between viewing booths or rooms.
2015 S-2
Adult Entertainment Activities 13
(C) A person who operates or causes to be operated an adult amusement arcade which exhibits on
the premises in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette or
other video reproduction which display specified sexual activities as defined in  20-1 shall comply
with the following requirements:
(1) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an
unobstructed view from a manager's or cashier's station of every area of the premises to which any
patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video
reproduction equipment. The view required in this chapter must be by direct line of sight from the
manager's or cashier's station.
(2) It shall be the duty of the operator and any employees present in the premises to ensure
that the view area specified in division (C)(1) above remains unobstructed by any doors, walls,
merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times. It shall be the duty of the operator to ensure
that there is at least one employee on duty and situated in a public area adjacent to the adult arcades,
where the view area specified in division (C)(1) is visible, at all times that any patron is present in the
adult arcades.
(3) No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at a time.
(4) All floor coverings in viewing booths shall be non-porous, easily cleanable surfaces, with
no rugs or carpentry. All wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces shall be constructed of, or permanently
covered by nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board, or other
porous material shall be used within 48 inches of the floor.
(D) The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to
illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five foot
candles measured at the floor level at all times any patron is present in the premises.
(E) All persons regulated pursuant to this section must comply with the terms and conditions
hereof within 60 days after the effective date of this chapter.
(Ord. 11-09-1118, passed 9-20-2011)
 20-20 LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.
(A) The public entrance to an establishment engaging in adult entertainment activities shall not be
located within 750 feet of any building containing a public or private elementary, middle or secondary
school, institution or higher education or business college, or any park-mall or park-like area of open
space under the control of a governmental agency, or any building used for a place of religious
worship, or any building used for a governmental function or public library. Such distance shall be
measured along a straight line from the nearest property line of the property on which the building or
public park-like area is located to the entrance to such establishment engaging in an adult entertainment
activity.
2015 S-2
14 Radcliff - Adult Entertainment Activities
(B) The public entrance to an establishment engaging in adult entertainment activities may
not be located within 750 feet of an area zoned or used for residential purposes. Such distance shall be
measured along a straight line from the boundary line of the nearest area zoned or used for residential
purposes to the entrance to such establishment engaging in an adult entertainment activity. All adult
entertainment establishments shall comply with all other pertinent zoning regulations of the City
Government.
(C) The public entrance to an establishment engaging in adult entertainment activities shall
not be located within 750 feet of the public entrance of another adult entertainment activity
establishment.
(D) The public entrance to an establishment engaging in adult entertainment shall not be
located within 750 feet of the public entrance of an establishment licensed to serve alcoholic beverages.
(E) The requirements of this section shall not apply to establishments engaged in adult
entertainment activities that were in existence as of the effective date of this chapter.
(Ord. 11-09-1118, passed 9-20-2011)
 20-21 THROUGH 20-29 RESERVED.
 20-30 SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED.
An adult entertainment establishment shall not make application for and shall not be granted
any license to sell alcoholic beverages otherwise issued pursuant to Chapter 4.1 or any other applicable
ordinance, statute, or regulation. The sale, use, or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises
of an adult entertainment establishment is prohibited, provided that, any adult entertainment
establishment which holds a license to sell alcoholic beverages on the effective date of this chapter may
continue to serve alcoholic beverages until the expiration date of its annual license at which time it
shall not make application for or be granted another such license. Nothing herein shall exempt an adult
entertainment establishment from  20-18.
(Ord. 11-09-1118, passed 9-20-2011)
 20-31 THROUGH 20-34 RESERVED.
 20-35 UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES.
Nothing contained in this chapter is intended, or shall be construed, to permit or authorize
activities which are unlawful under state law or local ordinance. It is unlawful for an operator to
knowingly violate the following regulations or to allow, either knowingly or recklessly, an employee or
a patron to violate the following regulations.
2015 S-2
Adult Entertainment Activities 15
(A) It shall be a violation of this chapter for a patron, employee, or any other person to knowingly
or intentionally, in an adult entertainment establishment, appear in a state of nudity, regardless of
whether such public nudity is expressive in nature.
(B) It shall be a violation of this chapter for an employee to knowingly or intentionally, in an adult
entertainment establishment, appear in a semi-nude condition unless the employee, while semi-nude,
remains at least six feet from any patron or customer and on a fixed stage at least 18 inches from the
floor. The six foot requirement is measured from the edge of the stage where the semi-nude employee
is located to the patron seating or standing area, or, if patrons are allowed to sit at the stage, from the
edge of the stage to a line or other barrier six feet from the edge beyond which employees are allowed
to appear semi-nude.
(C) It shall be a violation of this chapter for any employee, while semi-nude in an adult business,
to knowingly or intentionally receive any pay or gratuity directly from any patron or customer or for
any patron or customer to knowingly or intentionally pay or give any gratuity directly to any employee,
while said employee is semi-nude in an adult entertainment establishment.
(D) It shall be a violation of this chapter for any employee, who regularly appears semi-nude in an
adult entertainment establishment, to knowingly or intentionally touch a customer or the clothing of a
customer while the employee is performing or while the employee is semi-nude or in a state of seminudity
(Ord. 11-09-1118, passed 9-20-2011)
LICENSING PROVISIONS
 20-36 LICENSE APPLICATION; CONTENTS.
(A) The principal owner(s) or the operator(s) of an establishment intending to engage, or engaging
under a previously issued license in an adult entertainment activity, shall make application for a license
with the Director in accordance with this chapter.
(B) Such application shall be in writing, notarized, and shall be in the form prescribed by the
Director. The application will be deemed complete when it contains the following information:
(1) The name, business location address, business mailing address and phone number of the
establishment and the name and business address of the prospective licensee.
(2) The applicant's full true name, mailing address, date of birth, and a copy of a governmentissued
photo identification card or set of fingerprints.
(a) If the applicant is one or more natural persons, then all principal owners shall
comply.
2015 S-2
16 Radcliff - Adult Entertainment Activities
(b) If the applicant is other than an individual, such as a limited liability company,
corporation or partnership, each officer, director, general partner, member, principal owner and each
other person who will participate directly in decisions relating to management of the business shall sign
the application for a license as the applicant and comply with the requirements of this section.
(3) The name and address of the prospective licensee's designated agent for service of
process.
(4) In the event the applicant or licensee is not the owner of record of the real property on
which the licensed establishment is located or to be located, the application shall include a notarized
statement from the owner of record of the real property acknowledging that an adult entertainment
establishment is to be located on the real property upon issuance of the license. The application shall
furnish the name and the address of the owner of record of the real property and a copy of the lease or
rental agreement or memorandum thereof.
(5) A designation of the adult entertainment activities, as defined in  20-2(1) through  20-
2(8), in which the applicant seeks to engage at the specified location.
(6) All convictions for specified criminal activities, as defined in this chapter, of the applicant
or applicants whose names are required pursuant to this section.
(7) The name and mailing address of any person to whom the applicant wants mail notice to
be given in case of violation or other matters affecting any license hereunder.
(8) A drawing or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of
total floor space occupied by the business. The drawing or diagram need not be professionally prepared
but shall be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches.
(9) The name and addresses of any rental agent of the property on which the establishment is
located.
(10) A photograph or drawing of any signs displayed or proposed to be displayed on the
exterior of the establishment and a statement of the dimensions of the signs.
(11) Proof of compliance with city occupational license fee laws.
(12) A certificate of occupancy where required and, in all other cases, a letter of compliance
issued by the City Zoning Inspector certifying that the business is in compliance with applicable zoning
laws or has nonconforming use rights and that the proposed use will not constitute an enlargement or
expansion of the scope of the nonconforming rights;
(13) A certificate from the Fire Chief or his or her designee that all applicable fire regulations
have been met.
2015 S-2
Adult Entertainment Activities 17
(14) A statement from the City Building Inspector that the premises comply with applicable
provisions of the Uniform Kentucky Building Code, as adopted by the city; and
(15) A statement from the county's Board of Health that the premises are adequately ventilated
and contain public restrooms which satisfy the requirements of 902 KAR 10:010.
(Ord. 11-09-1118, passed 9-20-2011)
 20-37 INFORMATION TO BE CURRENT; DIRECTOR TO BE NOTIFIED OF CHANGES.
The information required by  20-36 shall be kept current by the licensee at all times even after the
granting of a license by the Director. It shall be the responsibility of the operator or other person
designated in the license application to notify the Director no later than the close of the fifth business
day after the effective date of any changes, alterations or modifications in any information contained in
the application including, but not limited to: name of the establishment; any change in the corporate or
partnership information submitted as part of the application; names and mailing addresses of
employees; name and address of designated agent for service of process; designation of the activity or
activities to be engaged in at the establishment, as defined in  20-2(1) through  20-2(8); and the name
and mailing address of any person the applicant wants mail notice to be given in case of violation or
other matters affecting the license.
(Ord. 11-09-1118, passed 9-20-2011)
 20-38 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
(A) Upon the filing of a completed application for an adult entertainment establishment license or
employee license under  20-42, the Director shall issue a temporary license to the applicant, which
temporary license shall expire 15 days after the final decision of the Director to deny or grant the
license. Within 20 business days after the receipt of a completed application, the Director shall cause
the premises to be inspected for compliance with the city zoning, building, safety, health and fire
codes. If inspections are not made within the specified 20 days, unless such failure is due to the
applicant's or the real estate owner's disallowance of said inspections, the property shall be deemed to
comply with the codes specified in the previous sentence. Within 20 business days after the receipt of a
completed application, the Director shall either issue a license, or issue a written notice of intent to
deny a license, to the applicant. The Director shall approve the issuance of a license unless one or more
of the following is found to be true:
(1) An applicant is less than 18 years of age.
(2) An applicant is delinquent in the payment to City Government of taxes, fees, fines or
penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant in relation to an adult entertainment
establishment.
(3) An applicant has failed to provide information or true and correct information required of
the applicant for issuance of the license.
2015 S-2
18 Radcliff - Adult Entertainment Activities
(4) An applicant, including any principal owner of the adult entertainment establishment, has
been convicted of a specified criminal activity, as defined in this chapter.
(5) The license fee required by  20-41 has not been paid.
(6) The proposed adult entertainment establishment is located in a zoning district other than a
district in which adult entertainment businesses are allowed to operate under the applicable zoning
regulations of City Government or is not in compliance with the location restrictions established for
adult entertainment establishments under this chapter.
(7) The applicant's premises have been found by the Director or his or her designees to not be
in compliance with the city zoning, building, safety, health or fire codes.
(B) An applicant that is ineligible for a license due to division (A)(4) above, may qualify for an
adult entertainment establishment license only when the time period required by the applicable division
in  20-43 has elapsed.
(C) The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the persons or persons to whom it is
granted, the number of the license issued to that applicant, the expiration date, and the address of the
adult entertainment establishment. An adult entertainment establishment employee license shall contain
a photograph of the licensee. The adult entertainment establishment license shall be posted in a
conspicuous place at or near the entrance to such business so that it may be easily read at any time. An
adult entertainment establishment employee shall keep the employee's license on his or her person or
on the premises where the licensee is then working or performing, and shall produce such license for
inspection upon request by a law enforcement officer or other authorized City Government
enforcement official. Such officer or official, pursuant to this chapter, shall request verification of an
employee's license only when reasonable and necessary to advance the purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. 11-09-1118, passed 9-20-2011)
 20-39 INSPECTIONS.
The application for or the grant of a license to operate an adult entertainment establishment is
deemed to permit periodic inspections of the public areas of any such establishment during such
establishment's business hours for the purpose of verifying compliance with the terms and conditions of
this chapter. This section shall be reasonably construed and applied by enforcement personnel.
(Ord. 11-09-1118, passed 9-20-2011)
 20-40 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
(A) Immediately upon the effective date of this chapter, no person shall operate, own or be
employed at an unlicensed adult entertainment establishment, such conduct having been prohibited
under Ordinance  20-4, enacted February 28, 1998, as amended, and the previous version of Chapter
20, as amended. All licenses presently held by adult entertainment establishments shall remain in
2015 S-2
Adult Entertainment Activities 19
full force and effect without the necessity of reapplication until the annual renewal date set forth in 
20-41. However, current licenses shall be subject to regulation by the terms of this chapter and shall be
in full compliance with this chapter within 60 days after the effective date hereof, provided that adult
entertainment establishments which are currently licensed and have obtained non-conforming use
status per KRS 100.253 shall be exempt from  20-20. All pending applications at the time of the
effective date hereof and new applications received thereafter shall be subject immediately to the terms
of this chapter.
(B) No owner shall permit adult entertainment activities to operate on his property without such
adult entertainment activities being properly licensed except as permitted under division (A) above.
(C) No person shall permit himself to be an operator or an employee at an adult entertainment
activity which has not been validly licensed hereunder, except as permitted under division (A) above.
(D) No person shall own, operate or be employed at an establishment engaged in adult
entertainment activities unless all employees of the establishment have obtained the license required by
 20-42.
(Ord. 11-09-1118, passed 9-20-2011)
 20-41 LICENSE YEAR; LICENSE FEES.
All adult entertainment establishment licenses shall be for the fiscal year, July 1 to June 30, or the
remaining portion of such fiscal year. The annual license fee shall be $1,000 and payable to the city at
the time of application. For new applications, annual fees shall be prorated at the rate of $100 per
month for the remaining full months of a fiscal year but shall not exceed $1,000. Application for
renewal of a license shall be made at least 90 days, but not more than 120 days, before the expiration of
the current license and shall be accompanied by the annual fee of $1,000. The renewal application shall
also contain any changes in the information required by  20-36 which have occurred since the
previous application. If the renewal application and/or the annual fee are not tendered in a timely
fashion, the Director shall serve notice to the licensee that the failure to submit the renewal application
and/or the annual fee within ten business days will be deemed an abandonment of the license as of the
above-referenced renewal deadline. Service of the notice required by this section shall be deemed
complete upon certified mailing, return receipt requested, or personal delivery.
(Ord. 11-09-1118, passed 9-20-2011)
 20-42 EMPLOYEE LICENSE REQUIRED.
(A) Any person intending to be an employee at an adult entertainment establishment shall make
application for an employee license with the Director in accordance with this section. The application
shall be in writing, notarized, and shall be in the form prescribed by the Director and shall be deemed
complete when it contains the following items:
(1) The legal name of the applicant;
2015 S-2
20 Radcliff - Adult Entertainment Activities
(2) Any and all aliases or names used or to be used by the applicant in the course of prior,
current or prospective appearances or performances as a dancer, performer or entertainer;
(3) The applicant's mailing address where the applicant may be contacted by the Director;
(4) The applicant's date of birth;
(5) A set of the applicant's fingerprints suitable or a copy of a government-issued photo
identification card;
(6) A recent photograph of the applicant; and
(7) Any information required under this section deemed to be private and/or confidential
within the meaning of KRS 61.878, or within the constitutional right to privacy, shall not be disclosed
to any person other than law enforcement agencies or other governmental agency.
(B) The applicant shall submit an annual license fee of $25 with the application for an employee
license and the Director shall immediately issue a temporary employee license pending a final decision
by the Director to grant or deny the employee license. Within 20 working days of the application, the
Director shall determine whether the applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity, as
defined in this chapter. If no record of such conviction is found, the Director shall issue an annual
employee license. The license so granted shall expire on June 30 of each year and shall be annually
reissued by the Director upon application therefor by the employee unless the Director confirms that
the applicant has been convicted of any of the above-described offenses. In the event the Director
confirms a conviction of a proscribed offense, he/she shall issue the applicant a notice of intent to deny
the employee license. Application for a renewal license shall be made at least 90 days, and not more
than 120 days, prior to expiration of the employee's current license. Within 30 days after the effective
date of this chapter, no person shall be an employee at an adult entertainment establishment without
having obtained the license required by this section.
(Ord. 11-09-1118, passed 9-20-2011)
 20-43 LICENSE DENIAL, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION; HEARING AND APPEAL.
(A) The Director shall issue a written letter of intent to suspend an adult entertainment license or
an employee license, as applicable, for a period not to exceed 30 days if it determines that the licensee
knowingly or recklessly violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter, or, knowingly
refused to allow an inspection of the licensed premises as authorized by this chapter.
(B) The Director shall issue a written statement of intent to revoke an adult entertainment
establishment license or an employee license, as applicable, if the licensee knowingly or recklessly
commits two or more violations specified in this chapter within a 12-month period.
2015 S-2
Adult Entertainment Activities 21
(C) The Director shall issue a written statement of intent to revoke an adult entertainment
establishment license or an employee license, as applicable, if:
(1) The licensee knowingly gave false information in the material submitted during the
application process;
(2) The licensee has knowingly engaged in or allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled
substances on the premises;
(3) The licensee has knowingly engaged in or allowed prostitution on the premises;
(4) The licensee has knowingly operated the adult entertainment establishment during a
period of time when the licensee's license was suspended;
(5) The licensee has knowingly engaged in or allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy,
oral copulation, or masturbation to occur in or on the licensed premises. This subsection will not apply
to an adult motel, unless the licensee knowingly allowed the foregoing sexual activities to occur either
in exchange for money or in a place within public view.
(D) The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the
license, provided however, that any reversal of a conviction shall automatically eliminate that
conviction from consideration in this chapter.
(E) When, after the notice and hearing procedure described in division (F) below, the Director
revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued an
adult entertainment establishment license or an employee license for one year from the date revocation
becomes effective, provided that, if the conditions of division (G) of this section are met, a provisional
license will be granted pursuant to that subsection.
(F) If facts exist for denial, suspension, or revocation of an adult entertainment establishment
license or an employee license issued under this chapter, the Director shall notify the applicant or
licensee (respondent) in writing of the intent to deny, suspend or revoke the license, including the
grounds therefore, by personal delivery, or by certified mail. The notification shall be directed to the
most current business address on file with the Director, and will provide the address of the Hearing
Officer to which the respondent should direct his or her response. Within five working days of receipt
of such notice, the respondent may provide to the Hearing Officer, in writing, a response that shall
include a statement of reasons why the license or permit should not be denied, suspended, or revoked.
Within three working days of the receipt of respondent's written response, the Hearing Officer shall
notify respondent in writing of the hearing date on respondent's denial, suspension or revocation
proceeding.
2015 S-2
22 Radcliff - Adult Entertainment Activities
(1) Within ten working days of the receipt of respondent's written response, the Hearing
Officer shall conduct a hearing at which respondent shall have the opportunity to be represented by
counsel, present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf, and cross-examine adverse witnesses.
Such proceeding shall be transcribed or recorded. Within ten working days after any hearing, the
Hearing Officer shall issue a written decision on the matter and mail such decision to the respondent by
certified mail no later than three working days after the date of such decision.
(2) If a response is not received by the Hearing Officer in the time stated or, if after hearing,
the Hearing Officer finds that grounds as specified in this chapter exist for denial, suspension, or
revocation, then such denial, suspension, or revocation shall become final five working days after the
Hearing Officer sends, by certified mail, the written decision and notice that the license has been
denied, suspended, or revoked. Such notice shall include a statement advising the applicant or licensee
of the right to appeal such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction.
(G) When a decision to deny, suspend or revoke a license becomes final, the applicant or licensee
(aggrieved party) whose application for a license has been denied, or whose licenses has been
suspended or revoked, shall have the right to appeal such action to a court of competent jurisdiction
within 15 working days of the date the adverse decision becomes final. Until the time for an appeal has
passed, any temporary license issued to the aggrieved party under this chapter shall remain in effect
throughout the administrative proceedings described in this section. Upon the filing of any court action
to appeal, challenge, restrain or otherwise enjoin the enforcement of the denial, suspension or
revocation, the Director shall immediately issue the aggrieved party a provisional license and shall file
the record of the administrative proceeding with the reviewing court within ten business days after
he/she receives notice of said action. The provisional license shall allow the aggrieved party to
continue operation of the adult entertainment establishment or to continue employment as an adult
entertainment employee, as the case may be, and will expire upon the court's entry of a judgment on the
merits of the aggrieved party's action to appeal, challenge, restrain or otherwise enjoin the enforcement
of the Director's decision.
(Ord. 11-09-1118, passed 9-20-2011)
 20-44 RESERVED.
 20-45 SCIENTER NECESSARY TO PROVE LIABILITY.
This chapter does not impose strict liability for violations of its provisions. Where any provision or
offense herein fails to state a necessary level of culpability to establish a violation or liability, the
offense shall be established upon a showing that the person acted knowingly or recklessly with regard
to the predicate act. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, for the purposes of this chapter, an act
by an employee shall be imputed to the adult entertainment licensee for the purpose of establishing a
violation of this chapter, or for purposes of license denial, modification, or revocation only if a licensee
allowed, either knowingly or by reckless failure to supervise, a violation of this chapter to occur. It
shall be a defense to liability that the adult entertainment establishment licensee was powerless to
prevent the violation.
(Ord. 11-09-1118, passed 9-20-2011)
2015 S-2 Repl.
Adult Entertainment Activities 23
 20-46 FAILURE OF OFFICIAL TO MEET TIME FRAME NOT TO RISK APPLICANT OR
LICENSEE RIGHTS.
In the event that a government official is required to take an act or do a thing pursuant to this
chapter within a prescribed time, and fails to take such act or do such thing within the time prescribed,
said failure shall not prevent the exercise of constitutional rights of an applicant or licensee. If the act
required of the official under this chapter, but not completed in the time prescribed, includes approval
of condition(s) necessary for approval by the City Government of an applicant or licensee's application
for an adult entertainment establishment license or an adult entertainment establishment employee
license (including a renewal), the applicant or licensee shall be deemed to have satisfied the
condition(s) for which approval was sought.
(Ord. 11-09-1118, passed 9-20-2011)
 20-99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a civil penalty of not
less than $100 nor more than $1,000 as imposed by the Director. Each day that a violation continues
after notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. Any person cited pursuant to this
division (A) and assessed a civil penalty shall have the right to appeal such penalty to the Hearing
Officer.
(B) Notwithstanding division (A) above, any person who violates any provision of this chapter or
who knowingly provides false information in an attempt to gain or maintain a license, shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not less than $250 nor more than
$500 or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both, for each offense. Any person cited hereunder for
a failure to meet a requirement hereof may be cited again for said failure one or more days after a prior
citation and in such case each citation shall constitute a separate offense.
(C) In addition to the penalties provided herein for violations of this chapter, the Director is
authorized to pursue remedial civil actions for violations of this chapter by civil complaint or petition
for injunctive relief, declaration of rights or other appropriate proceedings filed in the Hardin County,
Kentucky Circuit Court.
(Ord. 11-09-1118, passed 9-20-2011)
2015 S-2
24 Radcliff - Adult Entertainment Activities
CHAPTER 21: PAWN SHOPS, JUNK, SECOND HAND AND SCRAP DEALERS
2015 S-2 1
2 Radcliff - Pawn Shops, Junk, Second Hand, and Scrap Dealers
CHAPTER 21: PAWN SHOPS, JUNK, SECOND HAND AND SCRAP DEALERS
Section
21-1. Definitions
21-2. Compliance required
21-3. Transaction record of purchases
21-4. Transacting business with minors
21-5. Examination of books
21-6. Regulated property sale limitations
21-99. Penalty
_ 21-1 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
CITY OF RADCLIFF. The corporate limits of the City of Radcliff, Kentucky.
COMMODITY METALS. Any metal containing primarily brass, copper, copper alloy, aluminum,
stainless steel, or magnesium, or any other metal trading on the commodity markets that trades in
pounds, rather than ounces, except aluminum single serving beverage cans shall not be considered
commodity metals.
FERROUS METALS. Any metal consisting primarily of iron or steel.
INVESTMENT PURPOSES. The purchase of regulated property by persons and the retention of
that property in the same form as purchased, for resale to persons who are purchasing the
property primarily as an investment.
MINOR. Any person under the age of 18 years.
MOTOR VEHICLE DEALERS. Any person who exclusively deals in new or used cars.
PERSON. Any individual, owner, agent, partnership, corporation or other business entity.
PRECIOUS METALS. Any metal that is valued for its character, rarity, beauty, quality, or worth,
including, but not limited to gold, silver, platinum or any other such metals, whether as separate
items or in combination as a piece of jewelry.
2015 S-2
3
4 Radcliff - Pawn Shops, Junk, Second Hand, and Scrap Dealers
PURCHASE. To obtain regulated property by paying money or giving other valuable
consideration in a voluntary transaction. However, PURCHASES under this chapter do not include
transactions in which regulated property is obtained by the loan of money or on condition of
selling regulated property back to the individual from whom it came at a stipulated price.
REGULATED PROPERTY. The following property, which is used or secondhand:
(1) Commodity and precious metals.
(2) Gems, including but not limited to, any gem that is valued for its character, rarity,
beauty or quality, including diamonds, rubies, emeralds, sapphires or pearls, or any other such
gems or stones, whether as a separate item or in combination as a piece of jewelry.
(3) Jewelry containing metals or gems, including but not limited to, rings, necklaces,
pendants, earrings, brooches, bracelets, or chains.
(4) Watches, including but not limited to, pocket watches, wrist watches, or stop watches.
(5) Sterling silver, including but not limited to, flatware, candleholders, coffee and tea sets,
ornamental objects, champagne flutes, wineglasses, or serving pieces such as platters, bowls, trays,
water pitchers, open bakers, ice buckets, shell dishes or salt and pepper shakers.
(6) Audio equipment and accessories, including but not limited to, tape players, tape
decks or players, compact/digital disc players and compact discs, sound metering devices, tuners,
amplifiers, speakers, transceivers, equalizers, receivers, phonographs, turntables, stereos, radios,
clock radios, satellite radios, car stereos, car speakers, radar detectors, broadcasting equipment or
citizen band radios/transceivers.
(7) Video and digital equipment and accessories, including but not limited to, televisions,
videotape or digital videodisc recorders, videotape or digital videodisc players, video cameras,
video monitors, video games, digital video discs or video game consoles.
(8) Photographic and optical equipment and any accompanying bags, including but not
limited to, cameras, camera lenses, camera filters, camera motor drives, light meters, flash
equipment, movie projectors, slide projectors, photography processing equipment, photography
enlarging equipment, binoculars, telescopes, opera glasses, microscopes, surveying equipment,
rifle scopes, spotting scopes, or electronic sighting equipment.
(9) Electrical office equipment, including but not limited to, telefax machines, laser
printers, copiers, duplicators, typewriters, calculators, cash registers, transcribers, dictaphones,
computers, modems, monitors, or any computer equipment or accessories having uniquely
identifiable parts.
(10) Power yard and garden tools, including but not limited to, garden tractors, lawn
mowers, rototillers, lawn sweepers, weed or brush cutters, edgers, trimmers, blowers, chippers,
shredders, or ladders.
2015 S-2
Pawn Shops, Junk, Second Hand, and Scrap Dealers 5
(11) Power equipment and tools, including but not limited to, air hammers, air tools, nail
guns, power staplers, power saws, power sanders, chainsaws, power planers, power drills, routers,
lathes, joiners, shop vacuums, paint sprayers and accessory equipment, generators, air
compressors, pressure washers or logging equipment.
(12) Automotive and hand tools, including but not limited to, wrench sets, sockets sets,
screw driver sets, pliers, vise grips, tool boxes, auto body hammers, jacks or timing lights.
(13) Telephones or telephone equipment, including but not limited to, office telephones,
portable home telephones, mobile telephones, cellular telephones or answering machines.
(14) Sporting equipment, including but not limited to, bicycles, golf clubs and bags, pool
cues or cases, skis, ski boots, snowboards, fishing rods or reels, or skates.
(15) Outboard motors and boating accessories, including but not limited to, outdrives,
props, inboard engines, boat covers, tops or unlicensed boat trailers.
(16) Microwave ovens.
(17) Motor vehicles, other than as set forth in division (18)(a), below.
(18) Regulated property does not include any of the following property:
(a) Motor vehicles dealt in by motor vehicle dealers;
(b) Boats;
(c) Books, magazines, beta and VHS video tapes, and comic books;
(d) Glassware, objects d'art, or sports cards and sports memorabilia;
(e) Furniture;
(f) Refrigerators, stoves, washers, dryers and other similar major household
appliances;
(g) Property purchased at an auction;
(h) Property purchased from another person, who is in a business, as described in _
21-2;
(i) Postage stamps, stamp collections and philatelic items;
(j) Clothing;
2015 S-2
6 Radcliff - Pawn Shops, Junk, Second Hand, and Scrap Dealers
(k) Ferrous metals, including items listed in divisions (6) through (16) above, when
purchased by a scrap processor and which items are in such condition that their highest and
primary value is either in sale or transfer as scrap metal;
(1) Commodity or ferrous metals purchased by a scrap processor from a
manufacturing, industrial or other commercial vendor that generates such metals in the ordinary
course of business; or
(m) A total of four or less compact discs, digital video discs, and/or video games
purchased in any combination from a single seller in a 24-hour period.
SCRAP PROCESSORS. Any person who utilizes torches, sheers, balers, presses, or shredders to
manufacture scrap metal for remelting purposes only.
(Ord. 11-09-1119, passed 9-20-2011)
_ 21-2 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
Every person engaged in, conducting or carrying on any business in Radcliff, Kentucky, wherein
he or she regularly purchases, in the course of his or her business, regulated property from another
person shall comply with all the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 11-09-1119, passed 9-20-2011)
_ 21-3 TRANSACTION RECORD OF PURCHASES.
(A) Every person carrying on any business as set forth in _ 21-2 above, shall keep a transaction
record for each purchase, which shall contain the name of the person on behalf of the business, as
set forth in _ 21-2 above, who actually made the purchase, the name of the person or persons and
his or her signature from whom any regulated property is purchased, an electronically retained
copy of a government-issued photo identification, including the information obtained from
scanning the bar code on the back of a government-issued photo identification of the person or
persons from whom any regulated property is purchased, the date when the property was received
and bought, the residence or place of business of such person or persons from whom the
regulated property is purchased, and a full description of the items purchased. The transaction
record shall be in plain, legible English text. Except for scrap metal processors purchasing
commodity and precious metals, if any item of regulated property purchased has engraved
thereon any numbers, words, or initials, other than the name of the manufacturer or maker of the
item, or contains any setting of any kind, the description recorded on the transaction record shall
show the numbers, initials or other unique identifying marks. In the case of a motor vehicle, the
vehicle identification number shall be recorded on the transaction record including license plate
number and make, model and description of the motor vehicle
(B) All transactions which qualify under this chapter shall be registered with Leads on Line
within 24 hours of the receipt of the property. If so registered a hard copy retention shall not be
required.
2015 S-2
Pawn Shops, Junk, Second Hand, and Scrap Dealers 7
(C) It shall be the duty of any such person to allow any police officer designated by the Chief
of Police during regular business hours to examine and inspect transaction records, and if sufficient
information cannot be gained from an inspection of transaction records, it shall be the duty of any
person to permit and allow the officer to examine any and all regulated property mentioned herein
belonging to or purchased by such person. A transaction record and digital photograph, in
accordance with _ 21-6, if applicable, for a purchase shall be maintained together on the premises
for at least one year after the date of such purchase.
(D) Every person carrying on business as set forth in _ 21-2 above shall give a plain written or
printed receipt of the regulated property purchased.
(E) All described records shall be retained.
(Ord. 11-09-1119, passed 9-20-2011)
_ 21-4 TRANSACTING BUSINESS WITH MINORS.
No person carrying on any business as set forth in this chapter shall at any time or under any
circumstances purchase from a minor any regulated property as defined in _ 21-1 above unless
having been presented a certificate of trade as signed by a parent or legal guardian, provided such
parent or legal guardian has been physically present at a prior transaction.
(Ord. 11-09-1119, passed 9-20-2011)
_ 21-5 EXAMINATION OF BOOKS.
Any sworn law enforcement officer may examine during regular business hours the books of
any person doing business as set forth in this chapter, or his or her clerk, if they deem it necessary
when in search of stolen property. Any person who has in his or her possession a receipt from
selling regulated property to a person carrying on a business as described in this chapter, shall,
when accompanied by a sworn law enforcement officer, be permitted to examine regulated
property purporting to be sold by that receipt. No property shall be removed from the possession
of any person doing business as set forth in _ 21-2 above without due process of law as required
by the existing laws of the Commonwealth of Kentucky, or the laws and ordinances of the City of
Radcliff.
(Ord. 11-09-1119, passed 9-20-2011)
_ 21-6 REGULATED PROPERTY SALE LIMITATIONS.
No regulated property purchased by a person carrying on a business as described in _ 21-2
above shall be sold, altered or destroyed for a period of ten full days after the date of purchase or
ten days after registration of the property with Leads On Line, which ever occurs later. The
regulated property must be kept uncommingled, along with a copy of the transaction record, as
set forth in _ 21-3 above, on the
2015 S-2
8 Radcliff - Pawn Shops, Junk, Second Hand, and Scrap Dealers
premises of the business location during the holding period for purposes of inspection, if
necessary, as provided by this chapter. This section shall not apply if a digital photograph, which
accurately depicts the regulated property items of the transaction, is taken and retained together
with the transaction record, as provided by _ 21-3 above, for at least one year from the date of
purchase.
(Ord. 11-09-1119, passed 9-20-2011)
_ 21-99 PENALTY.
(A) (1) Any person who shall neglect or refuse to comply with or violates the provisions of
_ 21-3 shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500 for each offense or incarcerated up to
90 days or both. Each day such person, firm or corporation shall neglect or refuse to comply with
or violate any of the provisions of that section shall constitute a separate offense.
(2) Any person convicted of a second or subsequent offense under _ 21-3 shall be fined
not less than $500 or more than $1,000 or incarcerated up to 180 days or both.
(B) Any person who shall violate _ 21-4 shall be fined $100, imprisoned not more than 50 days
or both. For a second offense any person shall be fined not less than $500 nor more than $1,000 or
incarcerated up to 180 days or both.
(C) Any person who shall violate _ 21-5 shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500.
(D) Any person who shall violate _ 21-6 shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500.
(E) Any person so convicted shall be subject to any and all other administrative penalties,
including and not limited to revocation of the business license.
(Ord. 11-09-1119, passed 9-20-2011)
2015 S-2
CHAPTER 22: HAZARDOUS MATERIAL
2015 S-2 1
2 Radcliff - Hazardous Material
CHAPTER 22: HAZARDOUS MATERIAL
Section
22-1. Purpose
22-2. Definitions
22-3. Cost of recovery standards
22-4. Lien created, seizure, impoundment
22-5. Response standards
_ 22-1 PURPOSE.
Pursuant to the authority of KRS 39B.010, KRS 39B.070(2), 106 KAR 1:230, and KAR 1:240 et seq.,
this chapter is adopted by the City Council of Radcliff, Kentucky, for the purpose of requiring the
timely payment or reimbursement by any parties responsible for a release or threatened release of
any hazardous material in the city, of all costs incurred by the city, including the city's mutual aid
providers, and other local safety or emergency services agencies, in responding to a release or
threatened release of any hazardous material.
(Ord. 10-10-1102, passed 10-12-2010)
_ 22-2 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning:
COSTS. All expenses incurred by the city or any agent of the city, including the city's mutual
aid providers, and other local public safety or emergency services agencies in responding to a
release or threatened release of a hazardous material. The term includes, but is not limited to,
expenses for salaries and personnel benefits of employees who respond to a hazardous material
release or threatened release, including lost wages of volunteer personnel; the expenses incurred
to replace materials, supplies, vehicles, and equipment expended or contaminated or damaged in
response to a release or threatened release of a hazardous material; expenses incurred to properly
clean-up, restore, or dispose of contaminated vehicles, equipment, supplies, and materials involved
in response to a release or threatened release of a hazardous material; the logistical expenses
incurred for food, lodging, utilities, fuel services, sanitation, medical surveillance or treatment,
evacuation, and rental; and other personnel, health, medical, safety, operating, support, logistical,
maintenance, or administrative expenditures made to support the response to a release or
threatened release of a hazardous material, including any legal expenses incurred in recovering
costs as described in this chapter.
2015 S-2
3
4 Radcliff - Hazardous Material
FIXED FACILITY. Any building, structure, installation, storage container, equipment, pipe, or
pipeline (including any pipe into a sewer or publicly-owned treatment system), well, pit, pond,
lagoon, impoundment, reservoir, ditch, landfill, site, or immobile vessel where a hazardous material
is stored, deposited, disposed of, abandoned, placed, or otherwise is located. Consumer products
as defined in 15 U.S.C. 2052, in consumer use and vessels, are not included.
HANDLER. A person that stores, maintains, treats, processes, uses, generates, disposes of,
transports, controls, manages, or otherwise possesses a hazardous material.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. A substance (gas, liquid, solid, or semi-solid) capable of creating
harm to people, property, and the environment, including but not limited to, any element,
commodity, compound, chemical, substance, mixture, corrosive, radioactive, oxidizer, organic
peroxide, etiological or biological agent, carcinogenic, or highly reactive substance when mixed
with other substances.
MOBILE CARRIER. Motor vehicles, cargo tanks, box trailers, rolling stock, rail tank cars,
locomotive engines, aircraft, barges, boats, or other motorized vehicles or commodity containers
used in transportation of a hazardous material.
OWNER/OPERATOR. A person who owns or operates a fixed facility or a person that owns or
operates a mobile carrier as well as any person vested with proprietary or decision-making
authority over a fixed facility or mobile carrier.
PERSON. An individual, trust, firm, business, corporation, joint stock, company, partnership,
consortium, association, cooperative, joint venture, city, county, special district, a state or any
department or agency thereof, the United Sates of America or any department or agency thereof,
or other commercial or legal entities.
RELEASE. Any accidentally or intentional, unauthorized or non-permitted spilling, leaking,
pumping, pouring, emitting, escaping, emptying, discharging, injecting, dumping, or disposing of a
hazardous material into or on any site, surface, land, air, water, well, river, lake, reservoir, stream,
creek, ditch, sewer, pipe, drainage basin or other area.
RESPONSE. Any actions taken to ensure the preservation and protection of public health,
safety, welfare and the environment, including but not limited to, any mitigation, logistical,
remedial, and supporting measures required to safeguard emergency responders, the public, and
the environment.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY. Any person possessing or controlling a hazardous material at the time
of a release, or threatened release, of the hazardous material.
THREATENED RELEASE. A factor or circumstance that presents a substantial threat of a release.
(Ord. 10-10-1102, passed 10-12-2010)
2015 S-2
Hazardous Material 5
_ 22-3 COST OF RECOVERY STANDARDS.
Any person, owner/proprietor, handler, or other responsible party, that causes or is otherwise
responsible for a release or threatened release of a hazardous material that requires or results in a
response to the release or threatened release and the expenditure of public funds in executing the
response to the release by the city or any agent of the city, including the regional WMD/hazardous
materials response teams, mutual aid providers, and other local public safety or emergency
services agencies in the city, shall be liable to the city for all recoverable costs as outlined
hereinbelow and incurred by the city, the regional WMD/hazardous materials response teams,
mutual aid providers, and other local public safety or emergency services agencies in the city to
include any protective, mitigation, remedial and recovery actions taken in the response.
(A) In the event of a release of a hazardous material, or a threatened release of a hazardous
material, being transported in or otherwise involved in transportation or transit in the city, the
handler, the shipper or carrier, the owner/operator of the hazardous material, and any other
responsible party, jointly and severally, shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the city and
any agent of the city, including the regional WMD/hazardous materials response teams, mutual aid
providers, and any other dispatched local public safety or emergency services agencies in the city
in responding to the release or threatened release.
(B) In the event of a release of a hazardous material, or a threatened release of a hazardous
material, at a fixed facility, the handler or the owner/operator of the hazardous material, and any
other responsible party, shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the city or any agent of the
city, including the regional WMD/hazardous materials response teams, mutual aid providers, and
any other dispatched local public safety or emergency services agencies in the city and in
responding to the release or threatened release.
(C) At the direction of the City Council, the Director of the City Emergency Management, on
behalf of the city, is hereby authorized and directed to prepare and submit all bills of claim to any
owner/operator, carrier, shipper, handler, or other responsible party for payment or
reimbursement of all recoverable costs incurred as described in this chapter.
(D) At the direction of the City Council, the City Attorney is hereby authorized and directed to
initiate such proceedings, in the name of the city, in any court having jurisdiction over such matters
as are necessary to recover the costs incurred as described in this chapter.
(Ord. 10-10-1102, passed 10-12-2010)
_ 22-4 LIEN CREATED, SEIZURE, IMPOUNDMENT.
(A) All releases or threatened releases of any hazardous material, including a release or
threatened release of a hazardous material involved in transportation, or transit or a release or
threatened release of a hazardous material at a fixed facility, shall be considered a public health
hazard in the city. For the
2015 S-2
6 Radcliff - Hazardous Material
purpose of securing all recoverable costs incurred in executing a response to any hazardous
material release or threatened release by the city and any agent of the city, including the regional
WMD/hazardous materials response teams, mutual aid providers, and any other dispatched local
public safety or emergency services agencies in the city, the city shall have, and there is hereby
created a lien against the real or personal property in the city possessed by the owner/operator,
handler, or any other responsible party or person. The affidavit of the Mayor of the city shall
constitute prima facie evidence of the amount of the lien and it shall be recorded in the office of
the County Clerk. The lien shall be notice to all persons from the time of its recording and shall
bear interest thereafter at the rate of 12% until paid. The lien created shall take priority over all
other subsequent liens, except those asserted by any city or other taxing district which has priority
under KRS 134.420, and may be enforced by judicial proceeding. The owner of property upon
which a lien has been attached under this ordinance shall also be personally liable for the amount
of the lien, including all interest, civil penalties, and other charges and the city shall have the same
remedies as provided for the recovery of a debt owed.
(B) The lien shall be enforced upon the filing of an action in the County Circuit Court naming
all persons with a security or other interest in the real or personal property to which the lien is
attached.
(C) As to any moveable personal property or mobile carrier located in Hardin County,
Kentucky, including, but not limited to, any titled motor vehicle, trailers, attached thereto, vessels,
cargo tanks, locomotive engine, rail tank cars, rolling stock, and other equipment used to store or
transport a hazardous material, the city may effectuate or order the seizure or impoundment of
such property pending enforcement of the lien by the County Circuit Court. In addition, the Radcliff
Police Department may order impoundment to preserve such property as evidence.
(Ord. 10-10-1102, passed 10-12-2010)
_ 22-5 RESPONSE STANDARDS.
(A) Response to hazardous material release or threatened release within the geographical
boundaries of the city by the city and any agent of the city, including the regional WMD/hazardous
materials response teams, mutual aid providers, and any other dispatched local public safety or
emergency services agencies in the city shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of the
City Emergency Operations Plan, response agency standard operating procedures, and the terms
of written mutual aid agreements approved by the City Council. The owner/operator or handler of
the hazardous material involved in a release or threatened release, or other responsible party, shall
assume responsibility to the city and any agent of the city, including the regional WMD/hazardous
materials response teams, mutual aid providers, and any other dispatched local public safety or
emergency services agencies in the city for all costs incurred in responding to the release or
threatened release, including costs associated with execution or implementation of the City
Emergency Operations Plan, response agency SOP's, and the terms of written mutual aid
agreement approved by the City Council.
2015 S-2
Hazardous Material 7
(B) In the event the city, including the regional WMD/hazardous materials response teams,
mutual aid providers, and any other dispatched local public safety or emergency services agencies
in the city responded to a release or threatened release outside of the geographical boundaries of
the city under the terms and condition of written mutual aid agreements approved by the City
Council, the owner/operator, or handler of the hazardous material involved in the release or
threatened release, or other responsible party, shall assume responsibility to the city including the
regional WMD/hazardous materials response teams, mutual aid providers, and any other
dispatched local public safety or emergency services agencies in the city for all costs incurred in
responding to a release or threat of release, including costs associated with the execution or
implementation of the City Emergency Operations Plan, response agency standard operating
procedures, and the terms of written mutual aid agreements approved by the City Council.
(C) At the direction of the City Council, the City Attorney is hereby authorized and directed to
initiate such proceedings against the owner/operator, or handler, or other responsible party, or
other private entity, in the name of the city, in any court having jurisdiction over such matters as
are necessary to recover the costs incurred as described in this chapter.
(Ord. 10-10-1102, passed 10-12-2010)
2015 S-2
8 Radcliff - Hazardous Material
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Kentucky Revised Statutes
References to Ordinances
1
2 Radcliff - Parallel References
REFERENCES TO KENTUCKY REVISED STATUTES
KRS Cites Code Section
13B.080 4.1-25
13B.090 4.1-25
Ch. 39B 5-16
39B.010 5-24, 5-26, 22-1
39B.070(2) 22-1
41.240 2-67
41.240(4) 2-67
Ch. 61 2-31, 2-36
61.165 2-92
61.870C61.884 2-34
61.878 20-42
65.8801C65.8839 2-54
65-8815(5) 2-54
66.480 2-67
Ch. 76 17.5-2
82.020 2-1
82.082 7.5-1, 9-3
Ch. 83A 2-1, 2-31
83A.020 2-1
83A.030 2-16
83A.060(5) 4-1, 19-1
83A.070 2-32
83A.075 2-32
83A.080 2-31
83A.085 2-31
83A.085(d)(1)(a-h) 2-33
83A.087 2-35
83A.090 2-31
83A.130(11) 2-17
83A.170 2-2
Ch. 91A Ch. 10
91A.350 10-95
91A.360 10-107
91A.390 10-95, 10-102
92.280C92.281 10-77
92.540 2-65
92.590 2-65
99.595 10-1
2017 S-5 3
4 Radcliff - Parallel References
KRS Cites Code Section
99.595 et seq. 10-1
Ch. 100 4-1.1
100.133 et seq. 14.1-12
100.147 14.1-14
100.153 14.1-13, 14.1-15
100.157 14.1-15
100.161 4-5, 14.1-16
100.163 14.1-17
100.167 14.1-18
100.217(8) 2-48
100.237 2-52
100.241 2-52
100.253 2-52, 20-40
100.257 4-5
100.263 4-5
103.200 2-76
103.200(2) 2-76
103.200(3) 2-76
103.200(4) 2-76
103.200(8) 2-76
103.200(9) 2-76
103.200(16) 2-76
Ch. 109 8-6
131.010(6) 10-18
131.010 et seq. Ch. 10
134.420 2-66, 22-4
Ch. 136 2-66
136.120 10-36
Ch. 151 7.5-5
151.250 7.5-5, 7.5-6
Chs. 186C190 Ch. 12
198B.060 4-2, 4-6
218A.140 et seq. 20-2
Ch. 220 17.5-2
224.50B760 8-69
227.480 4-6
227.570(3) 11-4
227.600 11-3
227.700 14-11
227.702 14-11
227.702(1) 14-11
227-702(2) 14-11
2017 S-5
References to Kentucky Revised Statutes 5
KRS Cites Code Section
227-702(3) 14-11
227-706 14-11
Ch. 237 16-4
Ch. 241 4.1-2, 4.1-4
241.160 4.1-23, 4.1-33
241.180 4.1-23
241.190 4.1-33
Ch. 242 4.1-2, 4.1-4, 4.1-20, 4.1-23
Ch. 242 et seq. 4.1-23
Ch. 243 4.1-2, 4.1-4, 4.1-20, 10-36
243.070 4.1-25, 4.1-31
243.070(2)(a) 4.1-25
243.070(2)(b) 4.1-25
243.070(2)(c) 4.1-25
243.070(2)(d).2 4.1-25
243.070(3)(b) 4.1-25
243.070(4)(b) 4.1-25
243.070(5) 4.1-25
243.070(6)(b) 4.1-25
243.070(7) 4.1-25
243.070(8) 4.1-25
243.070(9) 4.1-25
243.070(10) 4.1-25
243.070(11) 4.1-25
243.070(12) 4.1-25
243.070(13)(a) 4.1-25
243.070(13)(b) 4.1-25
243.070(13)(c) 4.1-25
243.070(13)(d) 4.1-25
243.070(13)(e) 4.1-25
243.070(13)(f) 4.1-25
243.520 4.1-33
Ch. 244 4.1-2, 4.1-4, 4.1-20
244.050 4.1-25
244.290 4.1-31
Title XXI Ch. 3
2017 S-5
6 Radcliff - Parallel References
KRS Cites Code Section
257.100(4) 3-18
258.365 Ch. 3
Ch. 262 17.5-2
Ch. 322 17.5-22
Ch. 342 8-61
Ch. 350 7.5-5
351.310C351.380 7-2
365.660 10-57
Ch. 424 2-76
446.010(24) 1-2
446.010(26) 1-2
446.010(27) 1-2
446.010(28) 1-2
446.010(33) 1-2
446.010(39) 1-2
446.010(43) 1-2
446.020 1-2
446.030(2) 1-2
446.050 1-2
446.090 1-5
446.100 1-4
446.140 1-3
506.120 20-2
510.040 20-2
510.050 20-2
510.060 20-2
510.070 20-2
510.080 20-2
510.090 20-2
510.110 20-2
510.120 20-2
510.130 20-2
510.140 20-2
510.150 20-2
517.050 20-2
525.130 3-19
527.020 16-4
529.020 20-2
529.030 20-2
529.040 20-2
529.050 20-2
529.070 20-2
2015 S-2
References to Kentucky Revised Statutes 6A
KRS Cites Code Section
531.020 20-2
531.030 20-2
531.040 20-2
531.300C531.370 20-2
610.200C610.280 12-33, 14-9
635.010 12-33, 14-9
635.010 et seq. 12-33, 14-9
635.020 12-33, 14-9
635.060 12-33, 14-9
635.070 12-33, 14-9
635.080 12-33, 14-9
635.085 12-33, 14-9
635.100 12-33, 14-9
636.060 14-9
2015 S-2
6B Radcliff - Parallel References
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
B 3-19-1957 4-1
B 3-21-1961 10-65, 10-67
B 8-15-1961 18-1
B 3-16-1967 8-6
B 1-23-1968 4-4, 4-5
B 4-11-1968 5-16, 5-24C5-26, 5-38C5-44
B 3-4-1969 8-5, 8-6
B 8-22-1969 4-1
B 11-17-1970 16-4
B 8-17-1971 2-17
B 2-23-1972 14-2, 14-3
B 6-26-1972 18-2
B 11-21-1972 9-1, 9-3C9-10
B 1-16-1973 18-16C18-19
B 7-10-1973 2-31
B 12-19-1973 12-28
B 12-31-1973 10-34, 10-35.1C10-41, 10-44, 10-48C10-57
B 3-15-1974 10-56
B 12-26-1974 10-56
B 1-21-1975 4-4, 10-68
B 12-21-1976 10-35.1, 10-37.1, 10-56, 10-57
B 6-21-1977 18-45C18-51
B 4-5-1979 8-51C8-68
B 8-21-1979 14-5
B 10-16-1979 12-16
B 11-20-1979 12-31
B 12-21-1979 10-56
B 2-26-1980 14-8, 14.1-11C14.1-19
B 8-20-1980 2-1
B 1-20-1981 14-7, 14-26C14-29
B 2-17-1981 2-2
7
8 Radcliff - Parallel References
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
B 11-17-1981 2-75C2-79
B 5-18-1982 10-57
B 6-22-1982 16-5
B 11-16-1982 2-3
B 2-15-1983 2-43C2-53
B 7-19-1983 3-3, 14.1-12
B 8-30-1983 14.1-30, 14.1-31, 14.1-33C14.1-35
B 6-19-1984 2-32
B 6-26-1984 2-53
B 7-17-1984 2-4
B 3-18-1986 10-35.1
B 5-20-1986 2-33, 2-36C2-41
B 6-17-1986 18-48
B 6-26-1986 10-16C10-19
B 9-2-1986 2.5-1C2.5-9, 10-17, 10-56, 10-76C10-90
B 12-19-1986 2.5-6, 2.5-8
B 3-21-1988 10-95C10-101, 10-103C10-105, 10-107
B 5-31-1988 14.1-12
B 2-22-1989 10-96, 10-105C10-107
B 3-22-1989 2.5-6
B 5-24-1989 2-31
B 1-9-1990 2-31
B 1-19-1990 2-3
B 5-15-1990 10-57
B 6-19-1990 4-6
B 7-25-1990 12-28, 12-31C12-36, 12-37C12-39
B 8-27-1990 10-34, 10-37, 10-41, 10-44, 10-52
B 8-29-1990 10-56
B 10-23-1990 2-34
B 2-19-1991 12-2
B 3-21-1991 10-95, 10-96, 10-107, 18-2
B 10-10-1991 10-57
B 2-7-1992 10-36, 10-37, 10-39, 10-56, 10-57
B 9-15-1992 4-1
B 10-20-1992 2-35
B 11-17-1992 10-56, 10-57
B 12-15-1992 2-65
B 1-4-1993 10-46
2017 S-4
References to Ordinances 9
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
B 3-16-1993 3-1, 3-2, 3-6, 4-2, 4-4, 7-25, 8-73, 10-58,
10-68, 10-89, 12-27, 12-29, 13-9, 14.1-36,
18-2, 18-34
93-03-601 3-16-1993 10-65
B 4-27-1993 10-1
B 7-15-1993 10-90
B 7-20-1993 10-1
B 8-9-1993 9-11, 13-15
B 9-21-1993 4-3, 4-4, 4-6, 10-68, 14-10
94-06-666 7-1-1998 10-65
B 8-23-1994 12-33, 14-9
B 9-26-1994 2-67
B 10-11-1994 8-73
B 12-21-1994 10-56
B 4-13-1995 10-37, 10-77C10-80
B 12-19-1995 14.1-17
B 1-9-1996 2-31
B 5-30-1996 2-32
B 8-21-1996 2-66
B 11-15-1996 10-37, 10-41
B 11-19-1996 10-56
B 12-17-1996 2-37
B 12-18-1996 16-4, 16-5
B 12-23-1996 2-36
B 2-10-1997 10-68
97-02-738 3-1-1997 10-65
B 6-17-1997 13-27
B 11-19-1997 10-1, 10-67, 10-68, 14-10
97-07-746 1-17-1998 10-65
302A 2-1-1998 10-65
97-02-738 2-1-1998 10-65
B 2-18-1998 8-53, 8-54, 8-58, 8-60, 8-62, 8-68
B 7-19-1998 10-65
97-09-753 12-19-1998 10-65
2017 S-5
10 Radcliff - Parallel References
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
B 12-6-1999 10-57
B 2-15-2000 16-5
B 6-23-2000 2-32, 2-58
00-06-806 6-23-2000 2-55
B 8-17-2000 2-31, 10-34, 10-37, 10-56, 10-57
B 12-19-2000 2-17
B 1-19-2001 2-31, 4-1, 4-26, 19-2, 19-3
B 5-15-2001 10-56
B 5-22-2001 10-37
B 6-23-2001 2-32
B 11-20-2001 14.1-12, 14.1-13
B 3-11-2002 13-26, 13-27
B 5-21-2002 2-56C2-58
B 8-12-2002 12-33
B 9-9-2002 14-10
B 12-9-2002 10-56, 10-57
B 3-24-2003 10-17, 10-56, 10-77
B 9-8-2003 8-51C8-54, 8-58, 8-69, 10-57
B 12-8-2003 10-1, 10-2
B 6-15-2004 2-57
B 9-15-2004 2-55
B 2-7-2005 2-31
B 5-9-2005 11-3, 11-4, 13-2
07-05-1005 5-7-2007 7.5-1C7.5-13, 7.5-21C7.5-23, 7.5-31C7.5-37,
7.5-41, 7.5-51
07-08-1017 8-21-2007 4-1, 4-4, 4-5
07-10-1021 10-16-2007 12-29, 12-36.1
07-10-1022 10-16-2007 3-10C3-26
08-03-1025 3-10-2008 12-28
08-04-1030 4-22-2008 10-34, 10-35, 10-35.1, 10-36, 10-37, 10-
37.1, 10-38C10-41, 10-43C10-58, 10-60,
10-63
2015 S-2
References to Ordinances 11
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
08-04-1031 4-22-2008 10-76C10-90
08-04-1035 4-22-2008 14-28, 14-29
08-08-1048 8-19-2008 2-31
08-11-1051 11-12-2008 8-52C8-55, 8-57, 8-58, 8-69
08-11-1052 1-1-2009 10-65
08-11-1055 11-12-2008 10-62
09-06-1059 6-18-2009 10-65
09-06-1060 6-16-2009 Adopting Ordinance
09-08-1072 8-10-2009 10-65
09-08-1074 8-10-2009 14-10
09-12-1079 12-17-2009 2-90C2-107
10-03-1083 3-8-2010 4-1
10-04-1085 4-12-2010 Adopting Ordinance
10-06-1090 6-7-2010 17.5-21_17.5-33
10-06-1091 6-7-2010 4-35, 4-36
10-07-1096 7-12-2010 13-26, 13-27
10-10-1102 10-12-2010 22-1C22-5
11-09-1118 9-20-2011 20-1C20-4, 20-15C20-20, 20-30, 20-35, 20-
36C20-43, 20-45, 20-46, 20-99
11-09-1119 9-20-2011 21-1C21-6, 21-99
11-11-1122 11-29-2011 4.1-1_4.1-4, 4.1-20_4.1-28, 4.1-30_4.1-36,
4.1-99
12-05-1127 5-15-2012 13-26
12-08-1134 8-13-2012 4-1
13-05-1137 5-21-2013 5-41
13-05-1138 5-30-2013 13-26
13-05-1139 5-30-2013 13-26
13-05-1141 5-30-2013 4.1-32
13-08-1146 8-12-2013 4.1-20
13-08-1148 8-12-2013 4.1-25
14-03-1152 2-18-2014 10-41
14-09-1160 9-8-2014 4-1
15-03-1169 3-26-2015 2-3
15-05-1170 5-11-2015 4-4
15-06-1171 6-8-2015 Adopting Ordinance
16-02-1181 2-16-2016 Adopting Ordinance
16-02-1182 4-19-2016 10-95, 10-96, 10-102C10-105, 10-107
16-02-1183 4-19-2016 10-56
16-06-1187 6-21-2016 10-58, 10-59
17-03-1199 3-21-2017 2-54
17-03-1200 3-21-2017 13-30C13-34
17-04-1201 4-18-2017 2-95
2017 S-5
12 Radcliff - Parallel References
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
17-04-1202 4-18-2017 Adopting Ordinance
17-08-1208 8-28-2017 14-11
17-09-1209 9-19-2017 13-1, 13-2
17-09-1210 9-19-2017 2-68
17-10-1213 10-17-2017 13-32
2017 S-5
INDEX
1
2 Radcliff - Index
INDEX
ADMINISTRATION
Board of Adjustment
Adoption of bylaws; records, 2-50
Duties, jurisdiction and authority, 2-52
Established, 2-43
Fees for permits, variances and appeals, 2-53
Meetings, 2-51
Number and appointment of members, 2-44
Officers, 2-49
Reimbursement for expense, 2-46
Removal, 2-48
Term of office, 2-45
Vacancies, 2-47
City Council
Composition, 2-16
Regular meetings, 2-17
City to conduct nonpartisan elections, 2-2
Code Enforcement Board
Established, 2-54
Finances
Generally
Administration and procedure for ad valorem taxes, 2-65
Administration and procedure for bank franchise and local deposit taxes, 2-66
Investment policy for the city, 2-67
Minimum cash reserve amounts in the city general operating fund, 2-68
Industrial Revenue Bonds
Additional action by city officials, 2-79
Application for approval of industrial revenue bond issues, 2-78
Establishment of Bond Oversight Commission, 2-77
Guidelines adopted, 2-75
Requirements for issuing industrial revenue bonds, 2-76
Forestry and Conservation Board
Appointment of members; term of office; removal from office; and compensation, 2-57
Conflict of interest, 2-58
Established, 2-55
Powers, 2-56
3
2017 S-5
4 Radcliff - Index
ADMINISTRATION (Cont=d)
Generally
City Attorney; City Clerk; Chief of Police; Fire Chief; Alcoholic Beverage Control
Administrator; Chief Administrative Officer; department managers, 2-31
City Citation Officer, 2-35
Classification and compensation, 2-29
Classification and compensation plans, 2-32
Defense and payment of judgments for officers and employees while in the scope of
their employment, 2-33
Protection of public employees from reprisal for disclosure of information related to
suspected mismanagement, waste, fraud or endangerment of public health or
safety, 2-34
Surrender of effects of office, 2-30
Grievance procedure for suspected or alleged discrimination on basis of handicapped status, 2-4
Method of selection of Council members to preside at meetings in absence of Mayor, 2-3
Officers and Employees
Employees Retirement System
Classifications in county system, 2-40
Continuation of city=s present retirement system, 2-41
Coverage of new employees, 2-36
Current employees= participation, 2-37
Same - Accumulated revenue, 2-39
Transferral to county employees retirement system - Termination of pension plan, 2-38
Retention of the current organization and structure of city government; continuing current
ordinances and resolutions; effective date, 2-1
Smoking in Public Places and Places of Employment
Application to city-owned facilities, 2-92
Construction, 2-106
Declaration of establishment as nonsmoking, 2-98
Definitions, 2-91
Effective date, 2-107
Enforcement, 2-101
Findings and intent, 2-90
Governmental agency cooperation, 2-104
Nonretaliation and nonwaiver of rights, 2-100
Other applicable laws, 2-105
Posting of signs, 2-99
Prohibition of smoking in enclosed public places, 2-93
Prohibition of smoking in outdoor arenas and stadiums, 2-95
Prohibition of smoking in places of employment, 2-94
Public education, 2-103
Index 5
ADMINISTRATION (Cont=d)
Smoking in Public Places and Places of Employment (Cont=d)
Reasonable distance, 2-96
Violations and penalties, 2-102
Where smoking not regulated, 2-97
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ACTIVITIES
General Provisions
Administration, 20-3
Definitions, 20-2
Effect and limitation, 20-4
Findings, declaration of public policy and purpose, 20-1
Licensing Provisions
Employee license required, 20-42
Information to be current; director to be notified of changes, 20-37
Inspections, 20-39
Issuance of license, 20-38
Failure of official to meet time frame not to risk applicant or licensee rights, 20-46
License application; contents, 20-36
License denial, suspension, revocation; hearing and appeal, 20-43
License year; license fees, 20-41
Prohibited activities, 20-40
Scienter necessary to prove liability, 20-45
Penalty, 20-99
Restrictions and Operating Regulations
Construction requirements, 20-19
Employee age requirement, 20-17
Location restrictions, 20-20
Material not to be subject to public view, 20-16
Restricted hours, 20-18
Sale of alcoholic beverages prohibited, 20-30
Signage, 20-15
Unlawful activities, 20-35
ALARM SYSTEMS
Central offices to be staffed 24 hours a day, 2.5-3
Definition; scope of chapter, 2.5-1
False alarms, 2.5-2
Grace period for existing systems prohibited by this chapter, 2.5-8
Penalty for violation, 2.5-9
Permit; required, 2.5-5
Requirements for attachment to city departments, 2.5-4
Same; issuance, 2.5-6
Same; revocation, 2.5-7
2015 S-2
6 Radcliff - Index
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL ADMINISTRATOR (See also ADMINISTRATION)
Officers and employee
City Attorney; City Clerk; Chief of Police; Fire Chief; Alcoholic Beverage Control
Administrator; Chief Administrative Officer; department managers, 2-31
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL LAW (See also ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES)
Adoption of State Alcoholic Beverage Control Law, 4.1-4
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Adoption of State Alcoholic Beverage Control Law, 4.1-4
Alcohol warning signs; drinking alcohol during pregnancy, 4.1-36
Brew-on premises license, 4.1-30
City Administrator, 4.1-23
Closed doors during hours of operation, 4.1-35
Clubs, lodges, and fraternal orders, 4.1-24
Definitions, 4.1-20
Hours of operation, 4.1-21
Licensing and hearings, 4.1-25
Mandatory alcoholic beverage service training, 4.1-32
Nude performances prohibited, 4.1-33
Package retail liquor outlet, 4.1-28
Penalty, 4.1-99
Purpose, 4.1-1
Scope, 4.1-3
Solicitation for the purchase of alcoholic beverages prohibited, 4.1-34
Special Sunday retail drink license, 4.1-31
Supplemental retail drink liquor licenses, 4.1-27
Title; definitions, 4.1-2
Use of revenue, 4.1-22
Wholesale distribution and sales, 4.1-26
2015 S-2
Index 7
ANIMALS
Destruction of abandoned and suffering animal, 3-3
Dogs running at large, 3-2
Dogs; Vicious Dogs; Cruelty
Abandonment, 3-18
Alternate opinion, 3-11
Confiscation of victimized animal, 3-25
Control of dogs, 3-12
Control of vicious dogs, 3-13
Cruelty or exhibition fighting prohibited, 3-20
Cruelty to animals, 3-19
Definitions, 3-10
Enforcement of restrictions on vicious dogs, 3-14
Impoundment, 3-15
Killing dogs, cats for food or fur prohibited, 3-21
Mutilation of animals, 3-22
Penalties, 3-26
Provision of necessities, 3-16
Removal of animal in immediate danger, 3-24
Restraint by leash or chain; specifications, 3-17
Sexual acts with animals, 3-23
Nuisances, 3-1
BLASTING
Blasting Permit
Contracts, 7-24
Distribution of copies, 7-23
Effect of false statements, 7-22
Fee, 7-17
Location to be specified, 7-20
Penalty, 7-25
Renewal, 7-18
Required, 7-16
State license required, 7-19
When effective, 7-21
Exemption, 7-2
Permit to manufacture or sell, 7-4
Scope, 7-1
Storage, transportation and use generally, 7-3
2015 S-2
8 Radcliff - Index
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT (See also ADMINISTRATION)
Adoption of bylaws; records, 2-50
Duties, jurisdiction and authority, 2-52
Established, 2-43
Fees for permits, variances and appeals, 2-53
Meetings, 2-51
Number and appointment of members, 2-44
Officers, 2-49
Reimbursement for expense, 2-46
Removal, 2-48
Term of office, 2-45
Vacancies, 2-47
BOND OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE (See also ADMINISTRATION)
Industrial Revenue Bonds
Establishment of Bond Oversight Commission, 2-77
BONDS (See also ADMINISTRATION)
Industrial Revenue Bonds
Additional action by city officials, 2-79
Application for approval of industrial revenue bond issues, 2-78
Establishment of Bond Oversight Commission, 2-77
Guidelines adopted, 2-75
Requirements for issuing industrial revenue bonds, 2-76
BUILDING STANDARDS
Appeals, 4-5
Building Official, 4-1.3
Building permit and plan review schedule, 4-4
Building permit - required, 4-3
Codes adopted, 4-1
Electrical inspections, 4-6
Established, 4-1.1
2015 S-2
Index 9
BUILDING STANDARDS (Cont=d)
Planning Director, 4-1.2
Rapid Access Systems
Application, 4-36
Definitions, 4-35
Smoke detectors, 4-26
Violations, 4-2
BURNING
Open burning, 14-10
BUSINESS LICENSING (See also TAXATION)
Business Privilege License; Gross Receipts Tax
Administrative provisions, 10-47
Appeals from license suspension or revocation, 10-55
Applications, 10-35.1
Business closing during the calendar year, 10-46
Business privilege license/gross receipts tax application required, 10-35
Business privilege license/gross receipts tax payment required, 10-36
Compliance with law required, 10-37.1
Computation of license fee; minimum, 10-56
Computation of tax when one business subject to several different fees, 10-44
Definitions, 10-34
Effective date, 10-63
Enforcement, 10-52
Entire gross receipts to be reported; list of contested receipts, 10-38
Federal audit provisions, 10-45
Interest and penalties for late payments and extensions, 10-41
License certificates, 10-48
License transfer, 10-50
Off-site temporary motor vehicles sales, 10-62
Payments, returns and apportionment, 10-37
Penalty, 10-58
Refunds, 10-43
Reports in cases of mergers, acquisitions and the like, 10-39
Restriction on license issuance, 10-49
Returns required, 10-40
Revocation, 10-54
Severability, 10-60
Temporary suspension, 10-53
Transient merchants/peddlers/solicitors, 10-57
Unloading license (reserved), 10-61
Use of license fee and gross receipts tax, 10-51
Yard sales, 10-59
2017 S-4
10 Radcliff - Index
BUSINESS LICENSING (Cont=d)
Franchise Agreements
Exemption, 10-67
Imposed, 10-65
Payments, 10-66
Penalty, 10-68
Occupational Privilege Fee
Claim for refund of overpayment, 10-90
Confidentially of returns, information and the like, 10-85
Criminal penalty, 10-89
Definitions, 10-76
Duties of Director of Finance, 10-83
Enforcement powers of Director of Finance, 10-84
Exemptions, 10-79
Filing of return; payment of fee or refund claim, 10-81
Payment of occupation privilege fee, individuals, 10-77
Payment of occupational privilege fee by employers; return, 10-80
Returns to be filed by employee, 10-82
Special occupations, 10-78
Unlawful imposition of occupational privilege fee, 10-87
Unpaid occupational privilege fees; interest and penalties, 10-88
Use of occupational privilege fees, 10-86
CATS (See also ANIMALS)
Killing dogs, cats for food or fur prohibited, 3-21
Penalties, 3-26
CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER (See also ADMINISTRATION)
Officers and employee
City Attorney; City Clerk; Chief of Police; Fire Chief; Alcoholic Beverage Control
Administrator; Chief Administrative Officer; department managers, 2-31
CHIEF OF POLICE (See also ADMINISTRATION)
Officers and employee
City Attorney; City Clerk; Chief of Police; Fire Chief; Alcoholic Beverage Control
Administrator; Chief Administrative Officer; department managers, 2-31
CITY ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL ADMINISTRATOR (See also ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGES)
City Alcoholic Beverage Control Administrator; Appointment; Salary, Function, Oath and Bond
Appointment and salary and function, oath and bond, 4.1-5
Oath; bond, 4.1-6
Index 11
CITY ATTORNEY (See also ADMINISTRATION)
Officers and employee
City Attorney; City Clerk; Chief of Police; Fire Chief; Alcoholic Beverage Control
Administrator; Chief Administrative Officer; department managers, 2-31
CITY CLERK (See also ADMINISTRATION)
Officers and employee
City Attorney; City Clerk; Chief of Police; Fire Chief; Alcoholic Beverage Control
Administrator; Chief Administrative Officer; department managers, 2-31
CITY COUNCIL (See also ADMINISTRATION)
Composition, 2-16
Method of selection of Council members to preside at meetings in absence of Mayor, 2-3
Regular meetings, 2-17
CITY EMPLOYEES, INTERFERENCE WITH
Interference with city officers, employees and the like, 14-4
CITY OFFICERS, INTERFERENCE WITH
Interference with city officers, employees and the like, 14-4
CIVIL DEFENSE (See also CIVIL EMERGENCIES)
Disaster and Emergency Response
Generally
Definition, 5-16
Organization
Civil Defense Director generally, 5-26
Composition, 5-25
Established, 5-24
CIVIL DEFENSE DIRECTOR (See also CIVIL DEFENSE)
Civil Defense Director generally, 5-26
CIVIL EMERGENCIES
Authority of Mayor to proclaim a civil emergency, 5-39
Definitions, 5-38
Length of curfew or other orders of Mayor, 5-42
Notice of proclamation, 5-43
Obedience to orders of Mayor required, 5-44
Other powers of Mayor, 5-41
Power of Mayor to declare curfew, 5-40
12 Radcliff - Index
CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD (See also ADMINISTRATION)
Established, 2-54
CODE OF ETHICS
Adopted by reference, 2.1-1
CODE OF ORDINANCES; GENERAL PROVISIONS
Altering code, 1-7
Amendments to code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language, 1-6
Definitions; rules of construction, 1-2
Effect of repeal of an ordinance, 1-4
General penalty; continuing violations, 1-8
Headings and notes, 1-3
How code designated and cited, 1-1.
Officers and employees not punishable for failure to perform duty, 1-9
Severability, 1-5
COINS
Sale or Exchange of Jewelry, Coins, Precious Stones and Metals
Daily reports, 14-28
Duty to keep register; required information; access to/by police, 14-26
Penalty for violation, 14-29
Retention of articles in same state or condition, 14-27
COMMERCIAL BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS
Prohibited conduct on premises of commercial business establishments, 14-5
CONVENTION (See RADCLIFF CONVENTION AND TOURISM COMMISSION)
CURFEW
Curfew; penalty for violation, 14-9
DEPARTMENT MANAGERS (See also ADMINISTRATION)
Officers and employee
City Attorney; City Clerk; Chief of Police; Fire Chief; Alcoholic Beverage Control
Administrator; Chief Administrative Officer; department managers, 2-31.
DIRECTOR OF FINANCE (See also BUSINESS LICENSING)
Occupational Privilege Fee
Duties of Director of Finance, 10-83
Enforcement powers of Director of Finance, 10-84
2015 S-3
Index 13
DISASTER AND EMERGENCY RESPONSE
Generally
Definition, 5-16
Organization
Civil Defense Director generally, 5-26
Composition, 5-25
Established, 5-24
DISCRIMINATION (See also ADMINISTRATION)
Grievance procedure for suspected or alleged discrimination on basis of handicapped status, 2-4
DOGS (See also ANIMALS)
Dogs running at large, 3-2
Dogs; Vicious Dogs; Cruelty
Abandonment, 3-18
Alternate opinion, 3-11
Confiscation of victimized animal, 3-25
Control of dogs, 3-12
Control of vicious dogs, 3-13
Cruelty or exhibition fighting prohibited, 3-20
Cruelty to animals, 3-19
Definitions, 3-10
Enforcement of restrictions on vicious dogs, 3-14
Impoundment, 3-15
Killing dogs, cats for food or fur prohibited, 3-21
Mutilation of animals, 3-22
Penalties, 3-26
Provision of necessities, 3-16
Removal of animal in immediate danger, 3-24
Restraint by leash or chain; specifications, 3-17
Sexual acts with animals, 3-23
DRIVE-IN THEATERS, 14-3
EMPLOYEES RETIREMENT SYSTEM (See also ADMINISTRATION)
Classifications in county system, 2-40
Continuation of city=s present retirement system, 2-41
Coverage of new employees, 2-36
Current employees= participation, 2-37
Same - Accumulated revenue, 2-39
Transferral to county employees retirement system - Termination of pension plan, 2-38
14 Radcliff - Index
EXPLOSIVES
Blasting Permit
Contracts, 7-24
Distribution of copies, 7-23
Effect of false statements, 7-22
Fee, 7-17
Location to be specified, 7-20
Penalty, 7-25
Renewal, 7-18
Required, 7-16
State license required, 7-19
When effective, 7-21
Exemption, 7-2
Permit to manufacture or sell, 7-4
Scope, 7-1
Storage, transportation and use generally, 7-3
FINANCES (See also ADMINISTRATION)
Generally
Administration and procedure for ad valorem taxes, 2-65
Administration and procedure for bank franchise and local deposit taxes, 2-66
Investment policy for the city, 2-67
Minimum cash reserve amounts in the city general operating fund, 2-68
Industrial Revenue Bonds
Additional action by city officials, 2-79
Application for approval of industrial revenue bond issues, 2-78
Establishment of Bond Oversight Commission, 2-77
Guidelines adopted, 2-75
Requirements for issuing industrial revenue bonds, 2-76
FIRE CHIEF (See also ADMINISTRATION)
Officers and employee
City Attorney; City Clerk; Chief of Police; Fire Chief; Alcoholic Beverage Control
Administrator; Chief Administrative Officer; department managers, 2-31
FIRE STANDARDS
Appeals, 4-5
Building Official, 4-1.3
Building permit - required, 4-3
Building permit and plan review schedule, 4-4
Codes adopted, 4-1
Electrical inspections, 4-6
2017 S-5
Index 15
FIRE STANDARDS (Cont=d)
Established, 4-1.1
Planning Director, 4-1.2
Rapid Access Systems
Application, 4-36
Definitions, 4-35
Smoke detectors, 4-26
Violations, 4-2
FIREARMS
Firearms defined; discharge in city prohibited; penalty for violation; exceptions, 14-8
FIREWORKS, 14-11
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Abrogation and greater restrictions, 7.5-10
Administration
Designation of local Administrator, 7.5-21
Duties and responsibilities of the local Administrator, 7.5-23
Establishment of development permit, 7.5-22
Appeals and Variance Procedures
Appeals and variance procedures, 7.5-41
Basis for establishing the special flood hazard areas, 7.5-7
Compliance, 7.5-9
Definitions, 7.5-5
Enforcement, violation notice and penalties, 7.5-13
Establishment of development permit, 7.5-8
Interpretation, 7.5-11
Lands to which this chapter applies, 7.5-6
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
Critical facilities, 7.5-37
General construction standards, 7.5-31
Specific standards, 7.5-32
Standards for accessory structures in all zones beginning with the letter AA@, 7.5-36
Standards for shallow flooding zones, 7.5-34
Standards for streams without established base flood elevation (unnumbered A zones) and/or
floodways, 7.5-33
Standards for subdivision proposals, 7.5-35
Severability, 7.5-51
Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Objectives
Findings of fact, 7.5-2
Objectives, 7.5-4
Statement of purpose, 7.5-3
Statutory authorization, 7.5-1
Warning and disclaimer of liability, 7.5-12
2017 S-5
16 Radcliff - Index
FORESTRY AND CONSERVATION BOARD (See also ADMINISTRATION)
Appointment of members; term of office; removal from office; and compensation, 2-57
Conflict of Interest, 2-58
Established, 2-55
Powers, 2-56
FOWL (See also ANIMALS)
Destruction of abandoned and suffering animal, 3-3
Nuisances, 3-1
FRANCHISE (See also BUSINESS LICENSING)
Franchise Agreements
Exemption, 10-67
Imposed, 10-65
Payments, 10-66
Penalty, 10-68
FRANCHISE, GARBAGE (See also FRANCHISE; GARBAGE; TRASH)
Principles for Establishing Franchise
Assignment subject to consent of city, 8-63
Authority to advertise for bids, 8-70
Bidder to furnish personnel and equipment, 8-56
Bidder to maintain office in city, 8-58
Compliance with state workers= compensation provisions, 8-61
Consideration paid by bidder, 8-52
Definitions, 8-69
Disposal of waste materials, 8-68
Established, 8-51
Failure of bidder to perform, 8-62
Hours of collection; littering, 8-55
Insurance required, 8-60
Materials subject to refusal, 8-57
Modification, 8-66
Number of weekly collections, 8-54
Penalty, 8-73
Performance bond, 8-59
Records to be kept by bidder, 8-64
Residential/commercial bid acceptance, 8-71
Right of enforcement by city, 8-67
Index 17
FRANCHISE, GARBAGE (Cont=d)
Principles for Establishing Franchise (Cont=d)
Term of the franchise, 8-72
Termination of agreement, 8-65
Various bid requirements, 8-53
GARBAGE
Abatement by the city, 8-21
Commercial handbills or handbills and signs on public places, 8-11
Containers, 8-6
Convey of loose materials on public ways, 8-13
Definitions, 8-1
Disposal, 8-17
Dumping, 8-5, 8-18
Enforcement, 8-20
Illegal deposits of garbage, 8-15
Illegal deposits of litter and the like, 8-16
Investigation of premises, 8-9
Litter receptacles, 8-19
Littering prohibited, 8-2
Maintenance of property, 8-14
Mandatory garbage pickup, 8-12
Notice of removal, 8-10
Permitted storage, 8-8
Prevention of scattering, 8-3
Principles for Establishing Franchise
Assignment subject to consent of city, 8-63
Authority to advertise for bids, 8-70
Bidder to furnish personnel and equipment, 8-56
Bidder to maintain office in city, 8-58
Compliance with state workers= compensation provisions, 8-61
Consideration paid by bidder, 8-52
Definitions, 8-69
Disposal of waste materials, 8-68
Established, 8-51
Failure of bidder to perform, 8-62
Hours of collection; littering, 8-55
Insurance required, 8-60
Materials subject to refusal, 8-57
Modification, 8-66
Number of weekly collections, 8-54
Penalty, 8-73
Performance bond, 8-59
2015 S-2
18 Radcliff - Index
GARBAGE (Cont=d)
Principles for Establishing Franchise (Cont=d)
Records to be kept by bidder, 8-64
Residential/commercial bid acceptance, 8-71
Right of enforcement by city, 8-67
Term of the franchise, 8-72
Termination of agreement, 8-65
Various bid requirements, 8-53
Prohibited storage, 8-7
Recovery by city of expenses of litter removal, 8-22
Upsetting, tampering with receptacles or placing garbage in receptacles other than own, 8-4
GUNS
Firearms defined; discharge in city prohibited; penalty for violation; exceptions, 14-8
HANDBILLS (See also GARBAGE; TRASH)
Commercial handbills or handbills and signs on public places, 8-11
HANDICAPPED (See also ADMINISTRATION; TRAFFIC)
Grievance procedure for suspected or alleged discrimination on basis of handicapped status, 2-4
Parking, stopping and standing
Regulation of parking for the handicapped, 12-29
HARDIN COUNTY CODE OF ETHICS
Adopted by reference, 2.1-1
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL
Cost of recovery standards, 22-3
Definitions, 22-2
Lien created, seizure, impoundments, 22-4
Purpose, 22-1
Response standards, 22-5
HEALTH CLUBS AND THE LIKE
Building structure and layout, 9-5
Contact with opposite sex, 9-8
Definitions, 9-1
General equipment standards, 9-4
Inspections, 9-10
Penalty, 9-11
Permit application, 9-3
Permit required, 9-2
Sanitation and hygiene, 9-6
2015 S-2
Index 19
HEALTH CLUBS AND THE LIKE (Cont=d)
Sleeping and sleeping quarters, 9-7
Tolerating violations of law, 9-9
HOODS
Wearing of hoods or masks, 14-7
HOUSING STANDARDS
Appeals, 4-5
Building Official, 4-1.3
Building permit and plan review schedule, 4-4
Building permit - required, 4-3
Codes adopted, 4-1
Electrical inspections, 4-6
Established, 4-1.1
Planning Director, 4-1.2
Rapid Access Systems
Application, 4-36
Definitions, 4-35
Smoke detectors, 4-26
Violations, 4-2
INDECENT PICTURES, 14-2
INDUSTRIAL REVENUE BONDS (See also ADMINISTRATION)
Additional action by city officials, 2-79
Application for approval of industrial revenue bond issues, 2-78
Establishment of Bond Oversight Commission, 2-77
Guidelines adopted, 2-75
Requirements for issuing industrial revenue bonds, 2-76
JEWELRY
Sale or Exchange of Jewelry, Coins, Precious Stones and Metals
Daily reports, 14-28
Duty to keep register; required information; access to/by police, 14-26
Penalty for violation, 14-29
Retention of articles in same state or condition, 14-27
JUNK DEALERS (See PAWN SHOPS, JUNK, SECOND HAND AND SCRAP DEALERS)
LIQUOR (See ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES)
LITTER (See also GARBAGE; TRASH)
Illegal deposits of litter and the like, 8-16
Litter receptacles, 8-19
2015 S-2
20 Radcliff - Index
LITTER (Cont=d)
Littering prohibited, 8-2
Recovery by city of expenses of litter removal, 8-22
MASKS
Wearing of hoods or masks, 14-7
MASSAGE SALONS AND THE LIKE
Building structure and layout, 9-5
Contact with opposite sex, 9-8
Definitions, 9-1
General equipment standards, 9-4
Inspections, 9-10
Penalty, 9-11
Permit application, 9-3
Permit required, 9-2
Sanitation and hygiene, 9-6
Sleeping and sleeping quarters, 9-7
Tolerating violations of law, 9-9
MAYOR (See also ADMINISTRATION; CIVIL EMERGENCIES; POLICE DEPARTMENT)
Basic law enforcement training; authority of Mayor to contract with newly hired, uncertified
probationary patrol officers, 16-5
Civil emergencies
Authority of Mayor to proclaim a civil emergency, 5-39
Length of curfew or other orders of Mayor, 5-42
Obedience to orders of Mayor required, 5-44
Other powers of Mayor, 5-41
Power of Mayor to declare curfew, 5-40
Method of selection of Council members to preside at meetings in absence of Mayor, 2-3
MOBILE HOME PARKS
Manufactured home installation, 11-4
Manufactured homes must be habitable, 11-3
MOBILE HOMES
Manufactured home installation, 11-4
Manufactured homes must be habitable, 11-3
Index 21
MOTOR VEHICLES
Authority to regulate, 12-2
Operation Generally
Regulation of one-way traffic, 12-16
Parking, Stopping and Standing
General parking regulations, 12-27
Obstructional parking, double parking, 12-36
Parking in fire lanes, 12-28
Parking in parks, 12-35
Parking on easements and rights-of-way, 12-36.1
Parking on off-street facility, 12-34
Penalty for violation of '' 12-32 and 12-34 through 12-36, 12-37
Prepayment of fines, 12-39
Regulation of parking for the handicapped, 12-29
Regulation of roadblocks for charitable solicitations, 12-31
Skating and coasting; obstructions to the flow of traffic, 12-33
Unattended vehicles; locking and braking, 12-32
Uniform citation, 12-38
Traffic-control signs, signals and the like, 12-1
NOISE (See also NUISANCES)
The Prohibition Against Noise Pollution in the City
Definitions, 13-11
Exemptions, 13-14
Noise pollution, 13-10
Penalties, 13-15
Standards for noise pollution, 13-13
Unlawful conduct, 13-12
NUISANCES (See also ANIMALS; FOWL)
Animals and fowl
Nuisances, 3-1
Nuisances
Abatement by city, 13-7
City=s costs declared lien, 13-8
Contents of notice, 13-5
Definition, 13-1
Illustrative enumeration, 13-2
Notice to abate, 13-4
Penalty, 13-9
Prohibited, 13-3
Service of notice, 13-6
Registration Required of Foreclosed and Certain Vacant Residential Properties
Definitions, 13-31
Enforcement, 13-34
2017 S-5
22 Radcliff - Index
NUISANCES (Cont=d)
Registration Required of Foreclosed and Certain Vacant Residential Properties (Cont=d)
Maintenance, 13-33
Purpose, 13-30
Registration, 13-32
Rules and Regulations for City Parks and Facilities
Penalties, 13-27
Rules and regulations for city parks and facilities, 13-26
The Prohibition Against Noise Pollution in the City
Definitions, 13-11
Exemptions, 13-14
Noise pollution, 13-10
Penalties, 13-15
Standards for noise pollution, 13-13
Unlawful conduct, 13-12
OCCUPATIONAL PRIVILEGE FEE (See also BUSINESS LICENSING)
Claim for refund of overpayment, 10-90
Confidentially of returns, information and the like, 10-85
Criminal penalty, 10-89
Definitions, 10-76
Duties of Director of Finance, 10-83
Enforcement powers of Director of Finance, 10-84
Exemptions, 10-79
Filing of return; payment of fee or refund claim, 10-81
Payment of occupation privilege fee, individuals, 10-77
Payment of occupational privilege fee by employers; return, 10-80
Returns to be filed by employee, 10-82
Special occupations, 10-78
Unlawful imposition of occupational privilege fee, 10-87
Unpaid occupational privilege fees; interest and penalties, 10-88
Use of occupational privilege fees, 10-86
OFFENSES-MISCELLANEOUS
Curfew; penalty for violation, 14-9
Drive-in theaters, 14-3
Firearms defined; discharge in city prohibited; penalty for violation; exceptions, 14-8
Fireworks, 14-11
Indecent pictures, 14-2
Interference with city officers, employees and the like, 14-4
Open burning, 14-10
Prohibited conduct on premises of commercial business establishments, 14-5
Sale or Exchange of Jewelry, Coins, Precious Stones and Metals
Daily reports, 14-28
Duty to keep register; required information; access to/by police, 14-26
2017 S-5
Index 23
OFFENSES-MISCELLANEOUS (Cont=d)
Sale or Exchange of Jewelry, Coins, Precious Stones and Metals
Penalty for violation, 14-29
Retention of articles in same state or condition, 14-27
Wearing of hoods or masks, 14-7
OPEN BURNING, 14-10
PARADES AND ASSEMBLIES (See also SIDEWALKS; STREETS)
Application required, 18-47
Definitions, 18-45
Display of permit, 18-49
General provisions, 18-48
Parking, 18-50
Penalty for violation of article, 18-51
Permit required, 18-46
PARKING (See also PARADES AND ASSEMBLIES; SIDEWALKS; STREETS)
General parking regulations, 12-27
Obstructional parking, double parking, 12-36
Parades and Assemblies
Parking, 18-50
Parking in fire lanes, 12-28
Parking in parks, 12-35
Parking on easements and rights-of-way, 12-36.1
Parking on off-street facility, 12-34
Penalty for violation of '' 12-32 and 12-34 through 12-36, 12-37
Prepayment of fines, 12-39
Regulation of parking for the handicapped, 12-29
Regulation of roadblocks for charitable solicitations, 12-31
Skating and coasting; obstructions to the flow of traffic, 12-33
Unattended vehicles; locking and braking, 12-32
Uniform citation, 12-38
PARKS (See also NUISANCES; TRAFFIC)
Parking, Stopping and Standing
Parking in parks, 12-35
Rules and Regulations for City Parks and Facilities
Penalties, 13-27
Rules and regulations for city parks and facilities, 13-26
PAWN SHOPS, JUNK, SECOND HAND AND SCRAP DEALERS
Compliance required, 21-2
Definitions, 21-1
Examination of books, 21-5
2015 S-2 Repl.
24 Radcliff - Index
PAWN SHOPS, JUNK, SECOND HAND AND SCRAP DEALERS (Cont=d)
Penalty, 21-99
Regulated property sale limitations, 21-6
Transacting business with minors, 21-4
Transaction record of purchases, 21-3
PEDDLER (See also BUSINESS LICENSING)
Business Privilege License; Gross Receipts Tax
Transient merchants/peddlers/solicitors, 10-57
PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
Planning Commission
Bylaws and records, 14.1-18
Compensation of members, 14.1-13
Established, 14.1-11
Jurisdiction and authority, 14.1-19
Meetings, 14.1-17
Members generally, 14.1-12
Officers, 14.1-16
Removal of members, 14.1-15
Vacancies in membership, 14.1-14
Sedimentation and Erosion Control
Definitions, 14.1-31
Exemptions from permit, 14.1-34
Existing unvegetated areas, 14.1-35
Permit; control plan, 14.1-32
Plan review and approval, 14.1-33
Purpose and applicability, 14.1-30
Violations and penalties, 14.1-36
PLANNING COMMISSION (See also PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT)
Bylaws and records, 14.1-18
Compensation of members, 14.1-13
Established, 14.1-11
Jurisdiction and authority, 14.1-19
Meetings, 14.1-17
Members generally, 14.1-12
Officers, 14.1-16
Removal of members, 14.1-15
Vacancies in membership, 14.1-14
POLICE CHIEF (See also POLICE DEPARTMENT)
Police Department
Police Chief, 16-2
2015 S-2
Index 25
POLICE DEPARTMENT
Basic law enforcement training; authority of Mayor to contract with newly hired, uncertified
probationary patrol officers, 16-5
Established, 16-1
Police Chief, 16-2
Police officer, 16-3
Weapons, 16-4
PRECIOUS METALS
Sale or Exchange of Jewelry, Coins, Precious Stones and Metals
Daily reports, 14-28
Duty to keep register; required information; access to/by police, 14-26
Penalty for violation, 14-29
Retention of articles in same state or condition, 14-27
PRECIOUS STONES
Sale or Exchange of Jewelry, Coins, Precious Stones and Metals
Daily reports, 14-28
Duty to keep register; required information; access to/by police, 14-26
Penalty for violation, 14-29
Retention of articles in same state or condition, 14-27
RADCLIFF CONVENTION AND TOURISM COMMISSION (See also TAXATION)
Bonding of Commission Treasurer or officer handling funds; quarterly report, 10-100
Collection and payment of transient room tax by accommodations business establishments, 10-98
Commission membership determined by law, 10-107
Commission to audit businesses; to bring civil action, 10-105
Commission to bring criminal action, 10-106
Commission to submit a request for funds for operation, 10-102
Council to appoint certified public accountant for audit; enforcement in absence of voluntary
compliance, 10-104
Council to approve Commission's issuing of revenue bonds and borrowing of money beyond
fiscal year; effective date, 10-103
Depository determined by City Council, 10-101
Establishment of Commission; imposition of transient room tax, 10-95
Monthly collection by Commission Treasurer; delinquency charges, 10-96
Percentage rate imposed, 10-97
Taxation of room and/or space charges, 10-99
RAPID ACCESS SYSTEMS
Application, 4-36
Definitions, 4-35
2017 S-4
26 Radcliff - Index
SAFETY STANDARDS
Appeals, 4-5
Building Official, 4-1.3
Building permit and plan review schedule, 4-4
Building permit - required, 4-3
Codes adopted, 4-1
Electrical inspections, 4-6
Established, 4-1.1
Planning Director, 4-1.2
Rapid Access Systems
Application, 4-36
Definitions, 4-35
Smoke detectors, 4-26
Violations, 4-2
SAUNDERS SPRINGS NATURE PRESERVE (See also NUISANCES)
Rules and Regulations for City Parks and Facilities
Penalties, 13-27
Rules and regulations for city parks and facilities, 13-26
SCRAP DEALERS (See PAWN SHOPS, JUNK, SECOND HAND AND SCRAP DEALERS)
SECOND HAND DEALERS (See PAWN SHOPS, JUNK, SECOND HAND AND SCRAP
DEALERS)
SEDIMENTATION AND EROSION CONTROL (See also PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT)
Definitions, 14.1-31
Exemptions from permit, 14.1-34
Existing unvegetated areas, 14.1-35
Permit; control plan, 14.1-32
Plan review and approval, 14.1-33
Purpose and applicability, 14.1-30
Violations and penalties, 14.1-36
SIDEWALKS (See also STREETS)
Excavations
Application for permit; fee, 18-30
Assets or insurance required, 18-32
Filling and surfacing, 18-33
Permit required, 18-29
Permit revocation, 18-34
Provisions declared supplemental, 18-28
Regulations authorized, 18-31
House numbering, 18-2
2015 S-3
Index 26A
SIGNS (See also GARBAGE; TRASH)
Commercial handbills or handbills and signs on public places, 8-11
SMOKE DETECTORS
Building, fire, housing and safety standards
Smoke detectors, 4-26
SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES AND PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT
Application to city-owned facilities, 2-92
Construction, 2-106
Declaration of establishment as nonsmoking, 2-98
Definitions, 2-91
Effective date, 2-107
Enforcement, 2-101
Findings and intent, 2-90
Governmental agency cooperation, 2-104
Nonretaliation and nonwaiver of rights, 2-100
Other applicable laws, 2-105
Posting of signs, 2-99
2015 S-3
26B Radcliff - Index
Index 27
SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES AND PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT (Cont=d)
Prohibition of smoking in enclosed public places, 2-93
Prohibition of smoking in outdoor arenas and stadiums, 2-95
Prohibition of smoking in places of employment, 2-94
Public education, 2-103
Reasonable distance, 2-96
Violations and penalties, 2-102
Where smoking not regulated, 2-97
SOLICITOR (See also BUSINESS LICENSING)
Business Privilege License; Gross Receipts Tax
Transient merchants/peddlers/solicitors, 10-57
SOLID WASTE (See GARBAGE; TRASH)
STANDING (VEHICLE)
General parking regulations, 12-27
Obstructional parking, double parking, 12-36
Parking in fire lanes, 12-28
Parking in parks, 12-35
Parking on easements and rights-of-way, 12-36.1
Parking on off-street facility, 12-34
Penalty for violation of '' 12-32 and 12-34 through 12-36, 12-37
Prepayment of fines, 12-39
Regulation of parking for the handicapped, 12-29
Regulation of roadblocks for charitable solicitations, 12-31
Skating and coasting; obstructions to the flow of traffic, 12-33
Unattended vehicles; locking and braking, 12-32
Uniform citation, 12-38
STOPPING (VEHICLE)
General parking regulations, 12-27
Obstructional parking, double parking, 12-36
Parking in fire lanes, 12-28
Parking in parks, 12-35
Parking on easements and rights-of-way, 12-36.1
Parking on off-street facility, 12-34
Penalty for violation of '' 12-32 and 12-34 through 12-36, 12-37
Prepayment of fines, 12-39
Regulation of parking for the handicapped, 12-29
Regulation of roadblocks for charitable solicitations, 12-31
Skating and coasting; obstructions to the flow of traffic, 12-33
Unattended vehicles; locking and braking, 12-32
Uniform citation, 12-38
2011 S-1
28 Radcliff - Index
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT FUND (See also STORM WATER UTILITY AND
MANAGEMENT)
Establishment of Storm Water Management Fund, 17.5-4
STORM WATER SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE (See STORM WATER UTILITY AND
MANAGEMENT)
STORM WATER UTILITY AND MANAGEMENT
Assessment notices, 17.5-11
Authority, 17.5-2
Base rate, 17.5-8
Charges for tax-exempt properties; exemptions, 17.5-10
Classification of property for purposes of determination of the storm water management
fee, 17.5-7
Definitions, 17.5-3
Establishment of Storm Water Management Fund, 17.5-4
Findings, 17.5-1
Jurisdiction and authority, 17.5-2.1
Purposes of the Fund, 17.5-5
Request for credit, 17.5-14
Requests for correction of the storm water management fee, 17.5-13
Schedule of monthly rates for storm water management fee, 17.5-9
Storm water management fee, 17.5-6
Storm Water Runoff Control and Quality Management
Acronyms, 17.5-22
Appeals, 17.5-32
Authority, 17.5-24
Compatibility, 17.5-33
Construction site runoff management, 17.5-27
Definitions, 17.5-22
Enforcement, 17.5-32
General approach, 17.5-23
General provisions, 17.5-21
Illicit discharge detection and elimination, 17.5-25
Penalties, 17.5-32
Post-construction storm water management, 17.5-28
Program objectives, 17.5-23
Purpose, 17.5-21
Qualified professional, 17.5-30
Right of entry, 17.5-24
Severability, 17.5-33
2011 S-1
Index 29
STORM WATER UTILITY AND MANAGEMENT (Cont=d)
Storm Water Runoff Control and Quality Management (Cont=d)
Storm water quality management plan (SWQMP) permit
Application process, 17.5-26
Inspections, 17.5-29
Termination, 17.5-31
Title, 17.5-21
When storm water management fee payable; interest and penalties; lien on real property;
abatement of small amounts due, 17.5-12
STREETS (See also PARADES AND ASSEMBLIES; SIDEWALKS; TRAFFIC)
Acceptance of streets, 18-1
Excavations
Application for permit; fee, 18-30
Assets or insurance required, 18-32
Filling and surfacing, 18-33
Permit required, 18-29
Permit revocation, 18-34
Provisions declared supplemental, 18-28
Regulations authorized, 18-31
House numbering, 18-2
Street Improvements
Building permit restrictions, 18-19
Culverts and drainage, 18-16
Ditchlines, 18-18
Property line sidewalks, 18-17
2017 S-4
30 Radcliff - Index
STREETS (Cont=d)
Traffic
Authority to regulate, 12-2
Operation Generally
Regulation of one-way traffic, 12-16
Parking, Stopping and Standing
General parking regulations, 12-27
Obstructional parking, double parking, 12-36
Parking in fire lanes, 12-28
Parking in parks, 12-35
Parking on easements and rights-of-way, 12-36.1
Parking on off-street facility, 12-34
Penalty for violation of '' 12-32 and 12-34 through 12-36, 12-37
Parking, Stopping and Standing (Cont=d)
Prepayment of fines, 12-39
Regulation of parking for the handicapped, 12-29
Regulation of roadblocks for charitable solicitations, 12-31
Skating and coasting; obstructions to the flow of traffic, 12-33
Unattended vehicles; locking and braking, 12-32
Uniform citation, 12-38.March 24, 2009
Traffic-control signs, signals and the like, 12-1
SUBDIVISIONS
Bond, 19-2
Filing fees, 19-3
Regulations adopted, 19-1
TAXATION (See also BUSINESS LICENSING)
Ad Valorem Taxes
Property assessment moratorium for commercial and residential facilities on ad valorem
taxes, 10-1
Revitalization credit, 10-2
Gross Receipts Tax
Business privilege license/gross receipts tax application required, 10-35
Business privilege license/gross receipts tax payment required, 10-36
Computation of tax when one business subject to several different fees, 10-44
Use of license fee and gross receipts tax, 10-51
Insurance Tax
Amount of tax, 10-17
Records, 10-19
Index 31
TAXATION (Cont=d)
Insurance Tax
Tax imposed, 10-16
When due; late payment penalty, 10-18
Transient Room Tax
Bonding of Commission Treasurer or officer handling funds; quarterly report, 10-100
Collection and payment by accommodations business establishments, 10-98
Commission membership determined by law, 10-107
Commission to audit businesses; to bring civil action, 10-105
Commission to bring criminal action, 10-106
Commission to submit a request for funds for operation, 10-102
Council to appoint certified public accountant for audit; enforcement in absence of voluntary
compliance, 10-104
Council to approve Commission=s issuing of revenue bonds and borrowing of money beyond
fiscal year; effective date, 10-103
Depository determined by City Council, 10-101
Establishment of Commission; imposition, 10-95
Monthly collection by Commission Treasurer; delinquency charges, 10-96
Percentage rate imposed, 10-97
Taxation of room and/or space charges, 10-99
TOURISM (See RADCLIFF CONVENTION AND TOURISM COMMISSION)
TRAFFIC
Authority to regulate, 12-2
Operation Generally
Regulation of one-way traffic, 12-16
Parking, Stopping and Standing
General parking regulations, 12-27
Obstructional parking, double parking, 12-36
Parking in fire lanes, 12-28
Parking in parks, 12-35
Parking on easements and rights-of-way, 12-36.1
Parking on off-street facility, 12-34
Penalty for violation of '' 12-32 and 12-34 through 12-36, 12-37
Prepayment of fines, 12-39
Regulation of parking for the handicapped, 12-29
Regulation of roadblocks for charitable solicitations, 12-31
Skating and coasting; obstructions to the flow of traffic, 12-33
Unattended vehicles; locking and braking, 12-32
Uniform citation, 12-38.March 24, 2009
Traffic-control signs, signals and the like, 12-1
2017 S-4
32 Radcliff - Index
TRANSIENT MERCHANT (See also BUSINESS LICENSING)
Business Privilege License; Gross Receipts Tax
Transient merchants/peddlers/solicitors, 10-57
TRASH
Abatement by the city, 8-21
Commercial handbills or handbills and signs on public places, 8-11
Containers, 8-6
Convey of loose materials on public ways, 8-13
Definitions, 8-1
Disposal, 8-17
Dumping, 8-5
Dumping, 8-18
Enforcement, 8-20
Illegal deposits of garbage, 8-15
Illegal deposits of litter and the like, 8-16
Investigation of premises, 8-9
Litter receptacles, 8-19
Littering prohibited, 8-2
Maintenance of property, 8-14
Mandatory garbage pickup, 8-12
Notice of removal, 8-10
Permitted storage, 8-8
Prevention of scattering, 8-3
Principles for Establishing Franchise
Assignment subject to consent of city, 8-63
Authority to advertise for bids, 8-70
Bidder to furnish personnel and equipment, 8-56
Bidder to maintain office in city, 8-58
Compliance with state workers= compensation provisions, 8-61
Consideration paid by bidder, 8-52
Definitions, 8-69
Disposal of waste materials, 8-68
Established, 8-51
Failure of bidder to perform, 8-62
Hours of collection; littering, 8-55
Insurance required, 8-60
Materials subject to refusal, 8-57
Modification, 8-66
Number of weekly collections, 8-54
Index 33
TRASH (Cont=d)
Principles for Establishing Franchise (Cont=d)
Penalty, 8-73
Performance bond, 8-59
Records to be kept by bidder, 8-64
Residential/commercial bid acceptance, 8-71
Right of enforcement by city, 8-67
Term of the franchise, 8-72
Termination of agreement, 8-65
Various bid requirements, 8-53
Prohibited storage, 8-7
Recovery by city of expenses of litter removal, 8-22
Upsetting, tampering with receptacles or placing garbage in receptacles other than own, 8-4
WEAPONS (See also POLICE DEPARTMENT)
Firearms defined; discharge in city prohibited; penalty for violation; exceptions, 14-8
Police Department
Weapons, 16-4
YARD SALES (See also BUSINESS LICENSING)
Business Privilege License; Gross Receipts Tax
Yard sales, 10-59
2017 S-4
34 Radcliff - Index

II
PREFACE
The Zoning Ordinance and General Development Regulations for the City of Radcliff were authored
by Paul R. Tice II, Planner under the guidance of the Radcliff Planning Commission. The ordinance
was developed during the months of November and December of 1983 and January, February and
March of 1984. A completely new Zoning Ordinance was developed to achieve several objectives,
including, but not limited to the following:
1. To encourage development which will act towards implementing the newly created and
adopted Comprehensive Plan.
2. To make the Zoning Ordinance consistent with the newly created and adopted Subdivision
Regulations.
3. To improve the over-all appearance of Radcliff with special emphasis of the mobile home,
multi-family and commercial developments.
4. To allow flexibility in the zoning scheme while insuring compatibility between differing land
uses.
5. To allow the citizens of Radcliff the maximum opportunity to use their property while
protecting the welfare and value of the surrounding properties.
It is felt that this new ordinance will achieve the above-listed objectives.
It should be acknowledge that various groups and individuals contributed to the development of this
set of growth-management regulations. The following persons are noted for their contributions:
Mayor Joseph B. Hutcherson
The Radcliff City Council The Radcliff Planning Commission
Mr. Allen Bell Mr. John Pearman, Chairman
Mr. William Faulkner Ms. Saundra Brown
Mr. Vincent Kieta Mr. Raymond Dawley, Jr.
Mr. Jennings Smith Mr. William Mahanna
Mrs. Martha Baker Mr. Oliver Sullivan
Mr. Don Yates Mr. Allen Bell
Mr. Warren Wells
Mr. Ladislav J. Novak; City Engineer
Mr. Terry Bennett and Mr. Steve Wheatley, City Attorneys
Mr. Melvin Atcher and Mr. Tracy Arflin of the Radcliff Building Department
Ms. Brenda Kersey; Planning Commission Secretary and Typist
Mrs. Leslie Miller; City Secretary and Typist
III
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE I - INTRODUCTION PAGE
1.1 - Title 1
1.2 - Authority 1
1.3 - Adoption and Effective Date 1
1.4 - Purpose 1
1.5 - Interpretation and Scope of Regulations 2
1.6 - Severability Clause 2
1.7 - Repeal of Conflicting Ordinance & Regulations 2
ARTICLE II - DEFINITIONS
2.1 - Explanation of Word & Phrase Usage 3
ARTICLE III - GENERAL DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
3.1 - 3.8 - Miscellaneous Regulations 16
3.9 - Clear Intersection View Requirement for Corner Lots 17
3.10 - Corner Lot Requirements 18
3.11 - Street Frontage 18
3.12 - Fences 18
3.13 - Accessory Structures 19
3.14 - Habitable Floor Area Requirements 20
3.15 - Additions to Existing Structures Which Do Not Meet Required
Dimensional Setbacks 21
ARTICLE IV - GENERAL DESIGN & IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
4.1 - Drainage Standards 23
4.2 - Street & Drive Standards 23
4.3 - Sedimentation & Erosion Control Standards 23
4.4 - Utility Standards 23
4.5 - Lot Identification Standards 23
4.6 - Cut & Fill Standards 23
4.7 - Sidewalk Standards 24
4.8 - Special Requirements for Developments Containing Zero-Lot Line
and/or Condominium Designs 25
ARTICLE V - GENERAL ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT
AND APPEAL REGULATIONS
5.1 - Limitations On All Land And Structures 27
5.2 - Zoning Certificates Required 27
5.3 - Building Permits Required 27
IV
5.4 - Permit To Use Or Occupy Structures 28
5.5 - Violations And Penalties 28
5.6 - Effect Of Other Ordinance, Regulations, Statutes and Private Covenants 29
5.7 - Duties And Powers Of City Staff Acting On Behalf Of The
Planning Commission 29
5.8 - Enforcement 30
5.9 - Board of Adjustment 31
5.10 - Liability 34
ARTICLE VI - ZONING & REZONING STANDARDS, MAP &
TEXT AMENDMENT PROCEDURES
6.1 - Map & Text Amendment Procedure 35
6.2 - Zoning & Rezoning Procedure And Standards 35
6.3 - Zoning Of Annexed Territory 38
ARTICLE VII - ZONING MAP STANDARDS
7.1 - Description Of Map 39
7.2 - Changing Zone Boundaries 40
7.3 - Interpretation Of The Zone Boundaries 41
7.4 - Location District Boundary Lines Not Readily Determinable From
Official Zoning Map 41
ARTICLE VIII - NONCONFORMING USE STANDARDS
8.1 - Definition Of A Nonconforming Use 43
8.2 - General Standards 43
8.3 - Replacement Of Nonconforming Mobile Homes 44
ARTICLE IX - HOME OCCUPATION STANDARDS
9.1 - Purpose 46
9.2 - Zones Allowed 46
9.3 - Prohibited Commercial Activities 46
9.4 - Specific Conditions 46
9.5 - Home Occupation Permit Required 47
9.6 - Business License 47
ARTICLE X - CONDITIONAL USE STANDARDS
10.1 - Purpose 48
10.2 - Kentucky Revised Statutes Concerning Conditional Uses (KRS 100.237) 48
10.3 - Basement Apartment Units 49
10.4 - Public And Quasi-Public Uses Allowed In Residential Zones 50
10.4.1-Limited Commercial use in a Residential Zone as a Mixed Use 51
10.5 - Public And Quasi-Public Uses Allowed In The Commercial And C-H Zone 51
10.6 - Other Conditional Uses Allowed In The Commercial And C-H Zone 52
10.6.1-Residential in a Commercial Zone as a Mixed Use. 52
V
10.7 - Reserved 53
10.8 - Conditional Uses Allowed In The Industrial And I-H Zone 53a
10.9 - Modular, Section Or Manufactured Dwelling Units 53a
ARTICLE XI - OFF-STREET PARKING STANDARDS
11.1 - General 54
11.2 - Required Number of Parking Spaces 54
11.3 - Off-Street Parking by Land Use 54
11.4 - Shared Parking 54
11.5 - Location of Lot 54
11.6 - Parking Space Dimensions 55
11.7 - Driveway Slopes 55
11.8 - Parking Space Accessibility 55
11.9 - Compact-to-Standard Parking Space Ratio 55
11.10 - Screening 55
11.11 - Striping 55
11.12 - Lighting 55
11.13 - Handicap Parking 56
11.14 - Parking Aisle Width 56
11.15 - Curb Cuts 56
11.16 - General Design Standards for Parking Facilities 56
ARTICLE XII - PLANNED BUILDING GROUP (P.B.G.)
12.1 - Purpose 58
12.2 - Restriction To Certain Zones 58
12.3 - Application And Review Procedures For Planned Building Groups 58
12.4 - Format And Content Requirements For Planned Building Group
Site Plans 59
12.5 - General Lot Development And Design Standards 59
12.6 - Building Placement Standards 60
12.7 - Recording And Filing Of Approved Planned Building Group Site Plan 61
12.8 - Revisions To Approved Planned Building Groups 61
ARTICLE XIII - RESIDENTIAL-HOLDING ZONE STANDARDS
13.1 - Description Of The Zone 63
13.2 - Permitted Uses 64
13.3 - Lot Coverage 64
13.4 - Required Set-Backs 64
13.5 - Parking Requirements 64
13.6 - General Design & Improvement Standards 65
13.7 - General Development Regulations 65
ARTICLE XIV - RESIDENTIAL-ESTATE ZONE STANDARDS
14.1 - Permitted Uses 66
14.2 - Minimum Lot Area 66
VI
14.3 - Lot Coverage 66
14.4 - Required Set-Backs And Dimensional Requirements 66
14.5 - Parking Requirements 66
14.6 - General Design And Improvement Standards 66
14.7 - General Development Regulations 66
ARTICLE XV - RESIDENTIAL -1 ZONE STANDARDS
15.1 - Permitted Uses 68
15.2 - Minimum Lot Area 68
15.3 - Lot Coverage 68
15.4 - Required Set-Backs And Dimensional Requirements 68
15.5 - Parking Requirements 68
15.6 - General Design & Improvement Standards 68
15.7 - General Development Regulations 68
ARTICLE XVI - RESIDENTIAL - 2 ZONE STANDARDS
16.1 - Permitted Uses 70
16.2 - Minimum Lot Area 70
16.3 - Lot Coverage 70
16.4 - Required Set-Backs And Dimensional Requirements 70
16.5 - Parking Requirements 71
16.6 - General Design And Improvement Standards 71
16.7 - General Development Standards 71
ARTICLE XVII - RESIDENTIAL - 3 ZONE STANDARDS
17.1 - Permitted Uses 73
17.2 - Minimum Lot Area 73
17.3 - Lot Coverage 74
17.4 - Required Set-Backs And Dimensional Requirements 74
17.5 - Parking Requirements 74
17.6 - General Design And Improvement Standards 74
17.7 - General Development Standards 74
ARTICLE XVIII - RESIDENTIAL - 4 ZONE STANDARDS
18.1 - Permitted Uses 76
18.2 - Minimum Lot Area 76
18.3 - Lot Coverage 77
18.4 - Required Set-Backs And Dimensional Requirements 77
18.5 - Parking Requirements 77
18.6 - General Design And Improvement Standards 77
18.7 - General Development Standards 77
ARTICLE XIX - RESIDENTIAL - 5 ZONE STANDARDS
19.1 - Permitted Uses 79
VII
19.2 - Minimum Lot/Site Area 79
19.3 - Required Set-Backs And Dimensional Requirements 83
19.4 - Parking Requirements 83
19.5 - Screening Required 84
19.6 - Residential - 5 Development Site Plan Required 84
19.7 - General Lot Development And Design Standards 87
19.8 - Disapproval Of Residential - 5 Development Site Plans 87
19.9 - Approval Of Residential - 5 Development Site Plans 87a
19.10 - Amendment To Residential - 5 Development Site Plans 87a
ARTICLE XX - RESIDENTIAL - 6 ZONE STANDARDS
20.1 - Permitted Uses 89
20.2 - Minimum Lot/Site Area 89
20.3 - Required Set-Backs And Dimensional Requirements 93
20.4 - Parking Requirements 94
20.5 - Screening Required 94
20.6 - Residential - 6 Development Site Plan Required 95
20.7 - General Lot Development And Design Standards 97
20.8 - Disapproval Of Residential - 6 Development Site Plans 98
20.9 - Approval Of Residential - 6 Development Site Plans 98
20.10 - Amendment To Residential - 6 Development Site Plans 98
ARTICLE XXI - RESIDENTIAL - 7 ZONE STANDARDS
21.1 - Permitted Uses 100
21.2 - Minimum Lot Area 100
21.3 - Minimum Zone Area 100
21.4 - Lot Coverage 100
21.5 - Minimum Required Set-Backs And Dimensional Requirements 100
21.6 - Screening Required 101
21.7 - Parking Requirements 101
21.8 - Mobile Home Subdivision 101
21.9 - Mobile Home Parks 101
21.10 - Miscellaneous Development Standards For Mobile Home Parks
And Mobile Home Park Subdivisions 102
21.11 - Mobile Home Permit 104
21.12 - This Section Reserved For Future Use 104
21.13 - Replacement Of Mobile Homes 105
21.14 - General Design And Improvement Standards 105
21.15 - General Development Regulations 105
ARTICLE XXII - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (P.U.D.) STANDARDS
22.1 - Description Of The Zone 107
22.2 - Permitted Uses 107
22.3 - Ownership Control 107
22.4 - Minimum Zone Area 108
VIII
22.5 - Design Standards/Requirements 109
22.6 - Procedure For Obtaining A P.U.D. Zone 114
22.7 - Format & Contents Of Preliminary P.U.D. Plats 115
22.8 - Format & Contents Of Preliminary P.U.D. Site Plans 115
22.9 - Format & Contents Of Final P.U.D. Plats 116
22.10 - Format & Contents Of Final P.U.D. Site Plans 117
22.11 - Recording Of Approved Plat And Plan 117
22.12 - Revisions To Approved Plats And Plans 118
22.13 - Schedule Of Construction 119
22.14 - Project Time Frame 119
22.15 - Issuance Of Building Permits 119
ARTICLE XXIII - COMMERCIAL - HOLDING ZONE STANDARDS (C-H)
23.1 - Description Of The Zone 120
23.2 - Permitted Uses 121
23.3 - Lot Coverage 121
23.4 - Required Set-Backs And Dimensional Requirements 121
23.5 - Parking Requirements 121
23.6 - General Design And Improvement Standards 122
23.7 - General Development Regulations 122
ARTICLE XXIV - COMMERCIAL ZONE STANDARDS
24.1 - Description Of The Zone 123
24.2 - Permitted Uses 123
24.3 - Lot Coverage And Vegetation Requirements 124
24.4 - Minimum Lot And Zone Areas 126
24.5 - Minimum Required Set-Backs And Dimensional Requirements 126
24.6 - Parking Requirements 128
24.7 - Compatibility Standards 128
24.8 - Required Screening Of Dumpsters, Waste Materials And
Outer Boundary Zone 128
24.9 - Commercial Development Site Plan Required 129
24.10 - General Lot Development And Design Standards 132
24.11 - Disapproval Of Commercial Development Site Plans 132
24.12 - Approval Of Commercial Development Site Plans 133
24.13 - Amendments To Commercial Development Site Plans 133
ARTICLE XXV - INDUSTRIAL - HOLDING ZONE STANDARDS (I-H)
25.1 - Description Of The Zone 134
25.2 - Permitted Uses 134
25.3 - Lot Coverage 135
25.4 - Required Set-Backs And Dimensional Requirements 135
25.5 - Parking Requirements 135
25.6 - General Design And Improvement Standards 135
25.7 - General Development Regulations 135
IX
ARTICLE XXVI - INDUSTRIAL ZONE STANDARDS
26.1 - Description Of The Zone 136
26.2 - Permitted Uses 136
26.3 - Lot Coverage 137
26.4 - Minimum Lot And Zone Area 137
26.5 - Minimum Required Set-Backs And Dimensional Requirements 138
26.6 - Parking Requirements 139
26.7 - Compatibility Standards 139
26.8 - Required Screening Of Dumpsters, Waste Materials And
Outer Boundary 140
26.9 - Industrial Development Site Plan Required 140
26.10 - General Lot Development And Design Standards 143
26.11 - Disapproval Of Industrial Development Site Plans 144
26.12 - Approval Of Industrial Development Site Plans 144
26.13 - Amendment To Industrial Development Site Plans 145
ARTICLE XXVII - RESERVED
ARTICLE XXVII-A - URBAN AGRICULTURE ZONE STANDARDS (AG)
27-A.1 - Intent Of The Zone 152
27-A.2 - Permitted Uses 152
ARTICLE XXVIII - SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS
28.1 - Purpose 154
28.2 - Definitions 154
28.3 - Exemptions 155
28.4 - General Regulations 157
28.5 - Residential Districts 159
28.6 - Commercial And Industrial Districts 161
28.7 - Shopping Centers 162
28.8 - Permits 163
28.9 - Removal Of Abandoned Signs 163
28.10 - Placing Billboards In Tourism Overlay Areas 164
28.11 - Penalties 165
ARTICLE XXIX - CELLULAR ANTENNA TOWERS AND CELLULAR
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES STANDARD
29.1 - Purpose 166
29.2 - Pre Application Conference 166
29.3- Definitions 166
29.4 - General 167
29.5 - Applicability 167
29.6 - Application Requirements 167
29.7 - Processing of Application 171
X
29.8 - Design Standards 173
29.9 - Criteria 174
29.10- Amendments 175
29.11 - Penalties 175
ARTICLE XXX-LANDSCAPING STANDARDS
30.1 - Purpose 176
30.2 - Development Regulated 176
30.3 - Development Exempted 176
30.4 - Definitions 177
30.5 - Conflicts 178
30.6 - Landscape Buffer Chart 178
30.7 - Landscape Buffer Types 178
30.8 - Tree Planting Standards 179
30.9 - Landscaping of Interior Off-Street Parking Areas 180
30.10 - Maintenance Standards for Landscape Areas 181
30.11 - Landscape Plan Required 182
30.12 - Plant Materials List 182
ARTICLE XXXI-RURAL ESTATES (RU-E) ZONE STANDARDS
31.1 - Description of Zone 183
31.2 - Permitted Uses 183
31.3 - Maximum Density 183
31.4 - Lot Coverage 183
31.5 - Required Set-Backs and Dimensional Requirements 183
31.6 - Parking Requirements 184
31.7 - General Design and Improvement Standards 184
31.8 - General Development Regulations 184
31.9 - Highway 313 Corridor 184
ARTICLE XXXII-COMMERCIAL BUILDING DESIGN STANDARDS
32.1 - Intent and Purpose 185
32.2 - Definitions 185
32.3 - Applicability 188
32.4 - Plans Required 188
32.5 - Design Standards - Buildings 188
32.5.1 Materials and Colors 188
32.5.2 Facades and Exterior Walls 189
32.5.3 Detail Features 191
32.5.4 Roofs 191
32.5.5 Entryways 193
32.6 Design Standards-Site Design 194
32.6.1 Building Entrances 194
32.6.2 Site Entrances 194
32.6.3 Parking Lot Orientation 195
32.6.4 Pedestrian Walkways 196
XI
32.6.5 Landscaping 196
32.6.6 Outdoor Storage, Trash Collection, and Loading Areas 197
32.6.7 Features and Community Spaces 198
32.7 Waiver Procedure 199
XII
LIST OF FIGURES
TITLE PAGE
Figure 2.1 - Illustration Of Yards 14
Figure 2.2 - Illustration Of Yards 15
Figure 3.1 - Illustration Of Clear Intersection View Requirement
For Corner Lots 17
Figure 3.2 - Illustration Of Ground Level 22
Figure 14.1 - Lot Standards For The R-E Zone 67
Figure 15.1 - Lot Standards For The R-1 Zone 69
Figure 16.1 - Lot Standards For The R-2 Zone 72
Figure 17.1 - Lot Standards For The R-3 Zone 75
Figure 18.1 - Lot Standards For The R-4 Zone 78
Figure 19.1 - Lot Standards For The R-5 Zone 88
Figure 20.1 - Lot Standards For The R-6 Zone 99
Figure 21.1 - Lot Standards For The R-7 Zone 106
Figure 32.1 - Wall Projection/Recesses & Facade 190
Figure 32.2 - Wall Projection/Recesses & Facade 190
Figure 32.3 - Expression of Architectural or Structural Bay 191
Figure 32.4 - Parapet Standards 192
Figure 32.5 - Development with Customer Entrances 194
Figure 32.6 - Center with Features and Community Spaces 198
Photograph 1 - Wall Projections/Recesses & Facade 190
Photograph 2 - Parapet Standards 192
Photograph 3 - Required Entryway Design Elements 193
Photograph 4 - Typical Site Entrance 195
Photograph 5 - Pedestrian Walkway 199
Appendix A - Illustration Of Selected Minimum Required Standards
For All Zones 200
Appendix B - Comparison Of Multi-Family Lot Areas And Maximum Densities
Between 1974 And 1984 Zoning Ordinances 202


3
ARTICLE II
DEFINITIONS
2.1 Explanation of Word & Phrase Usage
For the purpose of this regulation and in order to carry out the provisions and intentions as
set forth herein, certain words, terms, and phrases are to be used and interpreted as defined
hereinafter. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tenses; the word person
includes a firm, partnership, or corporation as well as an individual; the word lot includes the
word plot or parcel; the terms shall and will are always mandatory and not directory; and the
word may is permissive.
1. Accessory Structure of Use: Any structure or use, other than the principal structure
or use, directly incident to, or required for the enjoyment of, the permitted use of any
premises.
2. Agricultural Property: Any piece of property which is classified and taxed as
agricultural property by the Hardin County Property Valuation Administrator.
3. Agricultural Use: The use of a tract of at least five (5) contiguous acres for the
production of agricultural or horticultural crops, including but not limited to
livestock, livestock products, fish, poultry, poultry products, grain, hay, pastures,
soybeans, tobacco, timber, orchard fruits, vegetables, flowers or ornamental plants,
including provisions for dwellings for persons and their families who are engaged in
the above agricultural use on the tract, but not including residential building
development for sale or lease to the public.
4. Alley: A narrow way (less than 20 feet wide), which primarily functions to grant
access to the back or sides of lots and/or buildings.
5. Authorized Agent: Any department, employee or advisor, elected or appointed body
which is authorized by the Planning Commission and/or Council to administer any
provision of the Zoning Ordinance or Subdivision Regulations.
6. Basement Apartment Unit: An accessory living unit located in the basement of a
single-family detached structure on a Conditional Use basis.
7. Billboard: Any sign, notice or advertisement, pictorial or otherwise, used as an
outdoor display for the purpose of making anything known, the origin or place of sale
of which is not on the lot with such display. Billboards may also be known as offpremise
signs and treated as such.
8. Board of Adjustment: The Radcliff Board of Adjustment; also referred to as the
Board.
9. Boarding House/Group Home: A building or part thereof (other than a hotel or
4
motel) where lodging or meals or both are provided with or without compensation for
six (6) or more persons.
10. Building: Any structure enclosed and isolated by exterior walls constructed or used
for residence, business, industry or other public or private purposes, or accessory
thereto, to include tents and swimming pools.
11. Building Line: A line across a lot establishing the minimum open space to be
provided between the principal buildings and the property line. Said line may be
established by a regulation of this ordinance or by a separate private covenant.
12. Building Line Front: A line drawn across a lot, as close to parallel to the street
frontage as possible, which designates the minimum spacing between all buildings
and property lines adjacent to streets (with the exception of reverse-frontage lots).
12a. Charitable Gaming: Games of chance, including but not limited to bingo, operated
by charitable or religious organizations or institutions.
13. Child Care/Day Care Center: Any child care facility which provides full or part time
care, day or night, to allow for the care of seven (7) or more children who are not the
children, grandchildren, nieces, nephews or children in legal custody of the operator.
13a. Child Care Home: A private home which provides full or part time care day or night
for six (6) or fewer children who are not the children, grandchildren, nieces,
nephews, or children in legal custody of the provided.
14. Church: A building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, where persons
regularly assemble for religious worship, and which building together with its
accessory buildings and uses, is maintained and controlled by a religious body
organized to sustain public worship. Does not include an undertaker's chapel.
15. City: The City of Radcliff, Kentucky.
16. Clinic, Medical or Dental: A building in which a group of physicians, dentists, or
physicians and dentists and allied professional assistance are associated for the
purpose of carrying on their profession. The clinic may include a dental or medical
laboratory. It may include out-patient care and/or operating rooms for minor surgery.
17. Club or Lodge: An association of persons for the promotion of some nonprofit
common object, as literature, science, politics, good fellowship, meeting periodically
and limited to members.
18. Commercial Floor Area: Floor area of buildings which is devoted to the storage and
display of merchandise, the performance of consumer services, or the circulation
accommodation of customers, and the housing or cooling equipment for the
commercial building.
5
19. Commercial Lake: A lake or pond where a fee is charged for fishing, boating, or
swimming, and where fishing supplies, equipment, bait and food or drink may be
sold.
20. Commercial Use: The use of any land, building or structure which is involved in the
sale, display or storage of merchandise, or is involved in the performance of
consumer, business or personal services, or involved in the accommodation and
circulation of customers.
21. Commission: The Radcliff Planning Commission.
22. Concealed Light Source: An artificial light intended to illuminate the face of a sign,
which light is shielded from public view and from adjoining lots.
23. Conditional Use: A use which is essential to or would promote the public health,
safety or welfare in one or more zone, but which would impair the integrity and
character of the zone in which it is located, or in adjoining zones, unless restrictions
on location, size, extent, and character of performance are imposed in addition to
those imposed in the zoning regulation.
24. Conditional Use Permit: Legal authorization to undertake a conditional use, issued
by the Board of Adjustment, consisting of two parts:
(A) A statement of the factual determination by the Board of Adjustment which
justifies the issuance of the permit; and
(B) A statement of the specific conditions, which must be met in order for the use
to be permitted.
24a. Construction: The erection, fabrication, reconstruction, substantial alteration or
conversion of a building, or the installation of equipment therein, but shall not
include the ordinary repair of a building or structure.
25. Consumer Services: Sale of any service to individual customers for their own
personal benefit, enjoyment, or convenience, and for fulfillment of their own personal
needs. For example, consumer services include the provision of the personal services
such as cleaning and barbering, the provision of lodging, entertainment, specialized
instruction, financial services, automobile storage, transportation, and similar
services.
26. Council: The Radcliff City Council.
27. Development: Any construction, reconstruction, modification, extension or
expansion of buildings or structures, parking areas, placement of fill, dumping,
storage of materials, land excavation, land clearing or any combination thereof.
28. Dimensional Variance: Departure from the terms of the Zoning Ordinance pertaining
6
to height and width or structure and size of yards and open spaces where such
departure will not be contrary to the public interest, and where owing to shape, or
topography and not as a result of the action of the applicant, the literal enforcement of
this zoning regulation would result in unnecessary and undue hardship.
29. Dwelling Unit: A dwelling is a building providing shelter, sanitation, and the
amenities for permanent habitation. It does not include mobile homes, temporary
lodging, or sleeping rooms. A dwelling unit means the dwelling accommodation
designed for one individual or family unit maintaining separate and independent
housekeeping.
30. Dwelling Unit, Attached: A dwelling unit in which one or more of the exterior walls
are party-common walls. Not to include mobile homes.
31. Dwelling Unit, Detached: A dwelling unit in which one of the exterior walls are
attached to the exterior walls of another principal structure. Not to include mobile
homes.
31a. Dwelling Unit, Intermodal Container: An intermodal container(s) used as a dwelling
unit.
32. Dwelling Units, Multi-Family: A building, or portion thereof, designed for, or
occupied by, three or more families living independently of each other.
33. Easement: A grant by a property owner to the general public and/or other specified
persons for a specific use of a designated land area.
34. Easement, Access: A private way, which is reserved by vehicular and/or pedestrian
access to abutting property and the size and location of which are of public record.
35. Engineer: A professional engineer registered by the Commonwealth of Kentucky
through the Board of Registration of Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors.
36. Erosion: The process by which the ground surface is worn away by the action of
wind and/or water.
37. Fabrication: Manufacturing, excluding the refining or other initial processing of
basic raw materials such as metal ores, lumber or rubber. Fabrication relates to
stamping, cutting, packaging or otherwise turning the processed materials into useful
and/or saleable products.
38. Family, Single: One or more persons occupying a premise and living as a single nonprofit
housekeeping unit. Single families may consist of the following:
(A) Any number of persons immediately related by blood, marriage or adoption.
(B) Five (5) or fewer persons not necessarily related by blood, marriage or
7
adoption. Plus in each of these cases domestic servants employed for service
on the premises shall be allowed. However, shall not include a boarding and
rooming house; club; lodge; fraternity or sorority house.
39. Fence: Any construction of wood, metal, wire, masonry, or other material, created
for the purpose of assuring privacy, protection, compatibility, enclosure or for
aesthetic reasons, but excluding shrubbery and plantings.
40. Fill: Any material which is used to alter the contours of the original land surface.
41. Fine Art Objects: Individual art pieces not mass produced consisting of one or more
of the following: paintings, drawings, etchings, sculptures, ceramics, inlays,
needlework, knitting, weaving, and/or craftswork; leather, wood, metal, glass or
photography.
42. Flat Sign: Any sign painted on or affixed to a building and which sign does not
project more than eight (8) inches from such building.
43. Flashing Sign: Any sign having a conspicuous and/or intermittent variation in the
illumination of the sign.
43a. Flea Market (Outdoor): Open-air commercial sale or sales of new or used goods
conducted on real property by groups of one or more vendors, not to include yard
sales, seasonal sales, or fund raising events.
44. Front Property Line: That boundary line of a lot or tract which abuts upon the
boundary of a street or highway right-of-way to which there is existing or the
possibility of future access.
45. Frontage Lots, Single: A lot or tract of land which has one property line adjacent to a
street right-of-way to which there is existing or the possibility of future access.
46. Frontage Lots, Double: A lot or tract of land which has two (2) property lines
adjacent to a street right-of-way to which there is existing or the possibility of future
access.
47. Frontage Lots, Triple: A lot or tract of land which has three (3) property lines
adjacent to a street right-of-way which there is existing or the possibility of future
access.
48. Frontage Lots, Quadruple: A lot or tract of land which has all property lines adjacent
to street right-of-ways to which there is existing or the possibility of future access.
49. Frontage Lots, Reverse: A lot or tract of land which has one or more property lines
adjacent to a street right-of-way but where there is no existing nor any possibility of
future access. Said access may be limited by topography; state, federal and/or local
regulations; and/or private covenants. The property line adjacent to the right-of-way
8
to which there is no access shall be defined as having reverse frontage.
50. Garage, Private: A detached accessory building or portion of a main building, used
for the storage of self-propelled vehicles, or other chattels where the capacity does
not exceed four (4) vehicles, or not more than one per family housed in the building
to which such garage is accessory, whichever is the greater, and not more than onethird
the total number of vehicles stored in such garage shall be commercial vehicles.
51. Gross Floor Area: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a
building, including interior balconies and mezzanines. All horizontal dimensions are
to be made between the exterior faces of walls, including the walls of roofed porches
having more than one wall. The floor area of a building shall include the floor area
of accessory buildings, on the same lot, measured the same way. May be referred to
as the Gross Leasable Floor Area.
51a. Ground Floor: The floor of a building at or nearly at ground level on the street side
of the house where the main entrance is.
52. Ground Sign: Any sign which is supported or attached directly to the ground by
more than one member or pole.
52a. Halfway House: A licensed or unlicensed facility for persons on release from
more restrictive custodial confinement, or initially placed in lieu of such more
restrictive custodial confinement, wherein supervision, rehabilitation, and counseling
are provided to mainstream residents back into society, enabling them to live
independently.
53. Height of Structure: The vertical distance measured from the average finished grade
at any point where an exterior wall meets the ground to the highest point of the
structure.
54. Hospital: An institution providing health services, primarily for in-patients, and
medical or surgical care of the sick or injured, including as an integral part of the
institution, such related facilities as laboratories, out-patient departments, training
facilities, central service facilities and staff offices.
55. Illuminated Sign: Any sign designed to emit or reflect artificial light from any source
fixed or incidental.
55a. Industrial Park: A grouping of at least three lots that is planned, developed and
operated as an integrated facility for a number of industrial and limited commercial
land uses allowed by Article XXIV of the Zoning Ordinance and Development
Regulations. Lot layout is determined by a centralized road network, transportation
facilities and utility needs. Aesthetics, compatibility and open space planning are
also key components of these parks.
56. Industrial Use: Any use which is primarily involved in the manufacture storage,
transporting, assembly, processing, packaging, disassembly or fabrication of any
product, raw materials or salvage materials. Transportation, warehousing and
wholesaling firms which are primarily serviced by truck (other than pick up trucks)
9
traffic shall also be defined as industrial uses.
56a Inoperative Motor Vehicle: Any motor vehicle which is partially dismantled or
wrecked and which cannot safely or legally be operated.
56b. Intermodal Container: A standardized reusable steel box used for the safe, efficient,
and secure storage and movement of materials and products within a global
containerized interdmodal freight transport system. Intermodal indicates that the
container can be moved from one mode of transportation to another(from ship, to
rail, to truck) without unloading and reloading the contents of the container.
57. Junk Yard (Including Auto Salvage Yards): A place where waste or discarded or
salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, cleaned, packed,
disassembled, handled, used lumber yards and places or yards for use of salvaged
house wrecking structural steel materials and equipment, but excluding such uses
when conducted entirely within completely enclosed buildings.
57. Land Disturbance Activity: Any activity involving the clearing, grading,
transporting, filing and any other activity which causes land to be exposed to erosion.
58. Lot: A parcel of land under one (1) ownership of at least sufficient size to meet the
minimum requirements for width, depth and area.
59. Lot of Record: Any lot which has been recorded in the office of the County Court
Clerk or any lot illustrated on an active preliminary plat as of the effective date of this
ordinance which does not have to meet lot area nor lot width standards.
60. Lot Lines: The lines bounding the outer area of a lot as defined herein.
61. Lot Width: The distance generally parallel to the front lot line, measured between
side lot lines at the front building line.
62. Manufacturing: The processing and converting of raw, unfinished or finished
materials or products, or any of these, into an article or substance of a different
character, or for use for a different purpose.
64. Manufactured (mobile) Home: A residential structure designed for transportation
after fabrication on its wheels and arriving at the site basically ready for occupancy,
except for minor incidental unpacking, placement of stands and connection to
utilities. A manufactured ( mobile) home is built in compliance with the Federal
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Code as set forth in the
Code of Federal Regulations and as mandated by the United States of America and as
administered by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development
which is commonly referred to as the HUD Code. This definition includes all single
and sectional manufactured (mobile) homes.
65. Manufactured (Mobile) Home Park: A tract of land containing two (2) or more
manufactured (mobile) homes on one (1) lot or tract of land.
66. Manufactured (Mobile) Home Subdivision: A subdivision designed and intended for
10
residential use where residence is in manufactured (mobile) homes exclusively with a
minimum of two (2) manufactured (mobile) homes, and each being located on a
separate and individual deeded lot.
67. Modular Home: Homes which are manufactured off site and then transported to the
site in two (2) or more sections, placed on permanent foundations, designed for
permanence and utilize architecture and building designs found in other single family
dwelling units. These homes are inspected in the manufacturing plant by a Kentucky
State Certified Building Inspector, using the CABO One and Two Family Building
Code, or the current edition of the locally adopted and State mandated Building
Code. Single and sectional manufactured (mobile) homes are not modular homes.
67a. Motor Vehicle: Any self-propelled land vehicle that can be used for towing or
transporting people or materials, including but not limited to automobiles, trucks,
buses, motor homes, motorized campers, motorcycles, motor scooters, tractors,
snowmobiles, dune buggies, and other off-the-road vehicles.
67b. Motor Vehicle Towing and/or Storage Class I: A business that tows motor vehicles
to a holding lot and stores them on a temporary basis not to exceed more than one
hundred and twenty (120) days and having more than ten (10) inoperative vehicles at
any one time. (No sale of parts from the vehicles is allowed.) But excluding such
uses when conducted entirely within completely closed buildings.
67c Motor Vehicle Towing and/or Storage Class II: A business that tows motor vehicles
to a holding lot and stores them on a temporary basis not to exceed more than one
hundred and twenty (120) days and having no more than ten (10) inoperative vehicles
at any one time. (No sale of parts from the vehicles is allowed.) But excluding such
uses when conducted entirely within completely closed buildings.
68. Nonconforming Structure or Use: A structure or use of any premises which does not
conform with all applicable provisions of this zoning regulation, but which existed
before its designation as nonconforming by the adoption or amendment of this
regulation.
68a. Ordinary Repair: Any nonstructural reconstruction or renewal of any part of an
existing building for the purpose of its maintenance or decoration, and shall include,
but not be limited to, the replacement or installation of nonstructural components of
the building such as roofing, siding, windows, storm windows, insulation, drywall or
lathand plaster, or any other replacement, in kind, that does not alter the structural
integrity, alter the occupancy or use of the building, or affect, by rearrangement,
exitways and means of egress; but shall not include additions to, or alterations of, or
relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, gas, soil, waste, vent or
similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical equipment including furnaces and hot
water heaters or other work affecting public health or safety.
69. Permitted Structure: A structure meeting all the requirements established by this
ordinance for the district in which the structure is located.
70. Permitted Use: Any use listed as a permitted use, a conditional permitted use, a use
by temporary permit, a home occupation or an accessory use in any given district.
11
71. Principal Building or Structure: A structure or building on a lot which performs an
independent significant function and which does not need the support of another
building on the lot to make its function complete.
72. Processing: Manufacturing, packaging, repairing, cleaning, and any other similar
original or restorative treatment applied to raw materials, products, or personal
property. Processing does not refer to the fabrication of structures.
73. Professional Office: The office of a person engaged in any occupation, vocation or
calling, not purely commercial, mechanical or agricultural, in which a professed
knowledge or skill in some department of science or learning is used by its practical
application to the affairs of others, either advising or guiding them in serving their
interest or welfare through the practice of an act founded thereon.
74. Public Facility: Any use of land whether publicly or privately owned for
transportation, utilities, or communications or for the benefit of the general public,
including but not limited to libraries, streets, schools, fire or police stations, county
buildings, municipal buildings, recreational centers including parks and cemeteries.
75. Retail Sales: Sale of any product or merchandise to customers for their own personal
consumption and use, not for resale.
76. Sediment: Soil or other surface materials that are transported by wind or water as a
result of erosion.
77. Set-Back Space: The required distance, and the land resulting therefrom, between a
lot line and the closest possible line of a conforming structure.
78. Sign: Any words, lettering, parts of letters, figures, numerals, phrases, sentences,
emblems, devices, designs, pictures, trade names, or trademarks by which anything is
made known such as are used to designate an individual, a firm, an association, a
corporation, a profession, a business, a service or a commodity or product, which are
visible from any public street or right of way and designed to attract attention. For
Sale or For Rent signs shall be deemed signs within the meaning of this definition,
but the term sign shall not include the flag, pennant or insignia or any nation, state,
city or other political unit, or of any political, educational, charitable, philanthropic,
civic, professional, religious or like campaign, drive, monument or event, used for a
public purpose in the public interest.
79. Single-Family Dwelling Unit: A single detached structure, either site built or
modular housing units, having but one (1) kitchen (with no fixtures or equipment
installed or roughed in for additional kitchens) and housing only one (1) of the
following groups of persons living together as a single non-profit housekeeping unit:
(a.) Any number of persons immediately related by blood, marriage or adoption,
or
(b.) Five (5) or fewer persons not necessarily related by blood, marriage, or
adoption, plus in each of the foregoing instances, domestic servants employed
12
for services on the premises.
80. Street: Any open vehicular way which affords the principal means of access to two
(2) or more properties.
(a.) Arterial: A street which provides an avenue for a high level of traffic (8,000
A.D.T. and up) to move steadily and expeditiously from one large area to
another. Normally, arterials are of considerable scope and size, have limited
access points and have collectors feeding into them.
(b.) Collector: A street which provides access to various large sections of a city.
Collectors are characterized by volumes of traffic ranging from 3,000 to
8,000 A.D.T. and have several local streets feeding traffic into them.
(c.) Cul-De-Sac: A permanently dead end street with an appropriate turn around
facility at the end. Cul-de-sacs have minimum pavement length and width
standards associated with them and carry volumes of traffic less than 500
A.D.T.
(d.) Local: A street which provides access to the various parcels of land which
are not served by other streets. Minor/local streets carry loads of traffic
ranging from 500 to 3,000 A.D.T., which has been primarily generated from
the abutting properties.
81. Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the
ground or attached to something having a location on the ground, but not including
fences or poles and appurtenances thereto used for the provision of public utilities;
includes principal and accessory buildings above and below ground.
81.a Street Vendor: An individual that conducts business from a mobile vending structure
which is commercially manufactured and will be used in a manner consistent with its
design. These structures may be self propelled, towed, pushed or a commercially
designed kiosk. This does not include pickup trucks, flatbed trailers, tables, awnings
or the like.
82. Trade & Business Schools: Secretarial school or college, or business school or
college, when not public and not owned or conducted by or under the sponsorship of
a religious or charitable organization; school conducted as commercial enterprise for
teaching industrial skills in which machinery is employed as a means of instruction.
83. Trailer Park or Campground: Any premises where two or more trailer coaches are
parked for living and sleeping purposes on a short term basis, or any premises used or
set apart for the purpose of supplying to the public short term parking space for two
or more trailer coaches for living and sleeping purposes, and which includes any
buildings, structures, vehicles or enclosure used or intended for use as a part of the
equipment of such trailer camp or court.
84. Unit: One (1) living unit or independent household.
85. Usable Open Space: Outdoor area of a lot which is designed and used for normal
outdoor living, recreation, pedestrian access or landscaping. Such areas may be
13
ground or roof spaces which are 75% open to the sky, balconies a minimum of 5 feet
wide, an unenclosed deck or porch. Off-street parking and loading, driveways and
areas of severe slope or flood proneness do not qualify as usable open space.
86. Wall Sign: Any sign which is painted or otherwise depicted directly upon a wall.
87. Warehousing: The depositing or securing of goods, wares and merchandise in a
warehouse.
88. Wholesaling: Sale for resale, not for direct consumption.
89. Window Sign: Any sign visible through a window and designed to be visible
through a window or painted or otherwise affixed to the external surface of a
window.
90. Yard: The open space surrounding the principal building on any lot, unoccupied and
unobstructed by any portion of that building from the ground to the sky except where
specifically permitted by the zoning regulation. Yards are illustrated in Figures 2.1 &
2.2 and further defined as follows:
(a) Front Yard: That portion of the yard extending the full width of the lot and
located between any property line adjacent to a street and a parallel line
tangent to any exterior wall of the principal structure which is adjacent to said
property line.
(b) Rear Yard: That portion of the yard extending the full width of the lot and
measured from the lot line to the rear of the primary structure towards the
structure the required distance set by ordinance.
(c) Side Yards: Those portions of the yard extending from the front yard to the
rear yard and measured between the side lot lines and parallel lines tangent to
the nearest parts of the principal building.
91. Zero Lot Line Design: A site design technique in which two (2) or more buildings
are located on lots in such a manner that one or both of their exterior walls are placed
upon one or both side lot lines.























39
ARTICLE VII
ZONING MAP STANDARDS
7.1 Description Of Map
**A. An Official Zoning Map which illustrates the zoning of every piece of property
within the Radcliff corporate limits is part of this ordinance. Said map is drawn at a
scale of one (1) inch equals four hundred (400) feet and the outer bounds of all zones
are indicated by solid lines; one of the following combinations of letters is placed
within the specific zone boundaries; R-E, R-H, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, R-7,
Commercial, Commercial-Holding, Industrial, Industrial-Holding, P.U.D. or Urban
Agriculture.
Said combination of letters represent the following zones:
R-H - Residential Holding
R-E - Single-Family Estate
R-1 - Residential-1 (Low Density, Single-Family)
R-2 - Residential-2 (Low Density, Single-Family)
R-3 - Residential-3 (Medium Density, Single-Family and Duplex)
R-4 - Residential-4 (High Density, Single-Family and Duplex)
R-5 - Residential-5 (Medium Density, Multi-Family)
R-6 - Residential-6 (High Density, Multi-Family)
R-7 - Residential-7 (Mobile Home Residential)
Comm. - Commercial
C-H - Commercial Holding
Indus. - Industrial
I-H - Industrial Holding
P.U.D. - Planned Unit Development
*AG - Urban Agriculture
B. Official Zoning Map Certification Required
The Official Zoning Map shall contain a certification which identifies it as the
Official Zoning Map. Said certification shall be as follows:
"I hereby certify that this is the Official Zoning Map for the City of Radcliff, Ky., referred to
in Article VII, Section 7.1 of the Zoning Ordinance and Development Regulations for the
City of Radcliff, adopted by the City Council on April 17, 1984."
___________________ __________
Mayor Date
___________________ __________
City Clerk Date
*Amended September 24, 1992
**Amended November 2, 2017
40
C. Amendment Certification Required
The Official Zoning Map shall contain a certification which identified all
amendments to it by date, zone change and ordinance number. Said certification
shall be as follows:
ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS
Date of
Amendment
Previous
Zone
New
Zone
Ordinance
Number
Date Map
Changed
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
D. Location Of The Official Zoning Map
A paper print of the original Official Zoning Map shall be kept on file with the
Hardin County Court Clerk and with the Radcliff City Clerk; the mylar version of the
Official Zoning Map shall be kept in the Planning Commission's office where it shall
be updated as to reflect the new zone boundaries and the amendment certification
updated by the Planning Commission or their authorized agent within ten (10) days
of the effective date of the rezoning ordinance.
E. Replacement Of The Official Zoning Map Mylar
In the event that the mylar of the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed,
lot or difficult to read, the City Council may by resolution adopt a new mylar version
of the Official Zoning Map. Said mylar shall be drawn in accordance with an
existing updated print of the Official Zoning Map.
F. Correcting Of Errors Found On The Official Zoning Map
Minor errors found on the Official Zoning Map may be corrected by a resolution
adopted by the Council. However, no corrections shall be made which are not in
strict compliance with the legal description contained within an ordinance which
establishes the location of a specific zone boundary line.
7.2 Changing Zone Boundaries
A. Zone boundaries may be changed, moved or revised in accordance with the standards
set forth in Article VI of this ordinance.
41
B. After each zoning change is adopted by the Council, the Planning Commission or
their designated agent shall revise the boundaries of the Official Zoning Map to
reflect the legal description of the parcel contained in the body of the rezoning
ordinance.
*C. Any zone boundary may be adjusted in conformance with Section 7.4 of this
ordinance.
7.3 Interpretation Of The Zone Boundaries
*Generally zone boundaries are intended to follow along property lines. If a parcel or lot of
land has more than one zone then said parcel shall be used in conformance with the
following guidelines:
A. Each parcel of land so divided may be used in conformity with and subject to the
regulations herein established for the zone in which each such parcel of land is
located; or
B. If a parcel is divided into two (2) or more zones the entire area may be used in
conformity with and subject to the regulations herein established for the zone which
occupies more than one-half (1/2) of the area of the entire parcel; or
C. If a parcel is divided into two (2) equal zone areas the entire area may be used in
conformity with and subject to the regulations herein established for either zone;
provided however,
D. That no parcel of land containing more than six thousand two hundred fifty (6,250)
square feet shall be used in any manner except in conformity with and subject to the
regulations herein established for the zone in which each parcel of land is located.
E. The lot area requirements set forth in 7.3 D may be circumvented by any change of
lot lines occurring after the establishment of the zoning line, whether by subdivision,
re-subdivision, agreement or otherwise.
7.4 Location District Boundary Lines Not Readily Determinable From Official Zoning Map
If for any reason the location of any district boundary line is not readily determinable from
the Official Map, the location of the district boundary line shall be fixed by the Planning
Commission in accordance with the following provisions:
A. Where a zone boundary line is established with reference to a fixed distance,
reference point, and/or dimensional bearings said information shall control the
location.
*Amended November 2, 2017
42
B. Where a zoning boundary line is established based upon a specific legal description
said description shall prevail.
C. Where a zone boundary line approximately follows platted lot lines, the zone line
shall be assumed to coincide with said lot lines.
D. Where a zone boundary line divides a platted lot or crosses unsubdivided property,
the location of the zone line shall be fixed from the scale of the Official Zoning Map.
E. In determining the zoning classifications of properties by scaling the distance off
from the Official Zoning Map all such measurements shall be made from the outer
edge of the zone line.
F. Where a zone boundary approximates a corporate boundary said line shall be deemed
to coincide with said boundary.
G. Where a zone boundary line is fixed with reference to a natural feature the actual
location of said feature shall control the location of the zone boundary line.





48
ARTICLE X
CONDITIONAL USE STANDARDS
10.1 Purpose
Certain uses are allowed in specific zones on a conditional use basis. The conditional use
concept rests upon the premise that a specific land use may be appropriate in a particular
zone, if certain conditions exist or are adhered to. All persons proposing to place any use in
a zone in which it is only allowed on a conditional use basis shall first obtain a Conditional
Use Permit from the Board of Adjustment. The Board shall consider review and act on all
such requests in a manner set forth in K.R.S. 100.237. The Board shall also consider the
effect the proposed conditional use will have on the character of the area and the manner in
which the proposed use will meet the specific standards for that particular use as found
herein.
10.2 Kentucky Revised Statutes Concerning Conditional Uses (K.R.S. 100.237)
100.237 Conditional Use Permits: The Board of Adjustment (B.O.A.) shall have the power
to hear and decide applications for Conditional Use Permits to allow the proper integration
into the community of uses which are specifically named in the zoning regulations which
may be suitable only in specific locations in the zone only if certain conditions are met:
A. The Board may approve, modify, or deny any application for a Conditional Use
Permit. Application shall be made on forms provided in the Board of Adjustment
Office. If it approves such permit it may attach necessary conditions such as time
limitations, requirements that one or more things be done before the request can be
initiated or conditions of a continuing nature. Any such conditions shall be recorded
in the Board's minutes and the Conditional Use Permit along with a reference to the
specific section in the zoning regulation listing the conditional use under
consideration. The Board shall have power to revoke Conditional Use Permits, or
variances for noncompliance with the condition thereof. Furthermore, the Board
shall have a right of action to compel offending structures or uses removed at the cost
of the violator and may have judgment in personam for such cost.
B. Granting of a Conditional Use Permit does not exempt the applicant from complying
with all of the requirements of buildings, housing and other regulations.
C. In any case where a Conditional Use Permit has not been exercised within the time
limit set by the Board, or within one year, if no specific time limit has been set, such
Conditional Use Permit shall not revert to its original designation unless there
has been a public hearing. Exercised, as set forth in this section, shall mean that
binding contracts for the construction of the main building or other improvement has
been let; or in the absence of contracts that the main building or other improvement is
under construction to
49
a substantial degree, or that prerequisite conditions involving substantial investment
under contract, in development, are completed. When construction is not a part of the
use, exercised shall mean that the use is in operation in compliance with the
conditions as set forth in the permit.
D. The Administrative Official shall review all Conditional Use Permits, except those for
which all conditions have been permanently satisfied, at least once annually and shall
have the power to inspect the land or structure where the conditional use is located in
order to ascertain that the landowner is complying with all of the conditions which are
listed on the Conditional Use Permit. If the land owner is not complying with all of
the conditions listed or the Conditional Use Permit, the Administrative Official shall
report the fact in writing to the Chairman of the Board of Adjustments. The report
shall state specifically the manner in which the land owner at the is not complying
with the conditions on the conditional use permit, and a copy of the report shall be
furnished to the land owner at the same time that it is furnished to the Chairman of the
Board of Adjustments. The Board shall hold a hearing on the report within a
reasonable amount of time and notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be
furnished to the land owner at least one week prior to the hearing. If the Board of
Adjustments finds that the facts alleged in the report of the Administrative Official are
true and that the land owner has taken no steps to comply with them between the date
of the report and the date of the hearing, the Board of Adjustments may authorize the
Administrative Official to revoke the Conditional Use Permit and take the necessary
legal action to cause the termination of the activity on the land which the Conditional
Use Permit authorizes.
E. Once the Board of Adjustments has completed a Conditional Use Permit and all the
conditions required are of such type that they can be completely and permanently
satisfied, the Administrative Official, upon request of the applicant, may, if the facts
warrant, make a determination that the conditions have been satisfied and the
conclusion in the margin of the copy of the Conditional Use Permit which is on file
with the County Clerk, as required in K.R.S. 100.344. Thereafter said use, if it
continues to meet the other requirements of the regulations, will be treated as
permitted use. (1966, C. 172, S51; 1978, C. 384, S23)
10.3 Basement Apartment Units
A. Zones allowed in: R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4.
B. Special Site Conditions Required (NOTE: The Board shall find that all conditions
exist before issuing a permit.):
1. Basement/units shall only be allowed in single-family detached units; there shall
be no more than one (1) accessory unit in any single-family detached structure.
2. 4,000 square feet additional land area shall be required for the basement unit.
3. Total area used for basement unit purposes shall not exceed 30% of the total
square footage contained in the residence.
50
4. No basement unit shall contain more than 2 bedrooms.
5. Two additional off-street parking spaces shall be provided.
6. Shall only be allowed on lots connected to public sanitary sewer and treated
water facilities.
7. Outward appearance of all structures shall architecturally resemble singlefamily
detached structures from all approaches. Only one front entrance will
be allowed, additional entrances may be located to the side or rear of the
structure.
8. The basement unit shall not be allowed if it violates private subdivision and/or
deed restrictions.
9. The basement unit shall not cause the structure to be out of character with the
existing neighborhood.
10.4 Public And Quasi-Public Uses Allowed In Residential Zones
A. Zones allowed in: R-H, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6 and Residential P.U.D.'s.
B. Specific uses allowed: All Types Of Churches
Synagogues
Libraries
Associated School Facilities:
Elementary
Middle or Junior High
High Schools
Cemeteries
Nursing/Convalescent Homes
Public Recreational Facilities
Governmental Offices and Facilities
Hospitals
Out-Patient Clinics
Surgical Centers
C. Special Site Conditions Required (Note: The Board shall find that all conditions exist
before issuing a permit.):
The Board of Adjustment shall only allow public and quasi-pubic uses which meet the
following conditions:
1. The use has access to a street which can adequately handle the anticipated
traffic;
preferably a collector or arterial street.
2. The use will not create traffic which will significantly reduce the quality of life
in the surrounding residential area.
51
3. The use will utilize building and/or site designs which will make it compatible
with the adjacent land uses.
4. The use will not adversely effect the character of the neighborhood.
5. The use will not violate any private deed or subdivision restrictions.
10.4.1 Limited Commercial use in a Residential Zone as a Mixed Use.
A. Zones Allowed on a conditional use basis: R-5 and R-6 (Multi-level/Multi-unit
apartment complexes)
B. Under specific conditions certain commercial uses can be allowed as a subordinate use
in the residential zone if the following conditions can be met:
1. All building code requirements can be met to include egress, fire separation
and required floor area.
2. The use has access to a street which can adequately handle the anticipated
traffic; preferably a collector or arterial street.
3. The use will not create traffic which will significantly reduce the quality of life
in the surrounding residential area.
4. The use will utilize building and/or site designs which will make it compatible
with the adjacent land uses.
5. The use will not effect the character of the neighborhood.
6. The use will not violate any private deeds or subdivision restrictions.
10.5 Public And Quasi-Public Uses Allowed In The Commercial And C-H Zone
A. Specific Uses Allowed: Nursing/Convalescent Homes
Pre-Schools
Lodges and Clubs (Private)
*Charitable Gaming Establishments
B. Special Site Conditions Required (Note: The Board shall find that all of the conditions
exist before issuing a permit.):
The Board of Adjustment shall only allow public and quasi-public uses which meet
the following conditions:
1. The use has access to a street which can adequately handle the anticipated
traffic; consideration should be given to how near a street currently is to its
maximum capacity and the effect the proposed use will have on the traffic
52
flow.
2. The use will utilize building and/or site designs which make it compatible
with existing and/or future proposed adjacent land uses.
10.6 Other Conditional Uses Allowed In The Commercial And C-H Zone
A. Specific Uses Allowed:
Recycling Collection and Minor Processing Centers (Paper, Plastics, Glass and
Aluminum Products)
Circus/Carnival Grounds
Commercial Campground/Trailer Park (Short Term)
Mobile Homes, or Manufactured Commercial Units and Intermodal Containers used
as commercial buildings shall have the same architectural features as a permanent
commercial structure.
B. Special Site Conditions Required:
The site conditions required shall be the same as those for public and quasi-public
uses; reference - 10.5, B. 1 and 2 of this article.
(Note: The Board shall find that all of the conditions exist before issuing a
permit.)
10.6.1 Residential in a Commercial Zone as a Mixed Use.
A. Specific uses allowed: all residential
B. Under specific conditions apartments can be allowed as a subordinate use in the
commercial zone if the following conditions can be met:
1. All building code requirements can be met to include egress, fire separation
and required floor area.
2. The commercial use must be located on the ground or street level with the
residential use on either an upper or lower floor. No apartment can be located
on the same floor as the commercial use.
3. All entrances to the residential portion of the building shall be from the rear
and shall not be visible from the main street that the business fronts.
4. Any additions to the building shall be of the same architectural design and
material as the existing structure.
5. Adequate parking spaces, two (2) per unit must be provided in addition to the
off street parking that is required for the business.
53
10.7 Reserved
10.8 Conditional Uses Allowed In The Industrial And I-H Zone
A. Specific Uses Allowed: Those listed in Section 26.2 B of the Industrial Zone
Standards.
B. Special Site Conditions Required:
The Board of Adjustments shall only allow uses which meet all of the following
conditions:
1. The use will be developed in a manner which will be compatible with the
surrounding land uses.
2. The use will not pose a threat to the health, safety or general welfare of the
surrounding properties nor to the city as a whole.
3. The use will have access to a street which can adequately handle the
anticipated traffic flow.
4. The use will not violate any private deed and/or subdivision restrictions.
(Note: The Board shall find that all of the conditions exist before issuing a
permit.)
10.9 Modular, Sectional, Or Manufactured Or Intermodal Container Dwelling Units
A. Zones allowed on a conditional use basis: R-2, R-3 and R-4.
B. Special Home Characteristics Required (Note: The Board shall find that all of the
conditions exist before issuing a permit.):
1. There shall be no wheels, axles, lights, tongues or other pieces of equipment or
hardware needed for transportation purposes left on the unit once it has been
placed on the site.
2. The unit shall be placed upon a permanent foundation, i.e., basement, slab, or
brick or concrete walled crawl space.
3. The unit shall be designed for permanence; that is, it should be no more easily
removed from the site than other dwelling units.
4. The unit shall have a roofline, siding, windows, doors, steps and porches
which resemble typical single-family architecture.
5. The unit shall not be placed on sites from which they have been restricted by
private covenants.






































































123
ARTICLE XXIV
COMMERCIAL ZONE STANDARDS
24.1 Description Of The Zone
Certain areas of the city are designated as Commercial Zones. The zone is designed to
permit the transaction of business in separate areas, which are conducive to the particular
type of business, in a manner which does not interfere with the surrounding land use, devalue
adjacent residential property or create traffic congestion. It is intended that each commercial
use will provide for good traffic and pedestrian circulation, adequate landscaping, buffering,
fencing and vegetated open spaces and that each and every commercial use shall contribute
to the beauty, convenience and attractiveness of the Radcliff business community.
24.2 Permitted Uses
Any type of land use which can normally be classified as commercial in nature and other
public and quasi-public uses shall be allowed in this zone if the following conditions exist:
A. The use has proper access to a transportation facility which can adequately handle the
traffic flow anticipated to be created from the specific use.
B. The site and building design for the use is handled in a manner which makes the use
compatible with the surrounding land uses.
C. The specific use is not prohibited from locating within the zone by a provision of this
ordinance.
D. Street Vendor meeting the definition as described in Article II of this ordinance are
allowed uses, with the permission of the property owner where stands are to be set
up, during the hours of daylight only. The only exception to the hours of operation
are during festivals, grand openings and special events or with the permission of the
Planning Commission or their Designated Agent.
This ordinance rests upon the premise that most types of commercial land uses may be
placed upon any specific Commercially Zoned lot as long as condition 1 exists and as long as
the building and site are designed to meet condition 2. Due to this basic assumption different
land uses will be required to use different site and building designs depending on the
intensity of the use and the type of land which surrounds them. For example a gasoline
service station would be required to emphasize compatibility to a much greater degree on a
site which is adjacent to residential land than it would on a site which is surrounded by
Commercial and/or Industrially zoned land.
The intent of this regulation is to allow flexibility in locating different types of commercial,
public and quasi-public uses within the Commercial Zone while insuring that a good
124
transition is made between commercial, public and quasi-public and residential land uses.
The following land uses are expressly prohibited from locating in the Commercial Zone:
Motor Vehicle Towing and/or Storage Class I
Flea Market (Outdoor)
Salvage Yards
Trucking/Transport Firms
Warehousing Operations (other than mini-storage warehouse facilities)
Wholesaling Operations (other than those which sell the majority of their
products to the general public)
The following land uses are allowed in the Commercial Zone on a conditional use basis, all
such uses must obtain a Conditional Use Permit as set forth in Article X.
Recycling Collection Centers With Minor Processing (paper, plastic and
aluminum products)
Lodges & Clubs
Commercial Campground/Trailer Park (short term)
Mobile Homes Used As Commercial Structures
Circus & Carnival Grounds
Nursing/Convalescent Homes
Pre-Schools
Charitable Gaming Establishments
The following public and quasi-public uses are allowed as permitted uses in the Commercial
Zone:
Schools & Educational Facilities
Boarding Houses/Group Homes
Churches & Religious Facilities
Child Care/Day Care Centers
Halfway House
Libraries
All Types of Public Buildings
Recreational Facilities (public and private)
Motor Vehicle Towing and/or Storage Class II
24.3 Lot Coverage And Vegetation Requirements
A. The vegetated and/or landscaped open space is required to fulfill several objectives,
including:
1. To provide for adequate aquifer-recharge areas.
2. To filter debris, sedimentation and other pollutants from the surface water
run-off before it exits from the lot.
3. To improve air quality.
125
4. To provide shade and a general cooling effect.
5. To soften and improve the appearance of Radcliff's commercial areas.
B. The landscaped and/or vegetated open space shall be located, to the degree practical,
in locations which are:
1. Clearly visible from the street.
2. In drainage channels and/or at drainage exit points.
3. In locations where it can be enjoyed by the customers of the business, and/or
the general public.
C. All uses within the Commercial Zone shall cover no more than 90% of their lot with
buildings, structures, parking and/or drive areas; 10% of their lot shall be left in
vegetative and/or landscaped open space unless design option 1, 2 or 3 are utilized as
set forth within:
1. Design Option 1: The lot coverage may be increased to 95% and the
vegetative and/or landscaped open space may be reduced to 5% if the
applicant agrees to place all parking facilities in the side and/or rear-yard and
to leave the front-yard as vegetative and/or landscaped open space with the
exception of areas needed to house the necessary ingress and egress drives.
Under this design option the minimum front-yard set-back shall be reduced to
30 feet.
2. Design Option 2: The lot coverage may be increased to 92.5% and the
vegetative and/or landscaped area may be reduced to 7.5% if at least half of
the vegetated and/or landscaped area is located in such a manner that it is
visible from the street and the remainder is placed in a drainage channel or
drainage exit point.
3. Design Option 3: The applicant may propose alternative designs which meet
the objectives set forth in section 24.3 of this article. Said design shall only
be allowed if it receives the approval of the Planning Commission.
Properties approved under either Design Option 1, 2 or 3 shall not be allowed to
infringe upon the required vegetated and/or landscaped open space areas with future
building, parking or other types of expansion.
24.4 Minimum Lot And Zone Areas
A. Zone Area
The minimum size for one independent and free-standing Commercially Zoned area
126
shall be 30,000 sq. ft.
B. Lot Area
The required lot area shall have a direct relationship to the size of the proposed
structure, the area required for parking and the area needed to meet the vegetated
open space and/or landscaped area requirement. It may be necessary to provide more
than the minimum lot area due to increases in the open space and/or landscaping
provided to achieve compatibility between the proposed land use and surrounding
land uses. The minimum required lot area shall be as follows: Total Ground Floor
Building Area (1) + Total Parking Facility Loading Facility & Driving Lane Area (2)
+ Total Vegetated and/or Landscaped Open Space Area (3) = Total Required Lot
Size. (Note: However, in no case shall a commercial lot contain less than 5,000 s.ft.)
Definition of Formula Terms
1. Total Ground Floor Building Area: Is the total area occupied by the ground
level floors of all structures (principal and accessory) to be located upon the
lot. (NOTE: If future expansions are planned their projected ground floor
areas should also be calculated.)
2. Total Area To Be Used For Parking And/Or Loading Facilities And Driving
Lanes: Is the total area occupied by all parking and/or loading facilities and
driving lanes on the site. (NOTE: This area may be estimated by multiplying
the number of parking spaces required by 350 sq. ft. The number of parking
and loading spaces required for specific uses is set forth in Article XI Parking
Standards.
3. Total Vegetated And/Or Landscaped Open Space: Is the total needed to meet
the minimum vegetated and/or landscaped open space requirement. This
requirement will often be exceeded to achieve compatibility with surrounding
residential land uses and to achieve design excellence.
C. Structures Per Lot
There shall be only one (1) principal structure placed on each lot unless a Planned
Building Group has been approved in accordance with Article XII.
24.5 Minimum Required Set-Backs & Dimensional Requirements
A. Front-Yard: All structures shall be set-back not less than 40' from any property line
which is adjacent to a street right-of-way unless the 30' design option is used as
outlined in 24.3 C.1.
B. Side-Yard: All structures shall be set-back not less than 10' from any side property
line unless one of the following conditions apply:
127
1. The side property line is adjacent to residential property in which case the setback
shall be increased to 40'.
2. The building is proposed to be connected to the side wall of another adjacent
building, which shall only be allowed under the following conditions:
a. All of the buildings are permitted uses within the Commercial Zone.
b. All of the buildings to be connected shall be constructed at the same
time; or the new building will be built onto an existing building and
the owner of the existing building has agreed to the common wall; or
the person proposing to build the structure on the property line which
is adjacent to a vacant lot has the legally binding and written consent
from the owner of said adjacent lot that when a building is placed
upon the vacant lot said building will connect to the existing adjacent
structure.
c. Emergency access to the rear of all connected buildings is guaranteed.
d. An appropriate common/party wall agreement is submitted, approved
and filed with the Planning Commission or their authorized agent.
e. The minimum side-yard set-back for the two (2) end buildings is
doubled.
f. All applicable fire and building codes are met.
C. Rear-Yard: All principal structures shall be set-back no less than 20' from the rear
property line unless the rear property line is adjacent to residential property in which
case the set-back shall be increased to 40'.
D. Minimum Width of Lot at Front Building Line: No minimum width required;
however, all lots shall be wide enough at the front building line to accommodate the
proposed structure and meet the required side-yard set-backs. Variances shall not be
granted from persons who wish to place buildings that are too large for lots which
have been subdivided after the effective date of this ordinance. It is understood that
some lots will be simply too small to accommodate certain types of structures. The
subdivider is hereby warned of the dangers of subdividing land into narrow lots
which will be severely limited as to the type of structures which may be sited upon
them.
24.6 Parking Requirements
A. All parking facilities shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the
Parking Design and Construction Standards found in Article XI.
B. If all parking facilities are placed in the side and/or rear-yards and if the front-yard is
128
left as vegetated and/or landscaped open space, except for ingress and egress drives,
then the lot coverage may be increased and the front-yard set-back decreased as set
forth in 24.3 C. 1 of this article.
C. Handicapped Spaces: Commercial uses shall provide handicapped spaces as required
by federal or state laws and/or local building codes.
24.7 Compatibility Standards
All commercial uses which are adjacent to residential areas shall be designed and constructed
in a manner which creates a high degree of compatibility between these land uses. The best
test of compatibility is whether the commercial use has a negative effect on the quality of the
residential living environment and whether the commercial use devalues the adjacent
residential property. No commercial use shall be allowed adjacent to a residential area unless
the Planning Commission finds the use compatible. Compatibility can be achieved through
the use of any combination of the following site design techniques:
A. Using architectural styles for the commercial buildings which relate to the building
materials, scale, size and general design used for adjacent residential structures.
B. Providing additional vegetated and/or landscaped open space which approximates the
open space provided in adjacent residential areas.
C. Providing screening which adequately shields the adjacent residential areas from the
incompatible aspects of the commercial activity including: noise, light, signage, and
any incompatible building and/or parking designs. Such screening may consist of
heavy landscaping, fencing, earthern berms or any combination of these elements.
D. Providing vegetated open space, buffer-yards and/or landscaping which softens the
appearance of the commercial use.
24.8 Required Screening Of Dumpsters, Waste Materials & Outer Boundary of Zone
A. All dumpsters for waste disposal shall be adequately screened from street and/or
general public view.
B. Any outdoor storage of waste materials or refuse shall be adequately screened from
street and/or general public view.
C. An appropriate screen (vegetation and/or fencing) shall be constructed along the
outer boundary of the Commercial Zone. Said screening shall be approved by the
Planning Commission as to location, height, material and/or vegetation types. Said
screening shall function to increase the compatibility between the land uses contained
in the adjacent zones. Said screening may be waived by the Planning Commission in
cases where the adjacent land will remain vacant or where the screening is not
desirable or logical for some other unique reason.
129
24.9 Commercial Development Site Plan Required
Prior to the issuance of a building permit for the construction of any new commercial
building or any addition to an existing commercial building, if said addition contains more
than 500 sq. ft., the applicant shall develop and have approved a development site plan. Said
plan shall be approved by the authorized agent of the Planning Commission. The
commercial development site plan will be approved if it conforms to all appropriate
development standards contained within this ordinance. Development plans must be
completed within one (1) year from the date of approval. If substantial construction has
occurred during the first one (1) year period and the project is not complete, a Planning
Department Official may grant a six (6) month extension in order to expedite completion of
the development plan. Any development plans that have not been completed in the allotted
time frame shall be considered void. If a six (6) month extension of the development plan is
granted, no additional fees need to be paid.
A. Format
All commercial development plans shall be developed within the following format:
1. Be drawn on a minimum size sheet of 8 1/2 inches by 11 inches.
2. Be drawn at a minimum scale of 1 inch equals 20 feet.
3. Be drawn upon a survey indicating the outer boundaries of the lot.
4. Any survey or re-survey shall be provided by a qualified, registered land
surveyor.
5. All engineering data shall be provided by a qualified, registered professional
engineer.
6. Information found on deeds and/or approved Final or Preliminary Plat
Packages may be used and/or referenced in meeting format and content
requirements, including contour and boundary data, if such information is
believed to be accurate.
B. Contents
All commercial development plans shall contain the following contents:
1. The dimension and bearing of all lot lines, and the total square footage
contained in the lot.
2. Developments shall provide two (2) foot contour information when the
Planning Commission or their authorized agent believes that the slope of the
land may present a development problem. Two (2) foot contour information
130
shall be provided if any of the following conditions exist:
a. The site contains existing areas with slopes greater than 10%.
b. The site contains areas which will be cut or filled to depths greater
than four (4) feet.
c. The site contains elevation changes in excess of ten (10) feet. The
Planning Commission or their authorized agent may require that both
the existing and the proposed final contours of the entire site are
provided or that the contours be provided only at certain locations as
deemed necessary by the specific land use, site, drainage system and
characteristics of the surrounding land.
3. Shall indicate the zoning of the lot and all adjacent properties, including those
across from any adjacent streets.
4. Shall indicate the land use of all adjacent properties, including those across
from any adjacent streets.
5. Shall indicate the following information regarding the principal structure and
all accessory structures to be constructed on the site:
a. The exact location of all proposed structures and/or existing
structures.
b. The outer dimensions, the total square footage of the ground floor and
the number of stories and height for all structures.
c. The proposed use to be contained in each structure.
d. The distance from each structure to the property line.
e. The location of all major entrances.
6. The layout of the parking and driving lanes shall be provided, including:
a. The number, size, design, surfacing material and location of all
parking spaces.
b. The location, width and surface materials of all driving lanes.
c. The location, width and surface materials of all curb-cuts (entrances)
and the distance to any adjacent curb-cuts (entrances).
d. The direction of traffic flow.
131
7. The location and size of all easements, in the case of drainage easements the
proposed final cross-sections and approximate grade for drainage channels
and the size and location of any drainage pipes shall be indicated.
8. Evidence shall be provided that the organizations for whom any easements
indicated have been provided have found the easements to be acceptable.
This standard may have been previously met in obtaining Preliminary and
Final Plat approval in which case it does not apply unless the size, location or
function of the recorded easement is proposed to be changed.
9. The location of any major waste disposal containers and the location, height,
and material for the required screening.
10. The amount of the lot, in square feet to remain as vegetated and/or
landscaped open space. Said vegetated and/or landscaped areas shall be
indicated and the type of vegetation and/or landscaping shall also be noted.
11. The material, location and height of any fencing shall be indicated.
12. The location, size, height and type of illumination for all signs which contain
more than six (6) square feet of total display area.
13. The location and construction design for all sidewalks.
14. The name, right-of-way and pavement width of all adjacent streets.
15. The direction for storm-water flow, the major drainage channels and the
ultimate receiver of the storm-water.
16. The location and construction design for any sedimentation and erosion
control devices and the time frame in which they are to be installed and
removed.
17. The location and approximate size of any flood-prone areas; sinkhole basins,
or other areas with severe environmental constraints.
18. The location and height of any street and/or security lighting.
19. The location, size, height and type of vegetative screening.
20. The location, depth and proposed final embankment slope for any areas
proposed to be cut or filled one (1) foot or more.
21. Information regarding the size, location, and surface of any open space and/or
recreational facility to be reserved for private and/or public use.
22. Title block placed in the lower right hand corner which contains the
132
following information:
a. Commercial building name.
b. Property Owner: The name, mailing address and phone number of
property owner and/or applicant.
c. Identification of person who prepared the site plan.
d. Legend Information: A graphic scale, written scale, north point and
date of preparation.
24.10 General Lot Development And Design Standards
A. All commercial lot development shall be done in accordance with the Design and
Improvement Standards set forth in Article IV and the General Development
Standards set forth in Article III.
B. Outdoor lighting may be provided which adequately lights all major parking facilities
and commercial buildings but shall be designed and located in such a manner so that
it does not flood adjacent residential properties with light.
C. Pump islands for gasoline service stations shall be located no closer than fifteen (15)
feet to any lot line adjacent to a street (does not apply to reverse-frontage lots).
24.11 Disapproval Of Commercial Development Site Plans
Whenever any commercial development site plan has been disapproved by the Planning
Commission or their authorized agent, the applicant shall be notified in writing within ten
(10) working days of the disapproval and of the reason for the disapproval. In the case of
disapproval
the applicant has three (3) options: (A) To revise the plan to address the deficiencies; (B) To
appeal the decision; (C) To not pursue the development.
In the case of resubmittal of revised plans there shall be no limit to the number of times an
applicant may submit a plan for a particular piece of property.
In the case of appeal, if the disapproval was made by the Planning Commission's authorized
agent then the appeal may be made to the Planning Commission; or if disapproval is made or
reaffirmed by the Planning Commission then the applicant may appeal this decision to the
Radcliff Board of Adjustments. All appeals to the Board of Adjustments shall be made
within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the written notice of disapproval and shall conform
with the appeal procedures set forth in K.R.S. 100.257, 100.261, and 100.263.
133
24.12 Approval Of Commercial Development Site Plans
Once a commercial development site plan has been approved, the Planning Commission or
their authorized agent shall notify the applicant (in writing) and the Building Department of
the approval. No building permits shall be issued for any buildings until said approval has
been granted. All approved commercial development plans shall be kept on file in the
Planning Commission's office.
24.13 Amendment To Commercial Development Site Plans
Any change in the information regarding lot dimensions; building (size, location, or use); the
size, number, or location of parking and/or driving facilities; sidewalks; open space;
landscaping; screening; lighting; and/or the size, height or illumination of signs shall cause
the approved commercial development site plan to be voided and an amended plan filed and
approved.












146
ARTICLE XXVII
RESERVED


154
ARTICLE XXVIII
*SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS
28.1 Purpose
The purpose of this chapter is to permit such signs that will not, by their reason, size,
location, construction, or manner of display, endanger the public safety of individuals,
confuse, mislead, or obstruct the vision necessary for traffic safety or otherwise endanger
public health, safety and welfare; and to permit and regulate signs in such a way as to support
and complement land use objectives set forth in The Zoning Ordinance and General
Developmental Regulations for the City of Radcliff.
28.2 Definitions
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words or terms used herein shall be interpreted as
follows:
A. ABANDONED shall mean to cease or discontinue a use or activity.
B. ERECT shall mean to build, construct, attach, hang, suspend, affix or paint walls
with a message.
C. FACING shall mean the surface area of one (1) side of the sign upon, against or
through which the message is displayed or illustrated on the sign.
**D. TOURISM OVERLAY ZONE shall mean the only area designated on the Official
Zoning Map for the construction of billboards. (See Section 28.10.)
E. PROPERTY OWNER shall include and be synonymous with "manager", "lessor",
"lessee", "tenant" and "supervisor".
F. SHOPPING CENTER shall mean a collection of five (5) or more retail or service
business establishments grouped together and with three (3) or more of the following
existing:
1. The establishments are within one (1) building;
2. The establishments are on the same lot;
3. The establishments share parking;
4. When the establishments are within more than one (1) building, the buildings
have similar setback; and
5. The establishments share ingress/egress.
G. SIGN shall mean any device, fixture, placard, or structure that uses any color, form,
*Complete Chapter Amended April 29, 1993
** Amended July 25, 1996
155
graphic, illumination, symbol, or writing to advertise, draw attention to, announce the
purpose of, or identify the purpose of a person or entity, or to communicate
information of any kind to the public.
1. BILLBOARDS shall mean a sign which has a flat sign space upon which
advertising may be posted, painted or affixed, and which is primarily
designed for the rental or lease of such space for advertising not relating to
the use of the property upon which the sign exists.
BILLBOARD ADVERTISING shall mean the business of leasing or
otherwise renting the use of or space on signs by the person who paints,
prepares, erects or maintains said signs, but in whom title thereto remains at
all times during such period of renting or leasing.
2. GROUND SIGN shall mean a permanent sign supported by one (1) or more
poles, structures or other bases placed in or on the ground and not attached to
the building, and must have a vertical clearance of eight (8) feet when
projected over the sidewalk and/or sidewalk easement.
3. PROJECTION SIGN shall mean any permanent sign which is all or in part
supported by or attached to a vertical portion of a building and extending
beyond the surface of the building to which it is attached without ground
support, to include awnings and canopies.
4. ROOF SIGN shall mean any permanent sign erected upon or over the roof of
any building, with the principal support being the roof structure.
5. WALL OR FACIA SIGN shall mean any permanent sign painted on or
secured and affixed to the building.
6. TEMPORARY SIGN shall mean any sign designed and constructed to be
displayed on an interim basis or for a specified period of time. All portable
signs shall be considered temporary signs.
7. INFLATABLE DEVICE shall mean any device of any design, figure or
pattern constructed for a particular purpose which is expanded by gas or air
that is secured by means of cables, anchors or lines to any solid surface.
*H. SIGN SUPPORT shall mean the pole, sign frame, supporting frame work and all
appurtenances needed or used to attach, hold, carry or fasten the sign. This includes
all supports used to attach a roof, ground, wall or pole sign.
28.3 Exemptions
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following on premise signs; however,
*Amended October 12, 2000
156
the signs shall not obstruct the vision necessary for traffic safety:
A. Temporary unlighted real estate signs not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet which
advertise the availability for sale, rental, lease or auction of the property and shall be
placed only upon the premises for sale, rental, lease or auction.
B. Signs painted or stenciled on the interior or exterior of the window.
C. Signs not exceeding two (2) square feet, denoting the name and address of the
residence.
D. Public building or church signs not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet.
E. Signs not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet, denoting the architect, engineer or
contractor at a construction site; and said signs shall be removed no more than five
(5) days after the completion date.
F. Traffic or other municipally-owned or state-owned signs, legal notices, railroad
crossing, danger or emergency signs.
G. Non-advertising decorative lights and signs for holiday season.
H. Directional signs not exceeding six(6) in number and three (3) square feet of facing
per sign, for on-premises use regarding an on-premises service facility.
I. Signs denoting operating instructions or menus for drive-in theaters, drive-in
restaurants, and drive-through car washes wherein the lettering does not exceed one
and one-half (1-1/2) inches in height.
J. Unlighted yard signs not exceeding four (4) square feet, which advertise the
availability for sale of personal property in residential areas.
K. All commercial or manufacturer's special promotional banners shall be permitted, for
no longer than thirty (30) days, as long as affixed flush against the building or
hanging underneath the roofline of building or awning where the promotion is being
held.
*L. Signs advertising the election of a candidate for public office or another issue which
is to be voted upon by the people of this city shall be permitted on private property
and shall be removed no later than ten (10) days following the election date. Such
signage shall not be permitted within any public rights-of-way or upon any city
property. Violators of the above mentioned shall be subject to Article 28.11
Penalties, of this article.
M. Legal notices not exceeding four (4) square feet to protect private property or caution
of possible danger.
N. One (1) sign advertising for civic clubs and churches within the city limits of Radcliff
*Amended December 1, 1994
157
not exceeding eight (8) square feet may be placed upon private property at the closest
major or minor arterial of its location with approval from the Enforcement Officer, as
well as another sign may be placed at the city limits.
0. Non-advertising inflatable devices may be allowed with written approval from the
Enforcement Officer.
P. Any City of Radcliff sign.
28.4 General Regulations
The following requirements shall apply within any zoning district:
** *** A. Blending or intermittent illumination signs such as computer controlled message
boards shall be allowed.
*** B. Reserved for future use.
C. No sign or lights shall contain or make use of any word, phrase, symbol, shape, form
or character in such manner as to stop, slow, endanger or to turn traffic.
D. No rotating sign shall exceed six (6) rounds-per-minute (RPM's) and no direct
intermittent beam of light shall rotate or revolve.
E. Signs may be illuminated by internal lighting or from an exterior source provided the
beam of light from any source shall be concealed from the view of motorists.
F. No sign shall be located on or project over any public right-of-way.
G. A noncommercial, public-service announcement sign may be suspended across
public streets or at other public places with written permission of the Enforcement
Officer for a period not to exceed fourteen (14) days.
H. No signs, placards, posters or notices shall be attached to poles, stanchions or
supports constructed primarily for utilities and other purposes or functions.
*I. All signs and sign supports shall be maintained in a good state of repair. Painted
faces or structural members shall be repainted whenever significant peeling or fading
occurs. Neon tubes, lamps and transformers shall be kept in a good working order.
The Enforcement Officer may order the removal of any sign which becomes a public
hazard due to lack of maintenance, repair or obsolescence. If the owner of the sign or
structure fails to remove or alter the structure within thirty (30) days after written
notice by certified mail or if the owner cannot be located, such sign or structure shall
be removed by the Enforcement Officer subsequent to the following procedure being
completed:
*Amended October 12, 2000
**Amended May 20, 2004
***Amended May 12, 2005
158
1. If the certified mail is not returned then it shall be construed that the
appropriate party was in fact notified. As a result of the owners lack of
attention the sign shall be considered abandoned and without value and shall
be dismantled and disposed of by the order of the Enforcement Officer at the
owner's expense.
2. In the event the mailed notice is returned, the City shall publish said notice
one (1) time in a legal newspaper; and if the owner of the sign or structure
fails to remove or alter the structure within ten (10) days thereafter, such sign
or structure shall be removed by the Enforcement Officer at the expense of
the owner.
*J. Off-premise signs shall not be permitted within the corporate limits of the City of
Radcliff, except those signs which are listed in Section 28.3, Exemptions, and
billboards which are regulated in Section 28.10, Placing Billboards in Tourism
Overlay Areas. Billboards which predate these applicable sign regulations and are
existing within the corporate limits of the City of Radcliff shall be deemed nonconforming.
K. All signs shall have a sign permit from the City of Radcliff. Application and detailed
sketches shall be submitted by the owner and/or sign company to the Planning &
Zoning Office. Any sign erected before the issuance of a sign permit shall be in
violation of this ordinance.
***L. Temporary signs shall be permitted to announce the opening of a business operating
for a specific period not exceeding thirty (30) days or a new business waiting to open.
All other business shall be allowed the use of temporary signs with a written permit
only. All temporary signs must be professionally designed and produced and must be
placed on the property in which the special event is being held. The written permit for
any business other than the ones listed above is good for seven (7) days only.
M. Businesses which are:
1. Located upon the same lot;
2. Located within the same structure; or,
3. Share common street frontage;
but are not classified as shopping centers as per Section 28.2 F of this ordinance shall
be required to place all permitted ground signs on a common structure and not be
allotted a separate ground sign for each business.
** ****N. Signs allowed within the City of Radcliff shall be of high quality and possess professional
design standards. Sign materials must be durable in nature. The use of banner type
materials, hand-painted materials and wood support posts (with the exception of those
encased with a decorative vinyl or aluminum sleeve) for a permanent sign will not be
allowed. The Enforcement Officer shall make an administrative review of all sign permit
applications and detailed sketches considering questions of public safety, community
aesthetics and professional design standards.
*Amended July 25, 1996 **Amended October 12, 2000
***Amended May 12, 2005 ****Amended January 16, 2014
159
O. The Board of Adjustment shall have the responsibility for administrative review
regarding all decisions of the Enforcement Officer. Appeals to the Board of
Adjustment shall follow the procedures set forth within KRS 100.257; 100.261 and
100.263.
P. During the construction of any planned shopping center area or residential
subdivision there shall be permitted a sign of not more then two hundred fifty (250)
square feet of displayed surface area pertaining to sale, rental, lease, and/or
identification of the center or subdivision. Such signs may be permitted until the
completion of the construction of the project and/or until the majority of homes or
stores have been leased or purchased. Such decisions are to be made by the
Enforcement Officer.
*Q. All obsolete signs, signs which no longer give a current description of the business or
services available on the premise, must be removed. The removal of the sign also
includes the removal of all sign supports as described in Section 28.2.
Sign Structures/Supports that are Exempt from removal, as required in Q. above are:
1. Sign Structures/Supports that still contain the sign framework and have blank
faces inserted. These blank faces must be of the same color and material as
the remaining sign faces on the structure.
2. Sign Structures/Supports which are in serviceable condition.
3. Sign Structures/Supports including framework must be of a professional
design and quality. The painting of plywood signs attached to poles, walls or
to the roof, must be removed.
28.5 Residential Districts
The following requirements shall apply within all residential districts:
A. Those having an approved Home Occupation Permit shall not be allowed a sign for
advertising purposes.
B. One (1) identification ground sign shall be permitted for each multiple-family
structure or complex. The ground sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet.
The sign shall indicate only the name and address of the premises, the name of the
management and the availability of rental units. Where a complex has more than one
(1) building, and the buildings are owned by different people, then each structure that is
owned by different people shall be permitted to have a ground sign, which is not to
exceed sixteen (16) square feet. Condominiums and town houses must comply to 28.3
(c).
*C. Subdivision identification sign/signature entrance: Each entrance to the subdivision shall
have no more than two signs per entrance and shall only contain the name of and the
*Amended October 12, 2000
160
establishment date for the subdivision.
1. A subdivision identification sign/signature entrance is any wall(s), fence(s),
guard house or similar structure exceeding four feet in height, constructed at
an entrance to any subdivision.
2. Location:
a. All signs shall be required to setback no less than 10 feet off the
paved surface of the street.
b. The sign/entrance shall not obstruct the natural roadside drainage or
through drainage facilities and shall allow for adequate sight distance.
c. The Planning Department may require that the locations of the
proposed sign/entrance be staked in the field and reviewed and
approved prior to construction.
d. Signs/entrances shall not be permitted within utility or drainage
easements without prior approval from the agency to whom the
easement has been dedicated.
e. Signs/entrances shall not be permitted within the right-of-way of
major arterial, minor arterial or collector roadways except those
collector roadways functioning as the primary entrance to the
proposed development and provided that approval from the Planning
Department and any other appropriate authority is obtained.
f. Signs/entrances may be located within the right-of-way of a local
street if it has been approved by the Planning Department.
g. Encroachment permits and proof of permanent maintenance must be
received for any sign/entrance to be located within a right-of-way
prior to construction plan approval.
h. Prior to construction of any sign/entrance within a right-of-way, an
indemnity agreement must be provided by the developer or owner to
the City. Such agreement shall conform to the format approved by
the Planning Commission.
i. Any public agency responsible for maintenance of facilities within the
right-of-way may require, for any reason, the removal of a
sign/entrance located within the right-of-way. The removal shall be
161
done at the owner(s) expense and within 30 days from receiving
written notice.
3. Height: The height of a sign/entrance shall be measured from the ground to
the highest point, including columns or other ornamentation. When
constructed on man made berms, the berm will be considered in the overall
height. The maximum height of a signature entrance shall be 15 feet. Light
fixtures and guardhouses may be extend an additional four feet.
4. Length: The maximum length of a sign/signature entrance shall not exceed
100 feet on each side of the entrance roadway. Any structure extending
beyond this length shall be considered a fence of wall and the requirements
for walls and fences shall apply.
5. Proximity to Structure on Lot and Driveways: Signs/entrance shall be
constructed a minimum of 20 feet from any dwelling or driveway entrance.
D. No billboards, projection, wall or roof signs shall be permitted.
E. Land uses within the residential zones which exist by merit of a conditional use
permit as established within the Radcliff Zoning Ordinance, Article X, may be
allowed signs which conform to standards set within this ordinance for the
commercial zone. Applications for such signs will be reviewed by the Enforcement
Officer which shall consider the application's compatibility and appropriateness with
existing land uses. The Board of Adjustment shall have exclusive judgment in this
matter and may limit or establish conditions upon the application.
28.6 Commercial and Industrial Districts
The following requirements shall apply within Commercial and Industrial Zoned districts
excluding shopping centers:
The Enforcement Officer may approve any sign applications for a total of four (4) signs per
business or industry establishment. No more than four (4) signs on premises will be
permitted to any applicant. Possible sign combinations or maximum number of signs by type
are as follows:
A. GROUND SIGN - The number of ground signs on premises permitted per
commercial or industrial establishment shall be based upon one (1) sign per street
frontage. No ground sign facing shall exceed two hundred fifty (250) square feet and
all portions of the sign shall not encroach within the established right-of-way in any
manner. Ground signs that project over the sidewalk and sidewalk easement must
have a vertical clearance of eight (8) feet in height.
B. WALL SIGN - Applicant may be permitted a maximum of three (3) wall signs to be
placed on the structure in an area below the roof line. No wall sign shall have a sign
area exceeding thirty (30) per cent of the facia or wall area or three hundred (300)
square feet.
162
C. PROJECTION SIGN - Applicant may be permitted one (1) projection sign which
shall not extend more than ten (10) feet outward nor extend above the height of the
building. Projection signs shall maintain a clear height of eight (8) feet above any
sidewalk, paved or ground surface measuring from the bottom of the sign to the soil,
pavement or sidewalk. Projection signs shall be prohibited to extend over any area
used by traffic or delivery vehicles. No projection sign area shall exceed fifty (50)
square feet.
D. ROOF SIGN - Applicant may be permitted one (1) roof sign which shall not extend
beyond the edge of the roof nor extend more than ten (10) feet beyond the highest
point of the building. No roof sign shall exceed two hundred fifty (250) square feet.
E. INFLATABLE DEVICE SIGN - Applicant may be permitted one (1) inflatable
advertising device which shall not be extended to such a vertical height that if the
wind blew it over it would extend beyond the property line of the business.
Signs shall not be placed in the area known as the vision triangle of an intersection of
any number of streets. The vision triangle shall be the area within a triangle
beginning at the point of intersection of two streets and continuing along those streets
away from said beginning point for a distance of twenty-five (25) feet with a line
connecting the two sides forming a base and enclosing the area. Nothing shall be
erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to impede vision
within this area or any ingress/egress area onto any street.
28.7 Shopping Centers
The following requirements shall apply within all shopping centers:
A. One wall or facia sign for each permitted use within the shopping center, not to
exceed one hundred twenty-five (125) square feet for each structure up to fifty (50)
feet in width, plus one (1) square foot of displayed surface area for each additional
foot in width, but in no case shall the sign exceed thirty (30) per cent of the area of
the facade of the building. This sign may be illuminated. Where a building is
exposed to more than one (1) street, one (1) additional sign shall be permitted for
each street exposure; provided, however, that in no case shall the area of each of the
additional signs exceed one hundred twenty-five (125) square feet.
B. Where the shopping center has a completely covered sidewalk, there shall be
permitted an additional sign outside and at ninety (90) degrees to each business hung
from the ceiling of the covered sidewalk. This sign will be limited to the name of the
store and the type of business or service provided. It shall not exceed fifteen (15)
square feet for each of the two (2) displayed surface areas.
C. The shopping center shall be permitted one (1) ground sign per three hundred (300)
feet of street frontage, and fraction thereof. The displayed surface area for all ground
signs shall not be more than three hundred (300) square feet for each street frontage
per facing.
163
However, if the shopping center is bordered by more than one (1) street an extra sign
shall be permitted on each street on which the shopping center has frontage in excess
of two hundred (200) feet. In addition the shopping center may have one (1) ground
sign located off premises. The ground sign not located on the premises shall be
located within two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet of the premises and must be
located next to the major and/or minor street artery affording direct access to the
property. Each business shall be permitted one (1) ground sign as component to the
shopping center sign. The off premises shopping center sign shall not exceed three
hundred (300) square feet of facing.
D. One (1) sign with not over twelve (12) square feet of displayed surface area,
pertaining only to the private sale, rental or lease of the premises upon which it is
displayed, except that on a building under construction an additional sign shall be
permitted with not over thirty-two (32) square feet of displayed surface area
pertaining to the names of contractors, sub-contractors and names of the suppliers of
materials used in the construction of the building and the names of the architect,
engineer, landscape architect and other professional people directly employed on the
design of the building or lot upon which the sign is displayed.
28.8 Permits
The following requirements shall apply within all zoning districts:
A. All signs shall have a sign permit from the City of Radcliff.
B. A fee shall be required for all sign permits, the amount to be established by the City
Council. Sign permit applications shall be made upon forms provided by the
Planning & Zoning Office. All signs shall comply with the provisions of this
chapter, and it shall be the duty of the Enforcement Officer to examine the
specifications and the premises involved for compliance of all applications.
*28.9 Removal of Abandoned Signs
If any sign and or sign structure/support within the City of Radcliff has been abandoned said
sign and or sign structure/support shall be removed by order of the Enforcement Officer
under the following conditions:
A. The sign and or sign structure/support has been abandoned for a period not less than
one hundred twenty (120) days. At this time the sign and or sign structure/support
shall be considered to have no value by reason of the owners abandonment or lack of
a purchaser or contract.
B. Any occasion in which the sign and or sign structure/support is destroyed to a degree
of fifty (50) per cent or greater.
The owner shall be notified by certified mail as to the required one hundred twenty (120) day
*Amended October 12, 2000
164
time period within which to act. The one hundred twenty (120) day clock shall commence
with the date upon the correspondence provided to the owner. If the owner cannot be
located, then notice shall be advertised within a legal newspaper describing the location of
the sign, any identifiable message, and the one hundred twenty (120) day removal
requirement commencing with the date of the newspaper.
28.10 Placing Billboards in Tourism Overlay Areas
The Tourism overlay area shall be any parcel which abuts KY 313 from the east side of 31-W
to South Boundary Road (see Radcliff Official Zoning Map).
Applicants wishing to obtain a permit to construct a billboard in an Overlay Area must
receive approval from the Planning Commission.
A. The applicant shall submit the following information to the Planning Commission:
1. A general site layout of the property where the sign is proposed to be located.
This layout must include proposed landscaping and be to scale.
2. Scaled drawings of what the billboard will look like, including the position of
lighting.
3. The distance from existing billboards.
4. Photographs of the area where the billboard is proposed to be located.
B. The Planning Commission shall use the following to guide their decision:
1. Will the proposed billboard be located within an approved Tourism Overlay
Area?
2. Will the proposed billboard be of all metal construction? (Wood poles,
supports or framing shall be prohibited.)
3. The billboard may be no smaller than two-hundred (200) square feet and no
larger than three-hundred (300) square feet.
4. No billboard shall be placed any closer than 1000 feet from any existing or
approved billboard.
5. Will the proposed billboard blend well with the adjacent areas? (Each
application shall be reviewed on its own merit.)
6. Have the landscaping requirements been properly met? (The Commission
shall require any landscaping it feels would be needed on a case by case
basis.)
165
C. Approved billboard permits from the Planning Commission shall only be valid for a
period of six (6) months. If the applicant does not construct the billboard within six
(6) months form the date of approval they must start the process over and resubmit
their application to the Planning Commission.
*28.11 Penalties
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article for which no other penalty is
provided shall upon conviction be fined in an amount not less than twenty dollars ($20.00)
nor more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Each day of the violation shall constitute
a separate offense. Any person violating this ordinance may also be found guilty of a civil
offense. The civil fine shall be no less than twenty dollars ($20.00) nor more than two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). The civil fine shall be paid directly to the City of Radcliff.
If the fine is not paid within thirty (30) days from the date of notification, then the City may
recover said fine in a civil action in a Court of proper jurisdiction. The City may also obtain
injunctions or abatement orders to ensure compliance with this ordinance or pursue
administrative remedies when appropriate, including injunctions and abatement proceedings.
*Amended October 12, 2000



CITY OF RADCLIFF
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Approved
February 5, 2009
City of Radcliff
Planning Department
411 West Lincoln Trail Boulevard
P.O. Box 519
Radcliff, Kentucky 40159-0519
(270) 351-1875 Fax: (270) 351-5846
TABLE OF CONTENTS
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Article I General Provisions
1.1 Purpose 1-1
1.2 Title 1-1
1.3 Authority 1-1
1.4 Area of Jurisdiction 1-1
1.5 Compliance with other Codes, Statutes and Regulations 1-1
1.6 Waiver 1-1
1.7 Disclaimer of Liability 1-2
1.8 Complaints Regarding Violations 1-2
1.9 Penalties for Violation 1-2
1.10 Conflict of Regulations 1-2
1.11 Separability 1-3
1.12 Amendments 1-3
1.13 Definitions 1-3
Article II Subdivision Procedure
2.1 Purpose 2-1
2.2 Minor Subdivision Procedure 2-1
2.3 Major Subdivision Procedure 2-1
2.4 Preliminary Plat Procedure 2-3
2.5 Improvement Plan Procedure 2-6
2.6 Record Plat Procedure 2-7
2.7 Completion of Public Improvements 2-9
2.8 Procedures for Environmentally Sensitive 2-11
and Geologic Hazard Areas
2.9 Amendments to Plans 2-11
Article III Subdivision Plat Content
3.1 Purpose 3-1
3.2 Minor Subdivision Plat Requirements 3-1
3.3 Preliminary Plat Requirements 3-1
3.4 Improvement Plan Requirements 3-4
3.5 Record Plat Requirements 3-6
3.6 As-Built Improvement Plans 3-11
Article IV Improvement and Design Standards
4.0 Purpose 4-1
4.1 General Requirements 4-1
4.2 Block and Lot Standards 4-1
4.3 Street and Sidewalk Standards 4-3
4.4 Utility Standards 4-14
4.5 Community Facilities Design Standards 4-19
4.6 Surveying and Monumentation Standards 4-20
4.7 Miscellaneous Standards 4-21
TABLE OF CONTENTS
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Article V Access Management Standards
5.1 Purpose 5-1
5.2 Conformance with Plans, Regulations, and Statutes 5-1
5.3 Applicability 5-1
5.4 Access Management Classification System and Standards 5-2
5.5 Driveway and Signal Spacing 5-2
5.6 Access Connection and Driveway Design 5-3
5.7 Joint and Cross Access 5-4
5.8 Corner Clearance 5-5
5.9 Alignment of Access Connections 5-5
5.10 Turning Movement Restriction 5-5
5.11 Turning Lanes and Deceleration Lane Provision 5-6
5.12 Number of Access Connections 5-6
5.13 Outparcels and Phased Site Plans 5-6
5.14 Non-Conforming Access Features 5-7
5.15 Flag Lots 5-7
5.16 Reverse Frontage Lots 5-7
5.17 Interchange Areas 5-8
5.18 Emergency Access 5-8
5.19 Transit Access 5-8
5.20 Traffic Studies 5-8
Appendices
Appendix A
Table 1: ADT Trip Generation Table A-1
Table 2: Street Geometrics A-1
Appendix B
Subdivision Application A-2
Construction Cost Estimates Worksheet A-3
Subdivision Standards Waiver Application A-4
Development in Environmentally Sensitive or A-5
Geologic Hazard Areas Application
Appendix C
Typical Street Cross-Sections A-6
Typical Curb Details A-13
Typical Residential Driveway Plan A-14
Typical Street/Sidewalk Transition A-15
Typical Warning Pattern Dimensions A-16
Typical Survey Control Monument A-17
Amendments
ARTICLE I-GENERAL PROVISIONS
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 1-1
1.1 Purpose
These standards are designed to encourage the development of sound and
economically stable residential, commercial, industrial and public areas; to
provide for safe, convenient and efficient traffic circulation; to enhance the unique
aesthetics of the community; and to provide for the overall harmonious
development of the community in accordance with the adopted comprehensive
plan for the City of Radcliff.
1.2 Title
The full title of these regulations shall be The Subdivision Regulations of the City
of Radcliff, Kentucky. As a short title, these regulations shall be known, and may
be cited, as the Subdivision Regulations.
1.3 Authority and Administrative Agency
These standards are adopted by the Radcliff Planning Commission. Through these
standards, the Radcliff Planning Commission shall have jurisdiction and control
over the subdivision of all land within the corporate boundaries of the City of
Radcliff.
1.4 Area of Jurisdiction
The Radcliff Planning Commission, through these standards, shall have jurisdiction
and control over the subdivision of all land within the corporate boundaries of the
City of Radcliff.
1.5 Compliance with Other Codes, Statutes and Regulations
Nothing in these standards shall be construed to exempt any applicant from
compliance with all local, state and federal codes, statutes and regulations.
1.6 Waiver
These standards are adopted only as minimum requirements, and all developers
should consider developing their subdivisions at higher standards.
The Commission may also reduce or otherwise vary the requirements of these
standards. Such waivers may be granted if the Commission finds such to be true
without detriment to the public good; without impairing the purposes, basic
objectives of these standards; and without impairing the desirable general
development of the neighborhood and the community as proposed by the
Comprehensive Plan. In granting such waivers, the Commission may attach and
require whatever conditions it finds are necessary or reasonable to secure the
basic objectives of these standards. Any waiver granted by the Commission shall
be noted in its official minutes along with the findings, which justify the granting of
the waiver.
ARTICLE I-GENERAL PROVISIONS
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 1-2
1.7 Disclaimer of Liability
Notwithstanding any provisions of these regulations, no approval of any
improvement plan, subdivision plat, or portion thereof, by the Planning
Department, the Engineering Department, the Planning Commission or any other
public agency or official of the City of Radcliff, whether employed, elected or
appointed, shall operate as a warranty or guarantee of the safety or
reasonableness of any improvement plan, subdivision plat, or portion thereof, or
act in any way to limit or alter any common-law duties imposed on the developers
or authors of such plans.
1.8 Complaints Regarding Violations
Any person may file a written complaint alleging violation of these standards.
Such complaint shall state fully the cause and base thereof and shall be filed with
the Director of the Planning Department. The Director or his agent shall properly
record such complaint and investigate and take action thereon as provided by
these regulations. If found to be in violation, the Director shall notify the owner
and give the developer reasonable time to correct any violations. If the violation is
not corrected within a reasonable time, the Director may institute appropriate
legal proceedings in the court of competent jurisdiction.
1.9 Penalties for Violation
Violation of the provisions of these regulations or failure to comply with any of the
requirements contained herein shall constitute a violation.
Any person who so violates these regulations or fails to comply with any of its
requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to penalties for violation
per 5.5 Violations and Penalties of the Zoning Ordinance and Development
Regulations of the City of Radcliff .
1.10 Conflict of Regulations
Whenever these regulations, or subdivision plats or improvement plans approved
in conformance with these regulations are in conflict with other local ordinances,
regulations, or laws, the more restrictive ordinance, regulation, or law shall govern
and be enforced by the appropriate agencies. When subdivision and
development plans, approved by the Planning Commission or its appointed
representative, contains setbacks or other features in excess of the minimum
requirements, such features shown on the approved plans shall govern and shall
be enforced by the Planning Department. Private deed restrictions or private
covenants for a subdivision do not fall within the jurisdiction of enforcement by
any local agency and cannot be enforced by the Department.
ARTICLE I-GENERAL PROVISIONS
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 1-3
1.11 Separability
If any clause, sentence, subdivision, paragraph, section or part of these
regulations be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof, but shall be
confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, subdivision, paragraph, section
or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which said judgment shall
have been rendered.
1.12 Amendments
The Radcliff Planning Commission may from time to time, revise, modify or amend
these regulations by a majority vote of the Commission.
1.13 Definitions
The following words and phrases, when used in these regulations shall be defined
and interpreted as indicated.
1. Access
A way or means of approach to provide vehicular or pedestrian entrance or
exit to a property.
2. Access Classification
A ranking system for roadways used to determine the appropriate degree
of access management. Factors considered include functional classification,
the appropriate local government's adopted plan for the roadway,
subdivision of abutting properties, and existing level of access control.
3. Access Connection
Any driveway, street, turnout or other means of providing for the movement
of vehicles to or from the public roadway system.
4. Access Management
The process of providing and managing access to land development while
preserving the regional flow of traffic in terms of safety, capacity, and
speed.
5. Average Daily Traffic (ADT)
The total volume of anticipated vehicular traffic passing at a street
intersection during a 24-hour period. The anticipated ADT is determined
by utilizing the trip generation tables published by the Institute of Traffic
Engineers (ITE). The ADT anticipated on a street is predicted by the number
of vehicular trips generated by land use types.
6. Backage Road
A public or private street parallel to another public or private street that
extends along the rear side of reverse frontage lots.
ARTICLE I-GENERAL PROVISIONS
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 1-4
7. Block
A surface land area, which is separated, and distinguished, from other
surface land area by visible physical boundaries such as streets, railroads,
or other physical barriers or property line.
8. Building Setback Line
A line in the interior of a lot, which is generally parallel to, and a specified
distance from, the street right-of-way line or property lines. No building
shall then be placed in the space between the building setback line and the
right-of-way or property line.
9. Commission
The Planning Commission for the City of Radcliff, Kentucky.
10. Connection Spacing
The distance between connections, measured from the closest edge of
pavement of the first connection to the closest edge of pavement of the
second connection along the edge of the traveled way.
11. Control Monument
City of Radcliff Geodetic Control Monument. See Appendix C for typical
detail.
12. Corner Clearance
The distance from an intersection of a public or private road to the nearest
access connection, measured from the closest edge of the pavement of the
intersecting road to the closest edge of the pavement of the connection
along the traveled way.
13. Cross Access
A service drive providing vehicular access between two or more contiguous
sites so the driver need not enter the public street system.
14. Deed
A legal document conveying ownership of real property.
15. Department
The Planning Department for the City of Radcliff, Kentucky.
16. Developer
An individual, partnership, corporation or other legal entity or agent
thereof, which undertakes the activities covered by these regulations.
17. Directional Median Opening
An opening in a restrictive median which provides for specific movements
and physically restricts other movements. Directional median openings for
two opposing left or "U-turn" movements along a road segment are
considered one directional median opening.
ARTICLE I-GENERAL PROVISIONS
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 1-5
18. Easement
The right to use another person(s) property, but only for a limited and
specifically named purpose. The owner generally may continue to make
restricted use of such land since he has given up only certain, and not all,
ownership rights.
19. Engineer
A registered, licensed engineer in the State of Kentucky.
20. Environmentally Sensitive Area
Any area which, due to its natural or physical setting, may have
environmental problems with regard to its development. This is not to say
that the land cannot be developed but if it is determined that development
can occur, then some safeguards such as detailed site planning will be
necessary to overcome the physical limitations of the land. Lands in
question shall include, but shall not be limited to areas of steep slope (over
10%), floodplains, sinkholes, areas of poor soils, improper fill, wetlands,
significant areas of tree stands, aquifer recharge areas, riparian areas,
streams, creeks, lakes and other natural waterways.
21. Full Median Opening
An opening in a restrictive median that allows all turning movements from
the roadway and the intersecting road or access connection.
22. Functional Area (Intersection)
That area beyond the physical intersection of two controlled access facilities
that comprises decision and maneuver distance, plus any required vehicle
storage length, and is protected through corner clearance standards and
driveway connection spacing standards.
23. Functional Classification
A system used to group public roadways into classes according to their
purpose in moving vehicles and providing access.
24. Geological Hazard Area
Any area, due to its natural or physical setting may have environmental
problems so numerous that development, even with limitations, would pose
a severe problem to the immediate area or the surrounding area.
Examples of these areas are areas of excessive floodplain, areas that have
clustering of sinkholes, areas of severe slope (over 20%), areas that have
potential collapse problems due to caves underneath the rock strata but
close to the surface, and cliff areas.
25. Improvements
Physical changes made to raw land, and the structures placed on or under
the lands surface, in order to make the land more usable for mans
activities. Typical improvements in these regulations would be grading,
ARTICLE I-GENERAL PROVISIONS
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 1-6
street pavement, curbs, gutters, drainage ditches, storm and sanitary
sewers, and utility lines of all types.
26. Joint Access
A driveway connecting two or more contiguous sites to the public street
system.
Corner
Lot Double
Frontage
Lot
Lot
Figure 1.1 Lot, Corner Lot, and Double Frontage Lot
27. Lot
A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for transfer of
ownership for building development. Generally, lots are the basic unit of
a subdivision plan, i.e.; the smallest division of a plan designed to be
owned by one person.
28. Lot, Corner
A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at a street intersection, or
abutting upon two (2) adjoining and deflected lines of the same street and
thereby forming an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five (135)
degrees. Corner lots shall be construed to have front yards along each
abutting street, one rear yard and one side yard.
29. Lot, Depth
The average horizontal distance between the front and rear property lines
of a lot.
30. Lot, Flag
A large lot not meeting minimum frontage requirements and where access
to thepublic road is by a narrow, private right-of-way or driveway.
31. Lot, Frontage
The distance measured along the right-of-way, between the side property
lines. In the case of radii, the lot frontage is measured along the front
building setback line.
ARTICLE I-GENERAL PROVISIONS
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 1-7
32. Lot, Double Frontage (Reverse Frontage)
A lot having two (2) or more of its non-adjoining property lines abutting
upon a street or streets.
Figure 1.2 Building Setback Line, Front Lot Line, Lot Frontage,
Lot Depth, Rear Lot Line, Street Right-of-way, and Street Pavement
33. Lot Lines
The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
1. Front Lot Line - The property line dividing a lot from a street.
2. Rear Lot Line - The line opposite the front lot line.
3. Secondary Front Lot Line - The property line on a corner lot dividing
the side exposure of a principle structure from a street, or the rear of
the principle structure in the case of the lot with three front yards.
4. Side Lot Line - Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
34. Lot of Record
A lot or parcel that exists as shown or described on a plat or deed in the
records of the Clerk of the County Court.
35. Lot Width
The horizontal distance between side lot lines measured parallel to the front
lot lineat the minimum required front setback line.
36. Non-Conforming Access Features
Features of the access system of a property that existed prior to the date of
ordinance adoption and do not conform with the requirements of this code.
Street R.O.W.
Front Lot Line
Rear Lot Line
Lot
Frontage
Side Lot Line
Lot Depth
Street Pavement
Building
Setback
ARTICLE I-GENERAL PROVISIONS
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 1-8
37. Non-Restrictive Median
A median or painted centerline that does not provide a physical barrier
between traffic traveling in opposite directions or turning left, including
continuous center turn lanes and undivided roads.
38. Outparcel
A parcel of land abutting and external to the larger, main parcel, which is
under separate ownership and has roadway frontage.
39. Parcel
A part or a piece of land that cannot be identified by a lot or tract number.
40. Reasonable Access
The minimum number of access connections, direct or indirect, necessary to
provide safe access to and from the thoroughfare.
41. Restrictive Median
A physical barrier in the roadway that separates traffic traveling in opposite
directions, such as a concrete barrier or landscaped island.
42. Right-of-way
Land measuring between property lines which is dedicated for public use
and usually contains the street pavement, sidewalks, grass area, drainage
ways, and underground and above ground utilities.
43. Service Road
A public or private street or road, auxiliary to and normally located parallel
to a controlled access facility, that maintains local road continuity and
provides access to parcels adjacent to the controlled access facility.
44. Significant Change in Trip Generation
A change in the use of the property, including land, structures or facilities,
or an expansion of the size of the structures or facilities causing an increase
in the trip generation of the property.
45. State Primary Road System
The network of limited access and controlled access highways that have
been functionally classified and are under the jurisdiction of the
Commonwealth of Kentucky.
46. Street
Any public vehicular way -- a general term used to describe right-of-way
which provides a channel for vehicular and pedestrian movement between
certain points in the community, which may provide for vehicular and
pedestrian access to adjacent properties, and which may also provide
ARTICLE I-GENERAL PROVISIONS
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 1-9
space for drainage ways and the location of under-or above-ground
utilities. Streets are classified by function as follows:
1. Freeway - A multi-lane divided highway having a minimum of
two lanes in each direction for exclusive use of through traffic.
Access is fully controlled, with full grade separation at
interchanges.
2. Expressway  A divided arterial highway that serves throughtraffic.
Access is partially controlled, with full or partial grade
separations at major intersections.
3. Arterial  High volume roadways that serve primarily throughtraffic
at relatively high speeds. The provision of direct access
to abutting land is subordinate to providing service to through
traffic.
4. Collector  Streets having the dual function of providing land
access and traffic circulation service within residential,
commercial and industrial areas. Collector streets provide
the connecting link between local streets and the arterial
network.
5. Local  Streets that provide the greatest degree of access to
abutting property. A local street, while serving access to
adjacent parcels, must facilitate traffic movement within a
development. Service of through traffic on local streets is
clearly subordinate and even discouraged by low posted
speeds, street design and signing or signalization which
causes frequent stops.
47. Street, Private
Any street or thoroughfare for vehicular travel which is privately owned and
maintained and which provides the principal means of access to abutting
properties.
48. Street. Public
A street under the jurisdiction of a public body that provides the principal
means of access to an abutting property.
49. Stub-Out (Stub-Street)
A portion of a street or cross access drive used as an extension to an
abutting property that may be developed in the future.
50. Subdivision
The division of land into two (2) or more lots or parcels for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of sale, lease or building development, or if a
new street is involved, any division of a parcel of land, provided that a
ARTICLE I-GENERAL PROVISIONS
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 1-10
division of land for agricultural use and not involving a new street shall not
be deemed a subdivision. The term includes re-subdivision and when
appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdivision or to
land subdivided; any division or re-division of land into parcels of less than
one (1) acre occurring within twelve (12) months following a division of the
same land shall be deemed a subdivision. For the purposes of these
regulations, two classes of subdivisions shall be established as follows:
1. Minor Subdivision - Minor Subdivisions include only those
subdivisions which have a maximum of five (5) lots and which do
not propose the creation of a new street.
2. Major Subdivision - All subdivisions, which do not conform to the
definition, established for minor subdivisions shall be considered as
major subdivisions. Any subdivision proposing the creation of a new
street shall automatically be considered as, and follow the
requirements for, a major subdivision.
51. Subdivision Plat  The map of a subdivision.
52. Subdivision Plat, Consolidation - Consolidation subdivision plats shall be a
subdivision plat in which one or more lots are transferred between
adjoining properties which share at least one common boundary for the
purpose of changing the lot boundaries of one or more properties, or to
combine at least two properties into a lesser number of lots than originally
existed. No consolidation may result in there being more separate
transferable lots after consolidation than prior to consolidation.
53. Subdivision Plat, Corrected - Corrected subdivision plats shall be
amendments to existing plats for the purpose of correcting an obvious error
of an engineering, drafting or clerical nature, release or modification of
existing easements, the addition of new easements, or other changes of a
significant planning nature, such as, but not limited to, changes which
affect building lines or street requirements. Such changes of a significant
planning nature shall be considered as a major subdivision unless they
meet the requirements for another type of amendment.
54. Subdivision Identification Sign
Any wall(s), fence, guardhouse or similar structure exceeding four (4) feet in
height, constructed at an entrance to any subdivision.
55. Surety
A contract guaranteeing the developers obligation to the City to complete
subdivision improvements.
56. Tract
A plot of land intended for development; the largest division of land
ARTICLE I-GENERAL PROVISIONS
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 1-11
Street Pavement
Figure 1.3 Front yards, Secondary Front Yard, Side Yards, and Rear Yards on a
Corner Lot and an Interior Lot
57. Yard
An open space extending the full width of the lot between a principle
structure and the lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground
upward.
1. Front Yard - An open space extending the full width of the lot
between a principal structure and the front lot line, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward. The depth of a front yard is
the shortest distance measured perpendicularly between any part of
a building and the front lot line.
2. Rear Yard - An open space extending the full width of a lot between
a principle structure and the rear lot line, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward. The depth of a rear yard in
the shortest distance measured perpendicularly between any part of
a building and the rear lot line.
3. Secondary Front Yard - An open space extending the full width of
the lot line between a principal structure and the secondary front lot
line of a corner lot, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground
upward. The secondary front yard will be that front yard that is
parallel to the side exposure of the principal structure, or the rear
exposure of the principal in the case of a lot with three (3) front
yards. The depth of the secondary front yard is the shortest distance
measured perpendicularly between any part of a building and the
secondary front lot line.
4. Side Yard - An open space between a principal structure and a side
lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward. The
width of a side yard is the shortest distance measured
perpendicularly between any part of a building and the nearest side
lot line.
Rear Yard Rear Yard
Front Front Yard
Side Yard
Side Yard
Side Yard
Secondary Front
ARTICLE II-SUBDIVISION PROCEDURE
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 2-1
2.1 Purpose
The purpose of this article is to establish the procedure to be followed by the
developer and the Commission in reviewing and approving all minor and major
subdivision plats.
2.2 Minor Subdivision Plat Procedure
The developer shall submit the following materials with the Department:
 an application filing fee;
 one copy of the deed(s) of the property to be subdivided;
 one (1) mylar tracing of the plan;
 five (5) prints of the tracing; and
 a digital drawing of the plan on diskette compatible with the Citys
computer mapping system.
The Department shall review the minor record plat for compliance with applicable
requirements in the Zoning Ordinance and Development Regulations and the
Subdivision Regulations. Upon determination that all requirements have been
met, the Director shall certify the minor record plat as approved. If any questions
arise as to the compliance, however, the plat shall be referred to the Commission
for action. After approval, the Department will record the minor record plat in the
Hardin County Clerks office in a timely manner and notify the owner(s) of the plat
cabinet and sheet number.
2.3 Major Subdivision Plat Overview
The following plan types are hereby created and defined as needed for a major
subdivision:
2.3.1 Preliminary Subdivision Plat
All proposed major subdivisions, with the exception of major subdivisions
recorded as a single record plat section, shall be first considered by the
Commission as a preliminary subdivision plat. No lot may be sold or
transferred, or building permit obtained, based on the approved
preliminary subdivision plat.
2.3.2 Improvement Plans
The improvement plans are detailed construction plans for all
improvements to be developed in conjunction with the subdivision, such
as streets (public or private), storm drainage, sanitary sewers, water
systems and other facilities. Upon approval of these plans by the
Engineering Department, the developer may construct such
improvements in accordance with the approved improvement plans.
These plans may be submitted for concurrent review with the
preliminary subdivision plat.
ARTICLE II-SUBDIVISION PROCEDURE
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 2-2
Figure 2.1 Major Subdivision Plat Overview
2.3.3 Record Subdivision Plat
Following approval of the preliminary subdivision plat and the
improvement plans, a major subdivision shall be reviewed by the
Department as a record plat. After approval of the record plat by the
Department and after recording, lots may be sold or transferred and
building permits obtained in accordance with the approved record plat.
2.4 Preliminary Plat Procedure
All preliminary subdivision plats shall be processed as follows:
2.4.1 Pre-Application Conference
At least ten (10) working days prior to the filing of a preliminary
subdivision plat, the developer and his agent shall prepare a rough
sketch of the proposal and meet with the Department and the
Engineering Department to discuss subdivision requirements and
procedures, and possible issues related to the development of the
property in question. The developer or his agent shall present for
discussion a rough sketch showing the boundaries of the proposed
subdivision, the proposed location and widths of streets, lotting
schemes, drainage patterns plus any other pertinent information. The
Department shall not accept any application for a preliminary
subdivision plat approval unless the provisions of this Article have been
met.
Preliminary
Plat
Planning Department
Improvement
Plans
Engineering Department
Record
Plat
Planning Department
ARTICLE II-SUBDIVISION PROCEDURE
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 2-3
2.4.2 Application and Distribution
To initiate formal review of a preliminary subdivision plat, the
developer shall file the following no fewer than thirty (30) calendar
days before the date of the Commissions scheduled meeting at which
the subdivision is to be considered:
 a completed application and filing fee,
 a copy of the deed(s) of the property to be subdivided, and
 two (2) prints.
The Department shall notify all concerned agencies of the submission
of the preliminary subdivision plat.
2.4.3 Review
The Department and concerned agencies shall review the preliminary
plat within fifteen (15) working days from the date of submission and
meet to try to resolve all differences and to make recommendations to
the Commission. No preliminary plat deemed to be incomplete will be
recommended to the Commission and therefore are considered
disapproved.
2.4.4 Meeting Requirements
The Commission shall consider no preliminary plat for action until it
has been reviewed and recommendations made by the Department.
All preliminary plats shall be approved or disapproved within sixty (60)
days from the date they are officially filed with the Department, if no
action is taken by the Commission within sixty (60) days it shall be
deemed disapproved.
For the Commission meeting, the developer shall provide the following
at least seven days prior to the scheduled meeting:
 seven (7) prints of the plat.
2.4.5 Commission Action
The Commission will review the Departments recommendation and
then act for approval, postponement or disapproval. Reasons for
action of postponement or disapproval shall be fully incorporated in
the Commissions minutes and shall be available to the developer and
the public.
Commission approval authorizes the developer to proceed with the
preparation of the required improvement plans. Preliminary plat
approval grants a developer two (2) years within which he shall submit
a record plat for approval for all properties shown on the preliminary
ARTICLE II-SUBDIVISION PROCEDURE
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 2-4
plat. Before expiration, the Commission may extend the approval, in
increments not to exceed one year at a time, provided that the
Commission finds that progress has been made in the physical
construction of improvements. In conjunction with such approval
extensions, the Commission shall have the right to require changes in
the development when it finds that time has necessitated such changes
for the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the community, or
when applicable ordinances and regulations have been changed.
Upon the expiration of any approval periods specified under this
Article, the plat shall be deemed not in conformance with these
regulations and require re-submission.
The City Engineer shall not approve any improvement plans for a
subdivision unless he has received a signed copy of the preliminary
plat.
ARTICLE II-SUBDIVISION PROCEDURE
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 2-5
Figure 2.2 Preliminary Plat Procedure
Pre-Application
Conference
Planning Department
Application, Fee
and Preliminary
Plat Submitted
Planning Department
Review
Appropriate City
Departments
Staff Report
Completed
Planning Department
Planning
Commission
Decision
Planning Department
Notice of
Decision Sent
Planning Department
Approved
Preliminary Plat
Distribution
Planning Department
if
disapproved
ARTICLE II-SUBDIVISION PROCEDURE
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 2-6
2.5 Improvement Plans Procedure
All improvement plans shall be processed as follows:
2.5.1 Application and Distribution
The developer shall submit one complete set of improvement plans,
showing all public improvements associated with the subdivision,
prepared and stamped by a professional engineer registered to
practice in the State of Kentucky, and fully conforming to these
regulations.
2.5.2 Review
The Engineering Department shall review the proposed improvement
plans and within thirty (30) days, notify the Department of the approval
or disapproval of the plan. Failure of the Engineering Department to
review plans within thirty (30) days does not constitute approval. If
disapproved, the project engineer may resubmit the corrected
improvement plans, accompanied by the copy previously reviewed.
Upon approval of the improvement plans, the developer may proceed
with the finalization of the record plat and the pre-construction
meeting.
2.5.3 Pre-construction Meeting
Before construction begins, the project engineer and the contractor(s)
completing the physical improvements shall meet with the Engineering
Department to discuss improvement plans, schedule of construction
phases, installation of erosion control, and difficulties that may arise
during construction. After the pre-construction meeting, the developer
is authorized to proceed with the construction of physical
improvements.
ARTICLE II-SUBDIVISION PROCEDURE
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 2-7
Figure 2.3 Improvement Plan Procedure
2.6 Record Plat Procedure
All major record plats shall be filed with the Department within two (2) years of
approval of the preliminary plat. The developer shall submit the following
materials with the Department:
 a completed application and filing fees;
 one (1) mylar tracing of the plan;
 five (5) prints of the tracing; and
 a digital drawing of the plat on diskette compatible with the Citys
computer mapping system.
The Department shall review the plat for compliance with applicable requirements
in these regulations and the Zoning Ordinance and Development Regulations.
Upon determination that all requirements have been met, the Director of the
Department shall certify the plat as approved. If any questions arise as to the
compliance, however, this plat shall be referred to the Commission for action.
After approval, the Department will record the plat in the Hardin County Clerks
office in a timely manner and notify the owner(s) of the plat cabinet and sheet
number.
Review
Engineering Department
Letter of Decision
Sent
to Developer and Project
Engineer
Engineering Department
Pre-Construction
Meeting
Engineering Department
if
disapproved
Improvement Plans
Submitted
Engineering Department
ARTICLE II-SUBDIVISION PROCEDURE
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 2-8
Figure 2.4 Record Plat Procedure
Application, Fees,
and Record
Plat Submitted
Planning Department
Review
Planning Department
Return to Project
Engineer
Planning Department
Plat Corrections
Project Engineer
Record Plat
Signed
with assurance of improvements
Copies
Distributed
Planning Department
Plat Filed At
Hardin County
Clerks Office
Planning Department
ARTICLE II-SUBDIVISION PROCEDURE
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 2-9
2.6.1 Conformance with Preliminary Plat and Review
The record plat is a legal record of the subdivision as surveyed in the
field and must agree with the approved preliminary plat, except that
record plats covering a portion of the approved preliminary plat may be
submitted. The Department shall review the record plats for
conformance with the preliminary plat within ten (10) days of the date of
submission. Upon determination that all requirements have been met
and that the plats are in agreement, the Director of the Department
shall certify the plats as approved. The Department will notify the
Commission of its actions, and have the action recorded in the minutes
of the Commission.
If the record plats are found to be in disagreement with these
regulations and/or with the approved preliminary plats, the Department
shall notify the applicant in writing of the reasons for disapproval.
The Department may approve a record plat that is found to be in
disagreement with the approved preliminary plat if the Department
determines the changes are of minor planning significance. Those
changes deemed to be minor are: a decrease in density with street
design remaining the same, decrease of number of lots by 10% or less
with street design remaining the same, or an adjustment of lot lines with
the street design remaining the same. The Department shall notify the
Commission of its actions after approving a record plat that is in
disagreement with the approved preliminary plat.
2.7 Completion of Improvements
Developers may begin construction of improvements after the preliminary plat and
improvement plans have been fully approved. If such improvements have not
been fully constructed at the time of consideration of the record plat, the
Commission may, but is not required to do so, permit the plat to be approved and
recorded prior to completion of such improvements. For any such case, an
acceptable surety must be posted by the developer to cover the full cost of
completing the incomplete improvements. The following requirements and
procedures shall apply to such surety.
2.7.1 Acceptable Sureties
Acceptable sureties shall be either an irrevocable letter of credit or a
certificate of deposit in favor of the City, or a performance bond in
favor of the City from a reputable bonding company acceptable to the
City. Any surety shall establish a completion date after which the City of
Radcliff shall call the surety and cause the work to be constructed.
2.7.2 Determination of Surety Amount
The Engineering Department shall determine the amount of the surety
based upon the estimated cost which would be incurred by the City to
construct the unfinished improvements including an estimated cost for
engineering, contingencies and inflation. The developers engineer
ARTICLE II-SUBDIVISION PROCEDURE
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 2-10
shall prepare and stamp an itemized cost estimate of all improvements
to be installed as part of the development. A separate cost estimate
showing remaining items to be completed shall also be submitted. The
initial surety shall never be less than 10% of the cost to install all
physical improvements of the development. The Engineering
Department shall review this estimate for accuracy and conformance
with the improvement plans and then establish the amount of the surety.
The City and the developer will also make a written agreement, stating
the improvements to be completed, as covered by the surety. Upon
receipt of the surety in the established amount from the developer and
the written agreement, the authorized City official will certify the record
plat. The plat will then be forwarded to the Department for certification
by the Director.
2.7.3 Surety Period
All required improvements should be satisfactorily installed within (2)
years of final plat approval by the Department.
In order to assure completion of and warranty of the approved
improvements, the developer shall maintain a surety through the
completion of the warranty period of all improvements. If construction
of the improvements is completed within one (1) year, the surety period
may be reduced in order to maintain a one-year warranty period.
2.7.4 Reduction of Surety
Two reductions in the amount of the surety will be permitted prior to the
warranty period. At least 10% of the original cost to install all physical
improvements shall be maintained through the warranty period.
2.7.5 Release of Surety
Upon written request from the developer, the City will accept the new
public improvements for ownership and continuous maintenance after
approval by the City. The request shall be accompanied by the
following:
 A letter from the developers engineer certifying that Control
Monuments, materials, construction, and testing comply with City
specifications.
 A written confirmation from the Engineering Department that all
improvements have been satisfactorily completed in accordance
with the approved plans and regulations.
 One (1) mylar and two (2) prints of the As-Built drawings.
ARTICLE II-SUBDIVISION PROCEDURE
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 2-11
 A digital drawing of the plan on diskette compatible with the
Citys computer mapping system.
The developer shall be notified of the initial acceptance date. This date
shall begin a one (1) year warranty period during which the City will
periodically inspect the streets and storm water system and the developer or
his contractor will be responsible for correction of any defects found. After
the one-year warranty period expires and all defects are corrected, the City
will permanently accept the streets and storm water drainage system for
continuous maintenance and the surety may be released.
2.8 Procedures for Environmentally Sensitive or Geologic Hazard Areas
Whenever a subdivision is proposed on land containing an environmentally
sensitive area or geologic hazard area, the developer shall submit the following
materials to the Department:
 An application, containing a general statement of development
activity and mitigation plans,
 A subdivision plat as required by these subdivision regulations,
which shall locate and identify such areas.
Additionally, other materials may be required after initial review by the
Department, including but not limited to:
 Engineering studies of sub-surface conditions,
 Erosion and sedimentation control plans,
 Drainage plans,
 Soil analysis, or
 Grading plans.
2.8.1 Commission Review
After review of the applications general statement and applicable
plans, if the Department finds that questions remain concerning the
developments impact on the environmentally sensitive or geologic
hazard area or the health and safety of future users of the area, the
plan will be referred to the Commission for action. The Commission
may refuse to fully approve a plat until it is satisfied that the hazards
have been eliminated or adequate safeguards have been provided
to ensure the least negative impact on the area.
2.9 Amendments to Plans
Any amended preliminary plat, improvement plan, or record plat shall follow the
same procedures as required for the original submission.
ARTICLE III-SUBDIVISION PLAT CONTENT
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 3-1
3.1 Purpose
The purpose of this article is to describe the minimum content and format of
required plan materials before they can be considered as officially filed for
Commission review.
3.2 Minor Subdivision Plat Content Requirements
The developer is required to provide the information and follow the same
requirements applicable to a record plat for a major subdivision. The following
additional requirements shall be applicable to the type of minor subdivision so
indicated.
3.2.1 Consolidation Plat
The developer or authorized agent shall consult with the Department to
determine appropriate lot labeling and wording of the consolidation
note. Connotation shall be added stating that the transferred parcels
shall not be available for future transfer without the newly created lots.
3.3 Preliminary Plat Requirements
The following information and requirements shall be applicable to any submission
for Commission consideration or a preliminary subdivision plat.
3.3.1 Drawing Size
The plat shall be 24x 36.
3.3.2 Authorization to Prepare Plats
Preliminary subdivision plats may be prepared only by a registered
professional engineer, registered landscape architect, or registered land
surveyor. However, certain information associated with the plat may be
required to be provided only by a registered professional engineer, such
as drainage calculations (including sizing of retention/detention basins,
pipes and culverts), preliminary estimates of street grades and
preliminary storm water design information. Plats will only be accepted
by the Department if the registered professional develops plans in
accordance with the current Zoning Ordinance and Development
Regulations and the Subdivision Regulations.
3.3.3 Title Block
The title block shall be placed on the bottom of the sheet and shall
contain the following:
 the subdivision name, which shall not duplicate nor closely
approximate the name of any other subdivision in Hardin
County, preceded by the words Preliminary Plat of (subdivision
name),
 the record name and mailing address of the property being
subdivided,
 the name, mailing address and phone number of the property
owner(s),
ARTICLE III-SUBDIVISION PLAT CONTENT
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 3-2
 the name, mailing address and phone number of the
developer(s),
 the name, mailing address , phone number and fax number of
the registered professional engineer preparing the plans and any
other persons directly involved in the transaction,
 graphic and written scale,
 north arrow,
 date of preparation,
 Property Valuation Administration (PVA) number of property
being subdivided, and
 other pertinent legend data.
3.3.4 Vicinity Sketch
A sketch showing the general location of the subdivision in relation to
the surrounding area and community features such as major traffic
arteries, public transportation, schools, recreation areas, shopping
areas, industrial areas and residential neighborhoods, with the sketch
oriented in the same direction as the lotting scheme.
3.3.5 Lotting Scheme
The lotting scheme shall be drawn at scale of one hundred (100) feet or
less to the inch, or other scale as approved by the Department, north
oriented to the top of sheet and show the following existing and
proposed features on the subject property.
A. The location, distance and bearings for boundary lines and location,
width and purpose of all easement lines.
B. The street name (which shall not be the same nor closely
approximate, phonetically or in spelling, the name of any other
street in Hardin County), location, pavement width, right-of-way
width, angles of intersection, street grade, and typical cross section.
C. The location and distance for lot lines, lot numbers, and the building
setback lines with dimensions showing the distance setback from the
street right-of-way.
D. The location, size and invert elevation of storm sewers, location of
sewer and water mains, location of gas lines, fire hydrants, electric
and telephone poles or underground wires and street lights (show
those existing within and adjacent to the proposed subdivision only).
E. Contours with two (2) foot vertical intervals, reference to a
permanent City of Radcliff benchmark or other datum approved by
the Engineering Department. Source of contours shall be noted.
ARTICLE III-SUBDIVISION PLAT CONTENT
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 3-3
F. When required, location and results of tests made to ascertain
subsurface soil, rock and ground water conditions, especially for
septic tanks, street construction or flood hazards.
G. The name, acreage and use of any parcels to be conveyed or held
for public use or for joint use of property owners, and an
explanation of the provisions of reservation and arrangement for
maintenance; and name, acreage and use of any non-public uses.
H. Areas of substantial existing trees shall be shown including those
located along fence rows and drainage areas.
I. The location of watercourses shall be shown, as well as the location
of any floodplain areas and the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
identification number. The elevation of the regulatory flood shall be
labeled where such information is available. The general location of
any proposed storm water retention basin and/or stream relocation
shall also be shown.
J. Any areas of geological hazard or environmental sensitivity as
defined in these standards shall be shown on the lotting scheme and
labeled as to their nature. Additional information as required by
these standards shall also be filed.
K. Other conditions such as ponds, marshes, sinkholes, or other
significant natural or manmade features and other information
related to the adjoining land as necessary to ensure proper
continuity of storm drainage, sanitary sewers, street grades and
other facilities.
L. The names of adjacent subdivisions and/or the names of recorded
owners of adjacent unsubdivided land and deed book or plat
cabinet and sheet number. Zoning and land use classifications of
all adjacent properties shall be indicated.
M. The location of the buffer zone area when the subdivision is adjacent
to an incompatible land use.
N. The location of existing political boundaries, school district
boundaries, and utility company boundaries if within more than one
service area.
3.3.6 Site Statistics
Site statistics shall include the total acreage; in street right-of-way and
single-family lots, acreage of other land uses, average lot sizes, lineal
feet of streets, zoning and land use classification, and density of
development.
ARTICLE III-SUBDIVISION PLAT CONTENT
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 3-4
3.3.7 Certification Block for Preliminary Plats
The certification block shall contain the following certifications along
with required signatures as follows:
Owners Certification
The owner(s) shall certify as follows:
(I, We) certify that (I am, we are) the owner(s) of the property platted
herein and accept this as (my, our) preliminary plat for development
of this property.
Owner(s) Title Date
Commission Certification
Upon acceptance of the preliminary plat, the Commission shall certify
as follows:
I certify that this preliminary plat has been approved in accordance
with the regulations administered by the Radcliff Planning
Commission.
Chairman or Authorized Agent Date
Preliminary Utility Certification
The owner(s) engineer/surveyor shall certify as follows:
I hereby certify I have submitted a copy of this preliminary plat to all
utility companies within the project area (list company names).
Engineer/Surveyor Title Date
3.4 Improvement Plan Requirements
This plan shall be sufficient to show the proposed locations, sizes, types, grades
and general design features of each facility as required by the Engineering
Department; be based upon reliable field data; and meet the following
requirements at a minimum.
The plan shall be to a horizontal scale of one inch (1) is equal to fifty (50) feet
and a vertical scale of one-inch (1) is equal to ten (10) or five (5) feet, on a 24 x
36 sheet size unless otherwise approved by the Engineering Department.
3.4.1 Title Block
The plan shall contain title block information as for the preliminary plat
and sheet title. Each sheet shall be numbered sequentially with each
ARTICLE III-SUBDIVISION PLAT CONTENT
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 3-5
sheet showing the total number in the set. A north arrow and graphic
scale shall be on all sheets of the plan.
3.4.2 Authorization to Prepare Plans
All improvement plan materials shall be prepared by a registered
professional engineer. Each page of the improvement plan materials
shall be certified with the seal of the engineer and his or her signature.
3.4.3 Street Plan
The plans shall show the plan and profile of each proposed street both
within the subdivision and a minimum of 300 feet beyond the tract. The
street plans shall show all curve data, edges of pavement, sidewalks,
rights-of-ways, property lines, ditch lines, top of banks, and toe of slope.
The street profile shall show all elevations and distances for the existing
ground and the proposed grade surface, special ditches, storm sewers,
and utility crossings.
3.4.4 Typical Street Cross Section
A typical cross section of each proposed street or other construction item
shall show the width and depth of pavement, the location and width
and depth of sidewalks and rights-of-ways, cross slopes of ditch lines if
not curb and gutter.
3.4.5 Drainage Plan
Storm water drainage plans shall show the location and profiles of
proposed storm water drainage sewers, channels or other drainage
ways along proposed streets and easement. All drainage plans should
indicate the following information as applicable:
 Drainage appurtenances, such as drop boxes, curb and gutter
inlets, flumes, headwalls, and street culverts,
 Pipes and ditch details,
 Entrance tile sizes for each lot,
 Direction of flow,
 Channel slope protection,
 Retention and/or detention areas, and
 Easements
3.4.6 Drainage Calculations
Design calculations for all drainage facilities including
detention/retention basins, storm water pipes and drainage channels.
Drainage calculations may be submitted in a binder folder, with the
cover sheet signed and stamped by the engineer.
3.4.7 Erosion Control Plan
The location of all erosion and sediment control facilities shall be shown
on the plan, with detail drawing of each type of facility being used.
ARTICLE III-SUBDIVISION PLAT CONTENT
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 3-6
Scheduling and specifications of sodding, seeding and other vegetative
BMPs shall be indicated.
An inspection and maintenance plan for both structural and vegetative
BMPs to insure functioning of practices and to protect downstream
areas from excessive sedimentation may be required by the Engineering
Department.
3.4.8 Utility Plan
The plans shall indicate the existing and/or proposed location of sewer
lines and appurtenances, water mains, water hydrants, water meters,
electric lines (overhead and underground), transformers, guide-wires,
natural gas, telephone, street lights, cable television and other public
utilities. The plans shall show lines, poles and any other necessary
facilities.
3.5 Record Plat Requirements
The following information and requirements shall be applicable to any submission
for Commission consideration of a record subdivision plat.
3.5.1 Drawing Size
The plats shall be 24 x 36.
3.5.2 Authorization for Plat Preparation
Record subdivision plats must be prepared by a registered land
surveyor.
3.5.3 Title Block and Vicinity Sketch
The title block shall be placed on the bottom of the sheet and shall
contain the following:
 the subdivision name, which shall not duplicate nor closely
approximate the name of any other subdivision in Hardin
County, preceded by the words Record Plat of (subdivision
name),
 the record name and mailing address of the property being
subdivided,
 the name, mailing address and phone number of the property
owner(s),
 the name, mailing address and phone number of the
developer(s),
 the name, mailing address , phone number and fax number of
the registered professional engineer preparing the plans as and
any other persons directly involved in the transaction,
 graphic and written scale,
 north arrow,
 date of preparation,
ARTICLE III-SUBDIVISION PLAT CONTENT
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 3-7
 Property Valuation Administration (PVA) number of property
being subdivided, and
 Other pertinent legend data.
3.5.4 Lotting Scheme
The lotting scheme shall be drawn at a scale of one hundred (100) feet
or less to the inch, north oriented to top of the sheet and shall show the
following:
A. For adjacent land, show the exact location of adjoining streets with
dashed lines; show the bearings and distances to nearest
established street bounds, established survey lines or other official
monuments; and for adjacent property, show the boundaries with
dashed lines and the record name of the subdivision or owners
name.
B. Show the subdivision tract boundary lines with lengths of course to
hundredths of a foot and bearings to nearest five (5) seconds of an
arc, determined by an accurate survey in the field.
C. For street right-of-way, show the names, bearings, angles of
intersections and widths. For all arcs, show the length of the radii,
points of curvance and tangent bearings. For all lot lines, show
dimensions in feet and hundredths and bearings and angles to
minutes if other than right angles to the street of lines.
D. All easements shall be shown and clearly labeled as to their width
and purpose.
E. All floodplain areas shall be shown and clearly labeled and where
available, the actual computed elevation of the regulatory flood
shall be noted, as well as the FIRM identification number.
F. Show lots numbered in numerical order, and street address
numbers for each lot.
G. Show the accurate location, description, and material of all
monuments.
H. Show all property intended for pubic use or dedication and for
common use of property owners.
I. Show building setback lines.
J. The names of adjacent subdivisions and/or the names of recorded
owners of adjacent un-subdivided land and deed book and page
ARTICLE III-SUBDIVISION PLAT CONTENT
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 3-8
or plat cabinet and sheet number. Zoning and land use
classifications of all adjacent properties shall be indicated.
3.5.5 Site Statistics
Site statistics shall include the total acreage; in street right-of-way and
single-family lots, acreage of other land uses, average lot sizes, lineal
feet of streets, zoning and land use classification, and density of
development.
3.5.6 Proposed Private Utilities
A listing of the private utilities (those improvements generally not later
dedicated to and maintained by local government such as electricity,
telephone, and at times, water, gas, and sewage disposal), whether or
not the developer intends to have them provided, agency or means by
which they are to be provided and agency which will supervise or
approve any installation.
3.5.7 Notes
Any informational or restrictive notes to be included on the plat shall be
numbered in sequential order and grouped together as one list
whenever possible.
3.5.7.1 Easement Maintenance Note
All lot owners are responsible for the upkeep of
easements on their lot, including ditches, swales and
other vegetated areas unless the City has accepted
responsibility for maintaining the area.
3.5.7.2 Sidewalk Maintenance Note
All lot owners are responsible for the maintenance of
all required sidewalks adjacent to their property.
3.5.7.3 Monumentation Note
All monumentation shall be indicated as required in Article 4,
Section 6 of these subdivision regulations.
ARTICLE III-SUBDIVISION PLAT CONTENT
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 3-9
3.5.8 Certification Block for Record Plats
Certification block shall contain the following certification along with
required signatures.
Surveyors Certification
The land surveyor who prepared the plat shall certify as follows:
I certify that this plat was prepared by me or under my direction; that
all monuments indicated here do actually exist and that their
locations, size and material are correctly indicated; and that the
information shown herein is correct to the best of my knowledge and
belief.
Signature Date
Registration Number
The land surveyor shall also stamp the plat.
Utility Certification
Utility/Telecommunications companies shall certify as follows:
I, being a duly authorized agent of the cited
utility/telecommunications company, accept the easements shown on
this record plat on behalf of my company.
If previous easements are to be released, the following phrase shall be
inserted at the end of the certification shown above:
I also release any easements that have been approved previously.
Representative Date
Company
ARTICLE III-SUBDIVISION PLAT CONTENT
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 3-10
Owners Certification
The owner(s) shall certify as follows:
(I, We) certify that (I am, we are) the owner(s) of this property, as
recorded in deed book ___ page ___ in the Hardin County Clerks
office, and that we adopt this subdivision plat with our free consent,
establish the minimum building lines, and dedicate all streets,
drainage ways, walks, public utility lines, parks and other open
spaces to public use as noted and illustrated. I understand and
agree that if the City of Radcliff has to use the financial surety to
complete the improvements, any unused funds will be returned to
the developer. If the cost is more than the surety, then the developer
/owner shall pay the difference.
Owner(s) Title Date
Notary Certification
Each owners signature shall be notarized as follows:
I certify that I am a notary for the State-At-Large. I further certify that
the above signature(s) (is, are) legal and (has, have) been executed
voluntarily, to the best of my knowledge and belief.
Notary Public Date
Date Commission Expires
Water and Sewer Certification
Water and Sewer Utilities shall certify as follows:
I certify that the water supply system and sewage disposal systems
installed or proposed for installation in this subdivision fully meet all
requirements and are approved.
Representative Date
Company
ARTICLE III-SUBDIVISION PLAT CONTENT
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 3-11
Improvement Certification
An official with jurisdiction shall certify the following:
I certify that the improvement plans for this subdivision have been
reviewed and are in conformance with all appropriate regulations. I
further certify that a financial surety in the amount of $
has been posted to assure completion of all required improvements
in case of default.
Jurisdiction Official Date
Commission Certification
Upon acceptance of the record plat, the Commission shall certify the
following:
I certify that this record plat has been approved in accordance with
the regulations administered by the Radcliff Planning Commission,
and that this plat is now eligible for recording.
Chairman or Authorized Agent Date
3.5.9 Amendments
The required content and format of any amendment to a subdivision
plat shall be the same as for the original submission. In addition, the
plat title shall be labeled to indicate the plat as an Amended (type of
plat) of (subdivision name); and a note shall be included on the plat
setting forth the specific purpose of the requested amendment. No plat
changes shall be considered in effect unless it is referenced in this note.
3.6 As-Built Improvement Plans
This plan shall generally include the same information as required for
improvement plans, except that the as-built plan shall accurately
reflect the actual installation of the improvements and shall be labeled
As-Built Improvement Plan in the title box.
ARTICLE IV-DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 4-1
4.0 Purpose
The purpose of this article is to establish the basic and minimum design and
improvement standards, which will be required for lots, streets, utilities, and other
physical elements in the subdivision.
4.1 General Requirements
Certified engineering plans and specifications for subdivision improvements shall
be provided as required by Article 3, Section 4 of this document. All
improvements shall be designed and constructed according to standard
engineering practice. It is the responsibility of the developer and his/her engineer
to obtain the best available design and construction.
Existing features which are assets to the community and subdivision area shall be
preserved as much as possible through harmonious design of the subdivision.
Examples of such features are groups of existing trees, watercourses, historic
buildings, and similar irreplaceable physical assets.
All construction shall be protected from flooding and erosion damage. Open
pipes shall be protected from filing with mud or debris. Erosion and flooding
control shall be exercised during construction to prevent damage to property
adjacent to the development. Silt dams, retention basins, or other protections are
required as needed.
4.2 Block and Lot Standards
The following shall be the minimum standards for lots and blocks:
4.2.1 Block Standards
In general, intersecting streets which determine block lengths shall be
provided as such intervals as necessary to meet existing street patterns,
topography and requirements for safe and convenient vehicular and
pedestrian circulation. Residential blocks shall not exceed one thousand
five hundred (1,500) feet in length, with a block width generally sufficient
to allow two tiers of lots of appropriate depths. Non-residential blocks
shall be of such length, width and other design as the Commission finds
necessary for the prospective use including appropriate provision for offstreet
parking, truck loading and unloading, buffer areas, pedestrian
movement and proper vehicular access to adjacent streets.
4.2.2 Lot Shapes
Excessive depth in relation to width should be avoided, with a proportion
of two and one-half (2 ) to one (1) normally being considered as a
desirable maximum for lot widths of seventy-five (75) feet or greater.
Pointed or very irregularly shaped lots shall be avoided where possible.
Additional depth of at least twenty (20) feet over the typical lot depth
shall be required on lots which back up to railroads, major streets,
commercial or industrial areas or other conflicting land uses.
ARTICLE IV-DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 4-2
4.2.3 Lot Frontage and Access
All lots shall abut an approved right-of-way for at least the minimum
frontage required by the zoning category in which the lot is located.
Frontage shall be measured at the street right-of-way line, except that in
cases where curved streets or cul-de-sac radii are involved, measurement
shall be taken at the building setback line as set forth in the zoning
category in which the lot is located, or if more restrictive, as set forth on
the subdivision plat. All lots shall be designed so as to provide safe,
convenient vehicular traffic and pedestrian access to the street.
Land reserved for public use, as stated in 4.5.1, may have this frontage
requirement waived by the Commission to no less than twenty (20) feet.
4.2.4 Lot Lines
Side lot lines should be at right angles to the straight street centerline
and radial to curved street centerline. Rear lot lines should consist of
straight line with a minimum number of deflections.
4.2.5 Lot Area and Minimum Setback Lines
Lots shall meet the minimum standards required by the Zoning
Ordinance and Development Regulations. The Commission may require
increased setbacks along collector and arterial streets, floodways, or
environmentally sensitive areas.
4.2.6 Corner Lots
Corner lots should be of sufficient width and depth to equal non-corner
lots in subdivisions plus sufficient area to comply with the required
minimum building setback lines on each street frontage.
4.2.7 Double Frontage Lots
Double frontage lots shall be prohibited except where employed to
prevent excessive vehicular driveway access to street or to separate
residential areas from other areas of conflicting land or traffic use.
4.2.8 Land Remnants
If remnants of land exist after subdividing and have no apparent future
use, which can be properly controlled, they shall be incorporated into
lots of the proposed lotting scheme.
4.2.9 Street Addresses
Street address numbers shall be assigned to each lot by the Department
in order to provide a separate and distinct address for each lot.
4.3 Street and Sidewalk Standards
The following guidelines shall be considered when laying out proposed
transportation system:
 Adequate vehicular and pedestrian access should be provided to all
lots,
ARTICLE IV-DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 4-3
 Local street systems shall be designed to minimize through traffic
movements,
 The layout of a local street system should not create excessive travel
lengths,
 Local circulation systems and land development patterns should not
detract from the efficiency of adjacent major streets,
 Residential streets shall clearly convey their local function and place in
the street hierarchy,
 Streets shall be designed to accommodate local emergency services,
 The street layout shall be designed to limit the extent of grading, cutting,
and filling necessary for street construction, preserving the topographic
characteristics of a site to the greatest extent possible, and
 The proposed street layout shall provide for the continuation of existing
streets to adjoining tracts, unless the Commission deems such extension
undesirable for specific reasons of topography or design. Where it is
desirable in the opinion of the Commission to provide street access to
adjoining property, proposed streets shall be extended by dedication to
the boundary of such property.
4.3.1 Street Design Standards and Geometrics
The following shall be the minimum standards for streets:
4.3.1.1 Street Hierarchy
The street hierarchy should minimize through traffic
movements in subdivisions, promote safety of vehicular
traffic and neighborhood residents, and promote a stronger
sense of neighborhood by limiting traffic volume.
4.3.1.2 Utilization
Street hierarchy shall be utilized in the layout and design of
subdivisions. This hierarchy shall conform to the following
specifications:
1. All proposed streets shall be classified under the street
hierarchy.
2. The street hierarchy shall be determined by road
function and the Average Daily Traffic (ADT) in
residential subdivisions. The anticipated ADT is
determined by utilizing the trip generation tables in
Appendix A. In commercial or industrial subdivision, the
road function should be built to collector street
standards.
3. Existing streets shall be classified under the street
hierarchy by the Commission when required or when
necessary for the review of proposed developments.
4. The developer shall demonstrate to the Commission that
the distribution of traffic to the proposed street system
ARTICLE IV-DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 4-4
will not exceed the ADT thresholds indicated herein for
any proposed or existing street type.
4.3.1.3 Classification
The following street classifications shall be used in the street
hierarchy:
A. Freeways, Expressways & Arterial Streets  These
streets shall have the highest traffic volumes, speed
limit, and right-of-way width. The Kentucky
Department of Transportation will be consulted when
state maintained roads are involved. New driveway
access shall be limited by the Kentucky Department of
Transportation. On-street parking shall be prohibited.
B. Collector Street - Collector streets shall be designed to
discourage through vehicular traffic generated outside
of the subdivision it serves unless a linkage between
higher order streets outside of the subdivision is
identified in the Comprehensive Plan or as determined
by the Commission to be desirable. Provides limited
access to abutting lots and conveys traffic from
intersecting local access and sub-collector streets to
higher order arterials. Designed to convey the highest
volume of vehicular traffic at the highest speed. Due
to the collector streets functions as a through street,
the following service restrictions shall apply:
 If residentially developed, no more than 25
percent of the total number of lots may take
direct access on the collector street.
 On-street parking may be allowed on one side
of the street with a rear alley design.
C. Local Street - The lowest order of streets. They provide
access to abutting lots and convey vehicular traffic
from the intersecting cul-de-sac streets. They are
designed to convey traffic with motorists having origins
or destinations within the immediate neighborhood.
Due to the function of local streets, the following
standards shall apply:
 The maximum number of lots should front on local
access streets.
 On-street parking may be allowed on one side of
the street with a rear alley design.
ARTICLE IV-DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 4-5
 No section of street should convey an ADT of
more than 1000 vehicles or be intersected by 5
or more streets.
D. Cul-de-Sac Street - Provides access to abutting lots and
does not convey vehicular traffic from any higher order
street that intersects it. Should be designed to conduct
the least amount of vehicular traffic at the lowest
speed. Due to the functions of a cul-de-sac, the
following standards shall apply:
 On-street parking may be allowed on one side of
the street with a rear alley design.
 No on-street parking shall be allowed in the
turnaround area.
 Minimum pavement turnaround radius shall be no
less than 35 feet.
If any public/institutional or nonresidential land uses
are proposed on a street, the additional ADT shall be
determined through use of the Institute of Traffic
Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation Tables.
4.3.1.4 Right of Way Width
Sufficient right-of-way is required to contain the elements of:
 Sufficient street pavement and curbing;
 Sidewalks;
 Street trees; Utilities such as water, sewer, and
natural gas; and
 Turn lanes where required.
The following table gives the minimum right-of-way width:
Collector (Front Overhead Electric) 50
Collector (Front Underground Electric) 50
Collector (Rear Underground Electric) 57
Local/Cul-de-Sac (Front Overhead Electric) 46
Local/Cul-de-Sac (Front Underground Electric) 46
Local/Cul-de-Sac (Rear Underground Electric) 53
The Commission may require additional right-of-way width
when the stated minimum is not adequate due to a dividing
median, turning lanes, ditch-line streets, potential for future
development, or similar circumstances.
ARTICLE IV-DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 4-6
4.3.1.5 Existing Deficient Street Rights-of-Way
Developments platted along existing streets shall dedicate
additional rights-of-way necessary to meet the minimum
width requirements specified in these regulations. Should
the possibility of obtaining additional rights-of-way on the
other remaining side of the right-of-way exist, the
Commission may reduce the increased dedication up to
one-half (1/2) the total necessary to meet the minimum
width requirements specified.
4.3.1.6 Pavement Width
The minimum pavement width (does not include curb and
gutter) for all streets shall be as follows:
Collector 24
Collector with parking 31
Local/Cul-de-Sac 20
Local/Cul-de-Sac with parking 27
Rear Alley (Private) 12
4.3.1.7 Pavement Specifications
The subdivision shall provide pavement on a sub-grade,
which has been properly shaped, rolled, and uniformly
completed to conform with specified cross-sections and
grades. Streets shall be constructed of Bituminous Concrete
(asphalt) which conforms to all industry standards and to
the current addition of Kentucky Department of Highways
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction. All subgrades
shall conform to 95% compaction as defined by the
Standard Proctor compaction test and/or shall meet
the approval of the Engineering Department. All rock subbases
shall extend at least six (6) inches beyond the edge of
the pavement. Streets shall be constructed in conformance
with the following pavement specifications:
A. Collector Streets
8 inches DGA
4 inches Base Asphalt
1 inch Surface Asphalt
B. Local/Cul-de-Sac Streets
6 inches DGA
3 inches Base Asphalt
1 inch Surface Asphalt
C. Rear Alley (Private)
6 inches DGA
3 inches Base Asphalt
1 inch Surface Asphalt
ARTICLE IV-DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 4-7
4.3.1.8 Street Grades
The maximum and minimum street grades for all streets
shall be as follows:
Maximum Grade Minimum Grade
Collector Streets 8% .5%
Local Streets 10% .5%
Cul-de-Sac Streets 10% .5%
4.3.1.9 Street Intersections
Minimum standards for intersection design are as follows:
A. Number of Approaches
Intersections involving more than four (4) basic street
approaches shall be prohibited. Merging lanes,
deceleration lanes, Y intersections, etc., are not in
this prohibition and are considered as parts of one
street approach.
B. Angle of Intersection
For a tangent distance of at least one hundred (100)
feet, measures from the intersection of right-of-way
lines, all streets shall intersect at an angle of ninety
(90) degrees.
C. Street Jogs
Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one
hundred (100) feet for local and two hundred (200)
feet for collector streets shall not be made.
D. Excessive Grades at Intersections
When a street grade at the approach of an intersection
exceeds three (3) percent, a leveling area shall be
provided with grades of not greater than three (3)
percent for a distance of fifty (50) feet from the
intersection of street centerline. Vertical curves shall
then be used to connect the intersecting grades.
E. Spacing
The minimum standards for intersection spacing
measured from centerlines shall be as follows:
Minimum Preferred
Major Street Type Intersected Spacing Spacing
Arterial Streets 500* feet 1,000 feet*
Collector Streets 300 feet 500 feet
Local Streets 150 feet 200 feet
ARTICLE IV-DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 4-8
* May vary based upon the recommendation of the
Kentucky Department of Transportation.
F. Sight Distance
The site distance at intersections is the distance from
the stopped vehicles to as far left or right, the driver
can see. All driveways and intersecting roadways must
be designed and located so that the sight distance
shall be as follows:
If intersecting with a:
Arterial Street *KDOT
Collector Street 250 feet
Local Street 200 feet
Cul-de-Sac Street 175 feet
* State Department of Highways to determine.
Situations involving skewed intersections, curvilinear
streets, or other factors shall have sight distances
determined by the Commission. No plant material or
man made objects may be constructed which obstruct
visibility from 30 inches high upwards.
4.3.1.10 Horizontal Curve/Centerline Radius
The minimum horizontal curve radius shall be as follows:
Collector Streets 400 feet
Local Streets 200 feet
Cul-de-Sac Streets 200 feet
4.3.1.11 Minimum Property Line Radii
At street intersections, the minimum radius at property lines
shall be twenty (20) feet for all streets.
4.3.1.12 Clear Site Distance
In an area formed by joining with a straight line, points
along intersecting street rights-of-way, twenty-five (25) feet
from their intersection a clear area, is hereby created and
no plant materials or manmade objects may be constructed
which obstruct visibility from thirty (30) inches high upwards
to the sky.
4.3.1.13 Maximum Cul-de-Sac Length
The maximum length for all cul-de-sac streets shall be as
follows:
ARTICLE IV-DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 4-9
On streets with an ADT of 200 or greater, the maximum
cul-de-sac length shall be 700 feet.
On streets with an ADT of less than 200, the maximum culde-
sac length shall be 1000 feet.
In commercial and industrial areas, cul-de-sac streets
should not exceed 1000 feet in length.
Cul-de-sac length shall be measured from the pavement
centerline of the intersection to the center of the cul-de-sac.
4.3.1.14 Conflicting Traffic or Land Use
When a proposed development contains or is adjacent to
an existing or proposed railroad right-of-way, arterial street
right-of-way or conflicting and detrimental land use, the
Commission may require marginal access street, reverse
frontage lots, lots with rear service alleys, lots with
depth or other measures which may be necessary for the
protection of abutting properties and the maintenance or
function of major traffic arteries.
4.3.1.15 Street Pattern and Continuity
Streets shall interconnect within a development and with
adjoining development. Cul-de-sacs are permitted only
where topographic conditions and/or exterior lot line
configurations offer no practical alternatives for connection
or through traffic. Extensive use of curvilinear streets within
a development is discouraged. The proposed street layout
shall provide for the continuation of existing streets to
adjoining tracts, unless the Commission deems such
extension undesirable for specific reasons to topography or
design.
Where it is desirable in the opinion of the Commission to
provide street access to a adjoining property, the proposed
street shall be extended by dedication to the boundary of
such property. This proposed street shall be temporarily
known as a stub street until it becomes a through street by
the adjoining property owner.
4.3.1.16 Stub Street
Temporary turnarounds shall be required at the end of stub
streets as long as it is retained within the street right-of-way.
ARTICLE IV-DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 4-10
4.3.1.17 Turning Lanes
When the Commission determines that vehicles turning into
a proposed subdivision will adversely affect the capacity of
the existing streets, the developer shall dedicate sufficient
right-of-way and construct the turning lane as necessary to
maintain the capacity of the existing streets. The
Commission may require turning lanes whenever a
proposed subdivision or additional section of an existing
subdivision generates an ADT of 1000 vehicles or greater at
the street intersection.
When the Commission determines that a turning lane is
desirable, the Kentucky Department of Transportations
design and construction standards for turning lanes shall be
utilized.
4.3.1.18 Street Names
Streets that are in alignment with existing streets shall bear
the name of the existing street, unless one of the streets is a
cul-de-sac. When streets are not in alignment, no name
shall be used which would duplicate or be confusing with
names of the existing street. Street names should not
duplicate or closely approximate in spelling or phonetics the
names of other streets in Hardin County.
4.3.1.19 Subdivision Entrances
The number of entrances required in a subdivision shall
depend on the type of subdivision, the density of the
development, and in residential subdivisions, the ADT. An
additional entrance/exit to a higher order street is required
whenever a subdivision entrance street conveys an ADT
greater than 2000. The Engineering Department may
require additional transportation improvements to gated
entrances.
4.3.1.20 Medians
Medians may be permitted in street cross sections when
approved by the Commission. Medians shall only be
allowed when it is designed to provide for all the necessary
traffic movements. Median breaks are only permitted at
intersections with cross streets unless otherwise approved.
Provisions for the maintenance of any median areas and
associated plantings shall be noted on the final plat of the
property. Plantings shall be of a nature that will not conflict
with sight distance or other traffic related requirements.
ARTICLE IV-DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 4-11
4.3.1.21 Lot Access in Residential Subdivisions
Driveways on corner lots in residential subdivisions shall be
limited to access from the street of lower classification. If
the streets are of the same class, access shall be limited to
the street of the lower ADT.
4.3.1.22 Curbs and Gutters
Curbing shall be required for the purposes of drainage,
safety, and delineation and protection of pavement edge.
This requirement may be waived by the Commission after a
recommendation by the Engineering Department and
drainage swales used when it can be shown that soil or
topography makes the use of drainage swales preferable.
Drainage swales and their construction must be approved
by the Engineering Department. If drainage swales are
used a two (2) foot shoulder will be required in lieu of the
two (2) foot curb and gutter. Driveway headwalls must be
provided and constructed based on standards set by the
Engineering Department.
A. Curb and Gutter Construction
On arterial streets, collector streets and local/cul-desac
streets with rear alleys, vertical face (box) curbs
shall be constructed. Driveway cuts shall be
constructed according to the figure in Appendix C.
The transition between vertical and existing rolled
curbs shall happen at sidewalk intersections where
handicap accessibility is provided.
B. Specifications
PCC Standard Verical Face Curb
See Typical Curb Detail in Appendix C
PCC Standard Rolled Curb
See Typical Curb Detail in Appendix C
C. Accessibility
Curbing and sidewalks shall be designed to provide a
ramp for handicap accessibility and bicycles at street
intersections.
4.3.1.23 Private Streets
Private streets shall be constructed in accordance with the
same standards as public streets. For new, private
residential streets, serving three (3) or more lots, a surety
will be required. The surety shall cover the cost to complete
the improvements and be in the form of a performance
ARTICLE IV-DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 4-12
bond in favor of the subdivisions Homeowners Association.
Completion timeline of the private street shall be in
accordance with the requirements of a public street. The
surety shall not be released until the road has been
approved through a final inspection by the city. A note shall
be placed on the record plat stating that the responsibility to
complete the private improvements, should the developer
default, rests on the Homeowners Association of that
subdivision.
4.3.2 Sidewalk Design Standards
Sidewalks shall be constructed along both sides of the street in all
zoning districts except Industrial. The Commission may waive these
requirements for sidewalks if an acceptable alternative pedestrian
walkway system is proposed that will provide better access to parks,
schools, or other land uses.
4.3.2.1 Sidewalk Construction
Concrete sidewalks and walkways shall be constructed on a
four (4) inch thick DGA base. Sidewalks shall be a
minimum of four (4) inches in thickness and have a
minimum width of five (5) feet.
Exposed aggregate sidewalks are not permitted.
When an alternative pedestrian walkway is provided,
walkway construction shall be approved by the Engineering
Department.
4.3.2.2 Sidewalk Placement
On curb and gutter streets, sidewalks shall be placed in the
right-of-way and parallel to the street, six (6) feet from the
back of the curb, unless an exception has been permitted by
the Engineering Department.
On ditch-line streets, the sidewalk shall be placed parallel
to the street, outside of the right-of-way within a sidewalk
easement.
Sidewalks installed on corner lots must have curb ramps
installed to the edge of roadway pavement. Perpendicular
curb ramps are required in accordance with the Americans
with Disabilities Act (ADA). Diagonal curb ramps are not
permitted.
If an existing sidewalk network is in place on adjacent
properties, the developer shall design and construct his/her
sidewalks to connect with the existing system.
ARTICLE IV-DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 4-13
In situations where a property owner purchases one or
more abutting lots, they will be required to install sidewalks
on all lots within six (6) months.
4.3.2.3 Accessibility
Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with ADA.
Curbing and sidewalks shall be designed to provide a ramp
for handicap accessibility and bicycles at street intersections.
4.3.2.4 Detectable Warning for Sidewalk Ramps
Detectable warnings shall be placed on all sidewalk ramps.
Pavers must be furnished having a minimum thickness of 2
inches and truncated domes at the nominal dimensions as
shown in Appendix C. The color shall be homogeneous
throughout the paver and provide visual contrast of 70% or
greater with adjoining surfaces. The City will allow either
red or yellow as colors. Color shall be consistent
throughout each development.
4.3.2.5 Construction of Detectable Warnings on Sidewalk Ramps
Detectable warnings shall extend the full surface width and
a minimum length of two (2) feet up the ramp, six (6) to
eight (8) inches from the back of the curb or pavement
edge. If a walkway crosses or adjoins a vehicular way, and
the pedestrian walking surface is not separated by curbs,
railings, or other elements, define the boundary between
the areas with a continuous two (2) foot minimum width
detectable warning (Residential driveways are exempt).
Detectable warnings shall be installed as shown in
Appendix C.
4.3.2.6 Sidewalk Railing
A protective railing must be installed along the segment of a
sidewalk, where a thirty (30) inch or greater measurement
exists from the surface of the sidewalk to the adjacent
grade.
4.3.2.7 Certificate of Occupancy Issuance
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued prior to the
required installation of sidewalks.
4.3.3 Driveway Entrance Standards
All driveways shall be paved with concrete or asphalt.
The sidewalk and the driveway apron shall have a smooth transition.
All driveway aprons shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet wide at their
ARTICLE IV-DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 4-14
narrowest point. All driveway aprons shall be two (2) feet wider on each
side where they meet the roadway pavement than they are at their
narrowest point.
4.3.3.1 Certificate of Occupancy Issuance
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued prior to the
required installation of driveways.
4.3.4 Street Lights
Street lights shall be placed at strategic locations to ensure safe vehicular
and pedestrian traffic. Streetlight locations and spacing must be
approved by the Engineering Department. Electric service to streetlights
shall be provided underground.
When ornamental street lighting is proposed, the developer shall provide
the street lighting poles, accessories, and necessary easements in
accordance with the appropriate utility company. The ownership and
maintenance of street lights may be transferred to the City after
inspection.
4.3.5 Off-Site Transportation Improvements
Off-site transportation improvements may be required by the Planning
Department or the Engineering Department. The cost of all required offsite
transportation improvements shall be the responsibility of the
developer.
4.4 Utility Standards
The following shall be the minimum standards for utilities necessary for
subdivision construction, such as telephone supply, electric supply, cable television
service lines, natural gas supply, water supply, storm water disposal, sewage
disposal, or other utilities:
4.4.1 General Requirements
The location of all utilities must be considered together to avoid crossing
conflicts, minimize trenching, and maintain the required separations
between incompatible systems. It is desirable to keep utilities in a
uniform location relative to the street.
4.4.2 Telephone, Electric, and Cable Systems
Every subdivision shall be provided with proper telephone, electric and
cable services system. In residential subdivisions that require
improvement plans, telephone, electric, and cable television service lines
shall be place underground except in cases where the Commission
determines underground lines are infeasible.
ARTICLE IV-DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 4-15
4.4.2.1 Location
All telephone, electric, and cable television system lines shall
be placed within the drainage and utility easement and
restricted from the public right-of-way.
4.4.3 Sanitary Sewer Collection System
Every subdivision shall be provided with a sanitary sewer system
designed and constructed according to the specification of Hardin
County Water District #1. If public sanitary sewer is not readily
available, then a private sanitary sewer (septic system) shall be provided
in conformance with the requirements of the Hardin County Health
Department. When public sanitary sewer becomes available to the
subdivision all lot owners are required to connect to the system.
4.4.4 Water Supply
Every subdivision shall be provided with a complete water distribution
system to serve the area being developed, including adequate fire
protection facilities, as required by the City of Radcliff. The entire water
system shall be provided by the developer and shall be designed and
constructed to meet the approval of Hardin County Water District #1 or
Hardin County Water District #2 and the Kentucky Division of Water.
4.4.5 Storm Water Drainage Systems
Every subdivision shall provide satisfactory drainage of the surface water
of the subdivision and the drainage area of which it is a part. The storm
water drainage system shall meet the approval of the Engineering
Department.
The developer shall be required to provide storm drainage
improvements that will prevent aggravation of any existing downstream
problem considering both the instantaneous flow rate and flood
elevations caused by the increased run off from the development.
4.4.5.1 Curb and Gutter
Gutters shall be designed for the twenty-five (25) year storm
rate, so that there will be no water in the portion of the
roadway, six (6) feet on either side of the centerline.
Storm water pipes parallel to the roadway shall not be
installed less than two (2) feet from the back of the curb and
gutter system.
4.4.5.2 Roadway Culverts and Storm Water Pipes
Roadway culverts and storm water pipes shall be designed
for the twenty-five (25) year storm rate and checked against
the one-hundred (100) year storm event.
ARTICLE IV-DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 4-16
All pipes shall have a minimum of twelve (12) inches of total
cover, to be measured from the top of the pipe (Unless
otherwise approved by the Engineer).
All pipes over twenty-four (24) inches shall have protective
end grates. The grates shall be designed so that they allow
the smooth flow of water, but will stop the flow of debris or
other large objects through the pipe.
Roadway culverts shall be extended a minimum of eight (8)
feet past the edge of the pavement.
Roadway culvert materials must consist of aluminized
corrugated metal pipe (ACMP) or reinforced concrete pipe
(RCP). Storm water pipes may consist of high-densisty
polyethylene (HDPE) pipe. Other pipe materials may be
approved by the Engineer.
Concrete headwalls are required at the ends of all pipes
and acceptable provisions must be made to prevent erosion
around the pipe entrance.
Standardized flared headwalls shall be required where two
(2) or more ditches are channeled into a culvert or when a
ditch deflects at an angle of one-hundred and thirty-five
(135) degrees or less.
4.4.5.3 Driveway Culverts
Driveway culverts and storm water pipes shall be designed
for the twenty-five (25) year storm event.
Driveway culverts for each lot shall be sized at a minimum
twelve (12) inch diameter and indicated on the drainage
plan.
Driveway culverts shall have a minimum of six (6) inches of
total cover.
Driveway culverts shall be installed at the same grade as the
ditch.
Driveway culverts shall extend a minimum of four (4) feet
past the apron pavement. The first two (2) feet of pipe on
either side of the apron shall have a minimum of six (6)
inches of topsoil cover.
ARTICLE IV-DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 4-17
Driveway culvert materials must consist of aluminized
corrugated metal pipe (ACMP) or reinforced concrete pipe
(RCP). Alternative materials must be approved by the
Engineer.
If driveway swales are utilized in lieu of driveway culverts,
approval of the Engineer is required. Swales shall not
exceed six (6) inches in depth nor drastically vary from the
contour of the ditch. A connecting two (2) feet wide
concrete channel may be required between driveway swales
to facilitate the movement of water when the roadside ditch
is less than three (3) percent slope.
4.4.5.4 Sidewalk Culverts
When a sidewalk crosses a ditch, a culvert shall be
required. Sidewalk culverts shall be sized for the twenty-five
(25) year storm event.
Sidewalk culverts shall have a minimum of six (6) inches of
total cover.
Driveway culvert materials must consist of aluminized
corrugated metal pipe (ACMP) or reinforced concrete pipe
(RCP). Alternative materials must be approved by the
Engineer.
The ends of the culvert shall be protected in a manner
approved by the Engineer.
4.4.5.5 Ditches
Ditches shall be designed for the twenty-five (25) year storm
rate and checked against the one-hundred (100) year storm
event.
The side slopes of roadside ditches and ditches in between
structures shall not be greater than 4:1.
The side slopes of all other ditches shall not be greater than
3:1.
Ditches with a slope of less than 0.8% or a water velocity in
excess of five (5) feet per second in a twenty-five (25) year
storm event shall have concrete bottoms and sidewalls.
Other means of stabilizing steep slopes may be approved
by the Engineer. When the drainage system is outside of the
road right-of-way, the developer shall make provisions for
ARTICLE IV-DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 4-18
the dedication of an easement to the City. The landowner
shall properly maintain all on-site drainage areas.
The owner shall adequately protect all ditches. Ditches and
open channels shall be seeded, sodded or paved
depending on grades and types of soils to stabilize the ditch
and prevent erosion, as determined by the Engineering
Department.
4.4.5.6 Detention and Retention Areas
For detention areas, storm water discharge shall be staged
to prevent post-developed flows from exceeding predeveloped
flows. The two (2), ten (10), twenty-five (25) and
one-hundred (100) year storm events shall be detained and
released at pre-development levels. All storage shall be
contained within a dedicated detention easement.
Any proposed development for which the ultimate receiver
is a flood prone area shall not be permitted unless the
proposed development can retain the increase in runoff
from the pre-development level, for the one hundred (100)
year four (4) day storm event. If a regional retention area
exists or is planned, fees will be levied in-lieu of this
requirement to offset construction costs for regional storm
water storage.
Side slopes shall not be greater than 3:1. The owner shall
adequately protect all detention/retention areas from
erosion.
The detention/retention areas may be designed as either
wet or dry basins. The development shall have as few
detention/retention areas as necessary to detain/retain the
required amount of water.
4.4.5.7 Sinkholes
Sinkholes may be used as a means of on-site disposal of
storm water, if approved by the Engineer.
Sinkholes must have a sufficient volume to store the onehundred
(100) year four (4) day storm event assuming zero
discharge. The area required to store this volume must be
shown as a dedicated easement.
Sufficient measures shall be taken to protect the sinkhole
during and after construction.
ARTICLE IV-DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 4-19
4.4.5.8 Certificate of Occupancy Issuance
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued prior to
completion of the following actions:
 Correct installation of all storm water drainage
features ;
 Grading and drainage around the structure and the
construction and restoration of front, rear and side
yard swales;
 Application of a three (3) inch layer of screened
topsoil, if adequate topsoil is not present on-site;
 Revegetation and stabilization of the site.
4.4.6 Natural Gas
Natural gas shall be provided at the option of the developer. Where
natural gas service is desired in a development, a natural gas main
extension contract must be completed with the appropriate agency. The
gas line extension shall conform to the policies and shall be designed
and constructed according to the specifications of the respective agency.
4.4.7 Utility and Drainage Easement
Drainage and utility easements shall be shown on the final plat. Release
or modification of utility and drainage easements shall require the
expressed approval of all such parties holding the right to use the
easement. Easements for new, or the continuation of existing, utilities
shall be provided for all subdivisions with the widths or other
characteristics as required by the Commission or the Department based
upon the following table:
STANDARD EASEMENT SIZES
Collector/Local (Front Overhead Electric) FY 20 SY 4 RY 8
Collector/Local (Front Underground Electric)FY 6 SY 4 RY 8
Collector/Local (Rear Underground Electric)FY 0 SY 4 RY 15
* FY-Front-Yard SY-Side-Yard RY-Rear-Yard
4.5 Community Facilities Design Standards
In reviewing preliminary plats, the Commission shall consider the adequacy of
existing or proposed community facilities which must serve the additional
population to be housed in the proposed subdivision.
Areas reserved for community facilities should be adequate for building sites,
landscaping, and off street parking as appropriate to the proposed use.
4.5.1 Reservation of Land for Public Use
The developer, in the design of the subdivision plan, and the
Department, in its review of the plan, shall consider the reservation of
ARTICLE IV-DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 4-20
land for parks, open space, and other public uses as indicated in the
Comprehensive Plan and/or as determined by the Commission
consistent with the principle that the burden for such public uses must
bear a reasonable relationship to the benefits conferred on the
development, to the overall benefit to the surrounding development, and
to the need for public use improvements necessitated by the
development. The developer may be required to reserve such sites for a
period of two (2) years after preliminary subdivision plan approval. After
the two (2) year period has elapsed, if the City has not accepted the area
for public maintenance, the full rights shall revert back to the developer.
The area of each parcel of recreation space shall be of such minimum
dimensions as to be functionally usable. The required lot frontage may
be waived by the Commission to no less than twenty (20) feet.
4.5.2 Location of Open Space Parcels
Open space parcels shall be located in close proximity to the dwelling
units they are intended to serve. They shall be located with consideration
for surrounding development and traffic conditions.
4.6 Surveying and Monumentation Standards
The following monumentation standards shall be applicable to all subdivision
plats:
A. Every boundary corner location which is determined by a land survey on
the subdivision property will be marked with a monument or a witness
monument as described and required of every registered land surveyor in
Kentucky as specified in Minimum Standards of Practice for Land Surveying
in Kentucky, effective October 1, 1980 (or a more current version) and
available from the Kentucky State Board of Registration.
B. There shall be a minimum of four (4) permanent Control Monuments
placed on the subdivision boundary when the plat is associated with a
major subdivision and a minimum of two (2) permanent Control
Monuments are required for minor subdivision plats if the lots are greater
than 1000 feet from an existing Control Monument.
C. Where corners are found to coincide with the previously set permanent
Control Monument, the number on the previously set monument shall be
shown on the plat.
D. A permanent Control Monument with both horizontal and vertical control
shall be required to be set at every intersection of a collector street with an
arterial street.
E. The location, reference numbers, State plane coordinates, and elevation of
all permanent Control Monuments shall be shown on the final plat.
ARTICLE IV-DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 4-21
F. All survey boundary location monuments shall consist of rebar, steel pins,
stone markers, etc., as described in the Minimum Standards of Practice for
Land Surveying in Kentucky.
G. The permanent Control Monuments, herein described, shall always consist
of a pre-printed survey disk (brass, bronze, or aluminum set in solid rock,
cemented into masonry or placed on top of a pre-cast concrete monument.
If a pre-cast monument is to be used, it shall have a minimum seven (7)
inch square top, and eleven (11) inch square bottom extended below the
frost line). Survey disks, as provided by the City, shall be placed in the new
concrete before it sets. The concrete monument must be set deep enough
to be undisturbed by frost and should extend a few inches above the
ground. See Appendix C for typical detail.
The corner location chosen should be one that will not be likely to be
disturbed. Original ground or excavated ground should be used for
locating the permanent Control Monument. A monument should never be
placed in a new fill area; however, if this is necessary, precautions must be
taken to make the monument permanent, as approved by the Engineering
Department.
H. If the subdivision is less than one (1) mile from an existing Control
Monument, as measured in a straight line distance, the plat and any new
permanent monuments set shall be referenced to that existing monument.
4.7 Miscellaneous Standards
4.7.1 Environmentally Sensitive Areas
All such areas shall be protected by special design measures taken by
the developer to attempt to minimize the developments impact.
Acceptable design measures are:
 Non-disturbance of the area;
 Provision of additional building setbacks (at minimum of 50 foot
setback);
 Provision of easements in such area as may be appropriate, so that
an open space is provided;
 Provision of storm water retention areas;
 Re-contouring and excavation of the area, only when an erosion
control plan is approved by the Engineering Department and when
appropriate performance surety has been posted with the City.
4.7.2 Geologic Hazard Areas
All such areas shall be protected by generously designing the
development such that any geologic hazard area shall be left in its
natural state as a permanent open space for a distance of 100 feet from
such areas.
ARTICLE IV-DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 4-22
4.7.3 Sinkhole Easements
If a sinkhole is located within the proposed subdivision, the plat shall
provide for a detention/drainage easement. This easement shall be a
minimum size to encompass the one-hundred (100) year storm event
storage requirement. Ingress/Egress easements must be provided to
access the detention/drainage easement from a public right-of-way. An
additional building setback of fifty (50) feet may be required.
4.7.4 Stream Easements
If a stream flows through, or adjacent to, the proposed subdivision, the
plat shall provide for a drainage easement along the stream for a
floodway of at least twenty (20) feet. An additional building setback of
fifty (50) feet may be required.
4.7.5 Buffer Zones
Buffer zones of screen plantings will be required when the subdivision is
adjacent to an incompatible land use, as required in the Zoning
Ordinance and Development Regulations.
4.7.6 Subdivision Identification Signs
Each entrance to the subdivision may have no more than two signs per
entrance and shall only contain the name of the establishment and date
for the subdivision.
4.7.7 Neighborhood Associations
Developers may chose to form neighborhood associations or other
organizations that would be responsible for the maintenance and
upkeep of common areas, decorative entrances, special median
plantings, drainage features or other special amenities. If any such
association or organization is formed, the private covenant or agreement
establishing the association or organization must be reviewed and
approved by the Department and City Attorney as to the content relating
to the continual and permanent maintenance of special features and the
disposition of such features if organization or association ceases.
4.7.8 Erosion Control
During grading, improvement installation, and building construction
erosion control shall be implemented. The project engineer shall use the
City of Radcliff Stormwater Runoff Control Ordinance and Design
Manual and the Best Management Practices for Construction Activities
prepared by the Kentucky Division of Conservation and Division of
Water. The developer and project engineer shall use vegetative,
structural, and associated best management practices, as approved by
the Engineering Department.
ARTICLE VACCESS MANAGEMENT STANDARDS
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 5-1
5.1 Purpose
The purpose of these standards is to provide and manage access to land
development, while preserving the regional flow of traffic in terms of safety,
capacity and speed. Major thoroughfares, including highways, arterials and
collectors serve as the primary network for moving people and goods. These
transportation corridors also provide access to businesses and homes and have
served as the focus for commercial and residential development. If access systems
are not properly designed, these thoroughfares will be unable to accommodate
the access needs of development and retain their primary transportation function.
These standards balance the right of reasonable access to private property, with
the right of the citizens of Radcliff to safe and efficient travel.
To achieve this policy purpose, state and local thoroughfares have been
categorized by function and classified for access purposes based upon their level
of importance. Regulations have been applied to these thoroughfares for the
purpose of reducing traffic accidents, personal injury, and property damage
attributable to poorly designed access systems, and to thereby improve the safety
and operation of the roadway network. This will protect the substantial public
investment in the existing transportation system and reduce the need for expensive
remedial measures. These regulations also further the orderly layout and use of
land, protect community character, and conserve natural resources by promoting
well-designed road and access systems and discouraging the unplanned
subdivision of land.
5.2 Conformance with Plans, Regulations, and Statutes
These standards are adopted to implement goal nine of the City of Radcliff
Comprehensive Plan. This goal is to promote quality transportation facilities for
the movement of people and goods. In addition, these standards conform with
the US 31W Access Management Partnership Memorandum of Understanding, the
US 31W Access Management Study and the planning policies of the KYTC set
forth in the Kentucky Statewide Transportation Plan. These standards also conform
with the access classification system and standards of the KYTC, and policy and
planning directives of the Federal Highway Administration.
5.3 Applicability
These standards shall apply to all arterial and collector streets within Radcliff and
to all properties that abut these roadways.
Subdivision plats, improvement plans, site plans and driveway apron permits
must conform with these access management standards prior to approval.
The access classification system and standards of the Kentucky Transportation
Cabinet (KYTC) shall apply to all roadways on the State Primary Road System.
ARTICLE VACCESS MANAGEMENT STANDARDS
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 5-2
5.4 Access Management Classification System and Standards
Arterial and collector streets with the City of Radcliff are classified by the following
functional categories:
Access Class 1: Principal (Major) Arterials  High volume roadways that provide
priority to mobility over access. They often provide service to traffic entering and
exiting the city and between major activity centers within the city.
Access Class 2: Minor Arterials  Moderate volume roadways that provide priority
to mobility over access. They often feed the major arterial system, support
moderate length trips, and serve activity centers.
Access Class 3: Collectors  Roads with moderate to low volumes that provide a
balance between mobility and access. They often link Local Streets with the
Arterials.
5.5 Driveway and Signal Spacing
All access connections on facility segments that have been assigned an access
classification shall meet or exceed the minimum connection spacing requirements
of that access classification as specified in Table 1.
Table 1: Minimum Driveway and Signal Spacing
Access Class Minimum
Adjacent
Spacing for
<=45mph (ft)
Minimum
Adjacent
Spacing for
>45mph (ft)
Signal Spacing Median
Treatment
1 600 1200 2400 Restrictive
2 450 600 2400 Restrictive Preferred
3 300 450 1200 Non-Restrictive
A. Driveway spacing shall be measured from the closest edge of the pavement to
the next closest edge of the pavement. The projected future edge of the
pavement of the intersecting road shall be used in measuring corner
clearance, where widening, relocation, or other improvement is indicated in an
adopted transportation plan.
B. The Engineering Department may reduce the connection spacing requirements
in situations where they prove impractical, but in no case shall the permitted
spacing be less than 85%of the applicable standard.
C. If the connection spacing of this code cannot be achieved, then a system of
joint use driveways and cross access easements may be required in
accordance with Section 5.7.
D. Variation from these standards shall be permitted at the discretion of the
Engineering Department where the effect would be to enhance the safety or
operation of the roadway. Examples might include a pair of one-way
driveways in lieu of a two-way driveway, or alignment of median openings with
existing access connections. Applicants may be required to submit a study
ARTICLE VACCESS MANAGEMENT STANDARDS
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 5-3
prepared by a registered engineer to assist the City of Radcliff in determining
whether the proposed change would exceed roadway safety or operational
benefits of the prescribed standard.
5.6 Access Connection and Driveway Design
A. Driveway apron grades should not exceed 8% and the change in grade
between the driveway apron grade and the street cross-slope should not
exceed 10%. Driveway grades should not exceed 8% for commercial or
industrial land uses. Driveway grades should not exceed 15% for residential
land uses. A level landing area should be provided at the approach to the
roadway; however, the effect of a vertical curve on sight distances should also
be considered.
B. Driveway approaches must be designed and located to provide an exiting
vehicle with an unobstructed view.
C. Construction of driveways along acceleration or deceleration lanes and tapers
is prohibited due to the potential for vehicular weaving conflicts.
D. Driveways with more than one entry and one exit lane shall incorporate
channelization features to separate the entry and exit sides of the driveway.
Double yellow lines may be considered instead of medians where truck offtracking
is a problem.
E. Driveways across from median openings must be consolidated to coordinate
access at the median opening.
F. Driveway width and flair shall be adequate to serve the volume of traffic and
provide for rapid movement of vehicles off of the major thoroughfare, but
standards shall not be so excessive as to pose safety hazards for pedestrians,
bicycles or other vehicles (Suggested standards appear in Table 2).
Table 2: Suggested Access Connection Design Form
Trips/Day 1-20 21-600 601-4000*
Trips/Hour Or 1-5 Or 6-60 Or 61-400
Connection Width
(2-Way)
12 min
24 max
24 min
36 max
24 min
36 max
Flare 10 min 10 min N/A
Returns (Radius) N/A Small radii
may be used
25 min
50 std
75 max
Angle of Drive 60-90 60-90
Divisional Island 4-22 wide 4-22 wide
Note: These standards are not intended for major access connections carrying over 4000 vehicles
per day.
ARTICLE VACCESS MANAGEMENT STANDARDS
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 5-4
G. The length of driveways or "Throat Length" shall be designed in accordance
with the anticipated storage length for entering and exiting vehicles to prevent
vehicles from backing into the flow of traffic on the public street or causing
unsafe conflicts with on-site circulation. General standards appear in Table 3
but these requirements will vary according to the projected volume of the
individual driveway. These measures generally are acceptable for the principle
access to a property and are not intended for minor driveways. Variation from
these shall be permitted for good cause upon approval of the Engineering
Department.
Table 3: Generally Adequate Driveway Throat Lengths
Signalized with 2 Egress Lanes 75
Signalized with 3 Egress Lanes 200
Signalized with 4 Egress Lanes 300
Unsignalized Driveway with 2 Egress Lanes 50-75
5.7 Joint and Cross Access
A. Adjacent commercial or office properties classified as major traffic generators
(i.e. shopping plazas, office parks), shall provide a cross access drive and
pedestrian access to allow circulation between sites.
B. A system of joint use driveways and cross access easements shall be
established along all arterial and collector streets and the building site shall
incorporate the following:
1. A continuous service drive or cross access corridor extending the entire
length of each block served to provide for driveway separation consistent
with the access management classification system and standards.
2. A design speed of 10 mph and sufficient width to accommodate two-way
travel aisles designed to accommodate automobiles, service vehicles, and
loading vehicles;
3. Stub-outs and other design features to make it visually obvious that the
abutting properties may be tied in to provide cross-access via a service
drive;
4. A unified access and circulation system plan that includes coordinated or
shared parking areas is encouraged wherever feasible.
C. Pursuant to this section, property owners shall:
1. Record an easement with the deed allowing cross access to and from other
properties served by the joint use driveways and cross access or service
drive;
2. Record an agreement with the deed that remaining access rights along the
thoroughfare will be dedicated to the City of Radcliff and pre-existing
driveways will be closed and eliminated after construction of the joint-use
driveway;
3. Record a joint maintenance agreement with the deed defining maintenance
ARTICLE VACCESS MANAGEMENT STANDARDS
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 5-5
responsibilities of property owners.
D. The Engineering Department may reduce required separation distance of
access points where they prove impractical, provided all of the following
requirements are met:
1. Joint access driveways and cross access easements are provided wherever
feasible in accordance with this section.
2. The site plan incorporates a unified access and circulation system in
accordance with this section.
3. The property owner shall enter a written agreement with the City of Radcliff,
recorded with the deed, that pre-existing connections on the site will be
closed and eliminated after construction of each side of the joint use
driveway.
4. The Engineering Department may modify or waive the requirements of this
section where the characteristics or layout of abutting properties would
make development of a unified or shared access and circulation system
impractical.
5.8 Corner Clearance
A. Corner clearance for connections shall meet or exceed the minimum
access connection spacing requirements for that street.
B. New access connections shall not be permitted within the functional area of an
intersection or interchange as defined by the connection spacing standards of
this code, unless:
1. No other reasonable access to the property is available, and
2. The Engineering Department determines that the access connection does not
create a safety or operational problem upon review of a site-specific study
of the proposed connection prepared by a registered engineer and
submitted by the applicant.
C. Where no other alternatives exist, the Engineering Department may allow
construction of an access connection along the property line farthest from the
intersection. In such cases, directional connections (i.e. right in/out, right in
only, or right out only) may be required.
5.9 Alignment of Access Connections
Access points on opposite sides of arterial and collector streets shall be located
opposite each other. If not so located, turning movement restrictions may be
imposed as determined necessary by the Planning Commission or their authorized
agent.
5.10 Turning Movement Restriction
The Planning Commission or its authorized agent may require access connections
to provide for only limited turning movements (ie. right in/out, right in only, or
right out only) where necessary for the safe and efficient movement of traffic.
ARTICLE VACCESS MANAGEMENT STANDARDS
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 5-6
5.11 Turning Lanes and Deceleration Lane Provision
At those access connections where vehicles turning to and from the street will
affect the capacity of the street, the developer shall dedicate sufficient right-ofway
and construct turning lanes or deceleration lanes as necessary to maintain the
capacity of the street. If the street in question has bike lanes, the developer shall
also include adequate right-of-way for the bike lane and continue the bike lane
through the access connection. Acceleration lanes are prohibited, with the
exception of freeway applications.
5.12 Number of Access Connections
A. The minimum lot frontage for all parcels with frontage on all arterial and
collector streets shall not be less than the minimum connection spacing standards
of that thoroughfare, except as otherwise provided in this Section.
B. All land in a parcel having a single tax code number, as of December 3,
2009, fronting on an arterial or collector street, shall be entitled one (1)
driveway/connection per parcel as of right on said public thoroughfare(s).
When subdivided as a recorded plat, parcels designated herein shall provide
access to all newly created lots via the permitted access connection. This may
be achieved through subdivision roads, joint and cross access, service drives,
and other reasonable means of ingress and egress in accordance with the
requirements of these standards. The following standards shall also apply:
1. Parcels with large frontages may be permitted additional driveways at the
time of adoption of these requirements provided they are consistent with
the applicable driveway spacing standards.
2. Existing parcels with frontage less than the minimum connection spacing for
that corridor may not be permitted a direct connection to the thoroughfare
under this Section where the Planning Commission or its authorized agent
determines alternative reasonable access is available to the site. [Note:
The Planning Commission or its authorized agent could allow for a
temporary driveway as provided in Section 5.7 with the stipulation that joint
and cross access be established as adjacent properties develop).
3. Additional access connections may be allowed where the property owner
demonstrates that safety and efficiency of travel on the thoroughfare will be
improved by providing more than one access to the site.
5.13 Outparcels and Phased Site Plans
A. In the interest of promoting unified access and circulation systems,
development sites under the same ownership or consolidated for the purposes
of development and comprised of more than one building site shall not be
considered separate properties in relation to the access standards of this code.
The number of connections permitted shall be the minimum number necessary
to provide reasonable access to these properties, not the maximum available
for that frontage. All necessary easements, agreements, and stipulations
required under Section 5.7 shall be met. This shall also apply to phased site
plans. The owner and all tenants within the affected area are responsible for
compliance with the requirements of this code .
ARTICLE VACCESS MANAGEMENT STANDARDS
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 5-7
B. All access to the outparcel must be internalized using the shared circulation
system of the principal development or retail center. Access to outparcels shall
be designed to avoid excessive movement across parking aisles and queuing
across surrounding parking and driving aisles.
C. The number of outparcels shall not exceed one per ten acres of site area, with
a minimum lineal frontage of 300 feet per outparcel or greater where access
spacing standards for that roadway require. This frontage requirement may be
waived where access is internalized using the shared circulation system of the
principal development or retail center. In such cases the right of direct access
to the roadway shall be dedicated to the City of Radcliff and recorded with the
deed.
5.14 Non-Conforming Access Features
A. Permitted access connections in place as of December 3, 2009, that do not
conform with the standards herein shall be designated as nonconforming
features and shall be brought into compliance with applicable standards under
the following conditions:
1. Subdivision plats and improvement plans are required;
2. Site plans are required;
3. Driveway apron permits are required;
4. Significant change in trip generation; or
5. As roadway improvements allow.
B. If the principal activity on a property with nonconforming access features is
discontinued for a consecutive period of 180 days or discontinued for any
period of time without a present intention of resuming that activity, then that
property must thereafter be brought into conformity with all applicable
connection spacing and design requirements, unless otherwise exempted by
the permitting authority. For uses that are vacant or discontinued upon the
effective date of this code, the 180 day period begins on the effective
date of this code.
5.15 Flag Lots
Flag lots are not permitted. Interior parcels shall be required to obtain access via
a public or private street in accordance with the Radcliff Subdivision Regulations.
Minimum street frontage requirements for each lot must be met in accordance
with the corresponding zoning classification for each property.
5.16 Reverse Frontage Lots
A. Access to double frontage lots shall be required on the street with the lower
functional classification.
B. When a residential subdivision is proposed that would abut an arterial, it shall
be designed to provide through lots along the arterial with access from a
ARTICLE VACCESS MANAGEMENT STANDARDS
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 5-8
backage road or interior local road. Access rights of these lots to the arterial
shall be dedicated to the City of Radcliff and recorded with the deed.
5.17 Interchange Areas
A. New interchanges or significant modification of an existing interchange will be
subject to special access management requirements to protect the safety and
operational efficiency of the limited access facility and the interchange area,
pursuant to the preparation and adoption of an access management plan. The
plan shall address current and future connections and median openings within
1/4 mile of an interchange area (measured from the end of the taper of the
ramp furthest from the interchange) or up to the first intersection with an
arterial road, whichever is less.
B. The distance to the first connection shall comply with the minimum driveway
spacing standards. However, no connection will be less than 400. This
distance shall be measured from the end of the taper for that quadrant of the
interchange.
C. The minimum distance to the first median opening shall be at least 1200 feet
as measured from the end of the taper of the egress ramp.
5.18 Emergency Access
In addition to minimum side, front, and rear yard setback and building spacing
requirements specified in the Radcliff Zoning Ordinance and Development
Regulations, all buildings and other development activities such as landscaping,
shall be arranged on site so as to provide safe and convenient access for
emergency vehicles.
5.19 Transit Access
In commercial zoning districts where transit service is available or is planned to be
available within five years, provisions shall be made for adequate transit access, in
the form of turn around loops or turnout bays. At a minimum, in the case of a
loop or cul-de-sac, entrance curves shall have a radius of 35 feet, and the internal
circle shall have an inside radius of 30 feet and an outside radius of 52.5 feet. In
the case of turnout bays, the curve radius shall be 35 feet the distance from the
roadside edge to the inside edge of the outside radius shall be 52.5 feet.
5.20 Traffic Studies
The City of Radcliff reserves the right to require traffic and safety analysis studies
where safety is an issue or where significant problems already exist.
Appendix A
Trip Generation Table
Street Geometric Table
APPENDIX A
A-1
Table 1
Average Daily Traffic (ADT)*
Trip Generation Table
The ADT anticipated on a residential street shall be determined by the number of
vehicular trips generated by dwelling unit type:
Dwelling Unit Type Average Trips Per Unit
Single Family, Detached 9.57
Duplex/Townhouse 5.86
Apartments 6.63
Trip Generation, Sixth Edition. Institute of Transportation Engineers
Table 2
Street Geometrics
Collector Collector Collector
FY OHE FY UGE RY UGE
Street Dimensions W/Parking
Right-of-Way Width 50 feet 50 feet 57 feet
Pavement Widths 24 feet 24 feet 31 feet
Design Speed 40 MPH 40 MPH 40 MPH
Street Grade, Minimum 0.5% 0.5% 0.5%
Street Grade, Maximum 8% 8% 8%
Minimum turnaround radius -- -- --
Street Intersections
Maximum Number of Approaches 4 4 4
Intersection Angle 90 90 90
Maximum Grade within 50 feet of 3% 3% 3%
intersection of street centerlines
Stopping Sight Distance Refer to 4.3.1.9 F.
Street Alignment
Horizontal Curve Radius 400 feet 400 feet 400 feet
Local Local Local
FY OHE FY UGE RY UGE
Street Dimensions W/Parking
Right-of-Way Width 46 feet 46 feet 53 feet
Pavement Widths 20 feet 20 feet 27 feet
Design Speed 30 MPH 30 MPH 30 MPH
Street Grade, Minimum 0.5% 0.5% 0.5%
Street Grade, Maximum 10% 10% 10%
Minimum turnaround radius 35 feet 35 feet 35 feet
Street Intersections
Maximum Number of Approaches 4 4 4
Intersection Angle 90 90 90
Maximum Grade within 50 feet of 3% 3% 3%
intersection of street centerlines
Stopping Sight Distance Refer to 4.3.1.9 F.
Street Alignment
Horizontal Curve Radius 200 feet 200 feet 200 feet
Appendix B
Subdivision Application
Construction Cost Estimates Form
Subdivision Design Standards Waiver Form
Environmentally Sensitive Area And
Geological Hazard Areas Application
APPENDIX B
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS A-2
SUBDIVISION APPLICATION
City of Radcliff Planning Department
411 West Lincoln Trail Blvd., P. O. Box 519
Radcliff, KY 40159-0519
270-351-1875
The following items are to be submitted along with this application:
 Plats as required by Article II of the Radcliff Subdivision Regulations.
 A review fee of , payable to the City of Radcliff, of which no part is refundable to the applicant.
 One copy of the deed(s) of the property.
Applicants Name: ________________________________________________________________________
Address: ______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
Phone Number: ________________________________________________________________________
Subdivision Name: ________________________________________________________________________
Location of Subdivision: __________________________________________________________________
Zoning Classification: __________________________________________________________________
Check One:
Preliminary Plat ? Record Plat ? Amended Record Plat ?
I (We) do hereby certify that the information provided herein is both complete and accurate to the best
of my (our) knowledge, and I (we) understand that any inaccuracies may be considered just cause for
invalidation of this application and any action taken on this application.
_____________________________________________________________________________________
Property Owner(s) / Applicant(s) Signature Title Date
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Received by: ______________________________________________ Date of Filing: __________________________
Review Fee: ______________________________ Date Received: __________________ Receipt #: _______________
Land Use Restriction Fee: ___________________ Date Received: _________________ Receipt#: _______________
Number of Lots Proposed: __________________ Number of Lots Created: _______________
Plat Cabinet: ________________________ Sheet Number: ___________________
APPENDIX B
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS A-3
CONSTRUCTION COST ESTIMATE FORM
City of Radcliff Planning Department
411 West Lincoln Trail Blvd., P.O. Box 519
Radcliff, KY 40159-0519
ITEM
NUMBER
OF
UNITS
MATERIAL
UNIT
PRICE
INSTALLATION
/ MAINT. UNIT
PRICE
TOTAL
UNIT
PRICE
TOTAL
MATERIAL
PRICE
TOTAL
INSTALLATION
/ MAINT. PRICE
TOTAL
PRICE
EARTH DITCH LF 0.00 7.50 7.50 0.00 0.00 0.00
2 - 4 FOOT PAVED DITCH LF 10.00 15.00 25.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
OTHER DITCH SIZE LF 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
RESTORATION SY 1.17 0.33 1.50 0.00 0.00 0.00
9" DEEP RIP-RAP SY 16.75 16.50 33.25 0.00 0.00 0.00
12" HEADWALL w/ energy dissipater EA 550.00 775.00 1325.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
15" HEADWALL w/ energy dissipater EA 550.00 775.00 1325.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
24" HEADWALL w/ energy dissipater EA 900.00 1100.00 2000.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
36" HEADWALL w/ energy dissipater EA 1250.00 1400.00 2650.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
12" S / F HDWL EA 425.00 775.00 1200.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
18" S / F HDWL EA 625.00 850.00 1475.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
24" S / F HDWL EA 800.00 1100.00 1900.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
12" STD HDWL EA 300.00 450.00 750.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
2'X2' CATCH BASIN W/GRATE EA 425.00 775.00 1200.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
3'X3' CATCH BASIN W/GRATE EA 600.00 900.00 1500.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
4'X4' CATCH BASIN W/GRATE EA 900.00 1100.00 2000.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
12" PIPE LF 5.00 15.00 20.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
15" PIPE LF 7.00 18.00 25.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
18" PIPE LF 10.00 30.00 40.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
24" PIPE LF 15.00 35.00 50.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
30" PIPE LF 22.00 38.00 60.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
36" PIPE LF 30.00 45.00 75.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
OTHER PIPE SIZE LF 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
BASIN EARTHWORK CY 0.00 4.00 4.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
WEIR EA 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
OTHER CONTROL STRUCTURE EA 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
ROCK CHECKS EA 50.00 50.00 100.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
ROCK CHECK MAINTENANCE EA 0.00 50.00 50.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
SB CHECKS / INLET / OUTLET PROT. EA 50.00 50.00 100.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
SB PROT. MAINTENANCE EA 0.00 50.00 50.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
SILT FENCE LF 0.65 1.85 2.50 0.00 0.00 0.00
SILT FENCE MAINTENANCE LF 0.65 0.85 1.50 0.00 0.00 0.00
OTHER LF 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
OTHER LF 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
DRAINAGE TOTAL $ - $ - $ -
** ROAD PRICES ARE BASED ON A 20 FOOT WIDTH, PRICES FOR WIDER ROADS WILL BE ADJUSTED PROPORTIONATELY**
PUBLIC RD (stone base) LF 6.50 3.50 10.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
PUBLIC RD (base coat) LF 15.50 8.50 24.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
PUBLIC RD (top coat) LF 5.50 3.00 8.50 0.00 0.00 0.00
PUBLIC RD GRADING / EARTHWK cut CY 0.00 2.00 2.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
PUBLIC RD GRADING / EARTHWK fill CY 0.00 2.00 2.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
CURB & GUTTER LF 3.50 8.50 12.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
ROAD TOTAL $ - $ - $ -
$ - $ - $ -
PREPARED BY:
APPENDIX B
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS A-4
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS WAIVER APPLICATION
City of Radcliff Planning Department
411 West Lincoln Trail Blvd., P. O. Box 519
Radcliff, KY 40159-0519
270-351-1875
Applicants Name: ________________________________________________________________________
Address: ______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
Phone Number: ________________________________________________________________________
Subdivision Name: __________________________________Location: _____________________________
Findings Necessary for Granting of Waiver Request: Before granting any waivers, the Planning
Commission must determine that there will be no adverse impact on the neighborhood or general
area. Describe the impact the proposed waiver(s) will have on the area and state the reason(s) in
support of this request. The explanation should address:
1. The special circumstances of the proposed use;
2. Site constraints that would make installation of improvement(s) economically unfeasible, and;
3. Whether installation of improvement(s) would serve the purpose of enhancing the public
welfare.
The Planning Commission may also consider other factors it may deem relevant in rendering its
decision.
EXPLANATION OF REQUEST:(Use additional sheets, if necessary)_________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________
I do hereby certify that the information provided herein is both complete and accurate to the best of my
knowledge and I understand any inaccuracies may be considered just cause for invalidation of the
application and any action taken on this application. A waiver of any requirements does not exempt
the development from any other requirements of the Radcliff Zoning Ordinance or Subdivision
Regulations.
________________________________________________________________________________________
Property Owner(s) / Applicant(s) Signature Title Date
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Received by: ______________________________________________ Date of Filing: __________________________
Date of Action: ___________________________________________________________________________________
Action Taken: ____________________________________________________________________________________
Commission Chair: _______________________________________________________________________________
APPENDIX B
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS A-5
DEVELOPMENT IN ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE OR
GEOLOGIC HAZARD AREAS
City of Radcliff Planning Department
411 West Lincoln Trail Blvd., P. O. Box 519
Radcliff, KY 40159-0519
270-351-1875
Applicants Name: ____________________________________________________________
Address: __________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________
Phone Number: ____________________________________________________________
Subdivision / Development Name: _______________________________________________
Address of Subject Property: ___________________________________ Zone: ____________
Check the following that apply: ? Environmentally Sensitive Area ? Geologic Hazard Area
For Environmentally Sensitive Areas, submit the following, along with this application:
1. A statement describing the nature of the environmentally sensitive area.
2. A statement describing the manner in which the area is to be addressed during
development.
3. A statement describing any special design measures taken to minimize impact on the
environmentally sensitive area.
4. Any plans or drawings indicating measures taken during construction.
For Geologic Hazard Areas, submit the following, along with this application:
1. A statement describing the nature of the geologic hazard area.
2. A statement describing how the area is to be protected.
3. If the area is not to be permanent open space, a statement describing the reasons for
changes to the area describing how the measures undertaken by the developer will
minimize the developments impact on the geologic hazard area. Additionally, plans
or drawings indicating measures taken during construction must be submitted if any
disturbance to the area is planned. NOTE: For geologic hazard areas, development
shall generally be designed such that any geologic hazard area is left in a natural
state.
I do hereby certify that the information provided herein is both complete and accurate to the best
of my knowledge, and I understand that any inaccuracies may be considered just cause for
invalidation of this application and any action taken on this application.
__________________________________________________________________________________
Property Owner(s) / Applicant(s) Signature Title Date
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Received by: ___________________________________ Date of Filing: ______________________
Date of Action: ___________ Action Taken: _____________________________________________
Commission Chair: ___________________________________________________________________
Appendix C
Typical Street Cross-Sections
Typical Street/Sidewalk Transition
Typical Residential Driveway Plan
Typical Residential Driveway Profile
Typical Curb Details
Typical Survey Control Monument
APPENDIX C
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS A-6
APPENDIX C
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS A-7
APPENDIX C
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS A-8
APPENDIX C
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS A-9
APPENDIX C
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS A-10
APPENDIX C
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS A-11
APPENDIX C
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS A-12
APPENDIX C
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS A-13
APPENDIX C
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS A-14
APPENDIX C
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS A-15
APPENDIX C
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS A-16
APPENDIX C
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS A-17
AMENDMENTS
RADCLIFF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Article 2.7.2 - Amended April 2, 2009
Article 2.7.4  Amended April 2, 2009
Article 4.3.1.23  Amended April 2, 2009
Article 5  Amended December 3, 2009
Article 1.13  Amended January 7, 2010
Table of Contents  Amended January 7, 2010
Article 4.3.1.3B.  Amended April 1, 2010
Article 4.3.1.3C.  Amended May 6, 2010
Article 3.3.7  Amended May 6, 2010
Article 3.5.8  Amended May 6, 2010
Article 2.7.5-Amended September 6, 2012
Article 2.3.1-Amended December 4, 2014
Article 2.2-Amended January 8, 2015
Article 2.6-Amended January 8, 2015
Article 5.5D.-Amended April 2, 2015
Article 3.5.8-Amended January 7, 2016