
Shepherdsville, KY Code of Ordinances


SHEPHERDSVILLE, KENTUCKY
CODE OF ORDINANCES



2018 S-2 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 018-264, passed 7-9-18; and
State legislation current through KRS 2018 Pamphlet



 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



OFFICIALS PAGE



 



Mayor
 
Curtis Hockenbury


City Attorney
 
Walt Sholar


City Council
 
Donna Burke


 
 
Lisa Carter


 
 
Stacey Cline


 
 
Bonnie Enlow


 
 
Mike Hibbard, Sr.


 
 
Gloria Taft




 



ADOPTING ORDINANCE



ORDINANCE NO. 017-233



AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING “CITY OF SHEPHERDSVILLE, KENTUCKY CODE OF
ORDINANCES” FOR THE CITY OF SHEPHERDSVILLE, BULLITT COUNTY, KENTUCKY



   WHEREAS, Kentucky Revised Statute 83A.060(8)(b) provides for city
ordinances not excepted therefrom to be kept in a minute book or an ordinance
book in the order adopted, and indexed in a composite index or maintained in
a Code of Ordinances; and



   WHEREAS, the City of Shepherdsville, Bullitt County, Kentucky, has
determined that it shall maintain such ordinances in a Code of Ordinances,
and has by the City’s authority had such a Code of Ordinances, titled
“City of Shepherdsville, Kentucky Code of Ordinances” prepared by the
American Legal Publishing Corporation;



   BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY OF SHEPHERDSVILLE, BULLITT COUNTY, KENTUCKY
AS FOLLOWS:



   SECTION ONE:  The “City of Shepherdsville, Kentucky Code of
Ordinances”, including any amendments that shall be made, is the City’s
Code of Ordinances as provided for by the Kentucky Revised Statutes.



   SECTION TWO:  The Clerk of the City of Shepherdsville is hereby
authorized and ordered to file a copy of such Code of Ordinances in the
Office of the Clerk.



   SECTION THREE:  This Ordinance shall take effect upon publication.



   SECTION FOUR:  Should any section, clause, line, paragraph, or part of
this Ordinance be held unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, the same
shall not affect the remainder of this Ordinance.



   SECTION FIVE:  Parts of any ordinance in conflict with this Ordinance
are hereby repealed.



   Given first reading at a regular meeting of the City Council of the
City of Shepherdsville, Bullitt County, Kentucky, on the 22nd day of May
2017. Given second reading at a regular meeting of the City Council of the
City of Shepherdsville, Bullitt County, Kentucky, on the 12th day of June
2017.



                                       �
�  Curtis Hockenbury  /s/                       



                                       �
�  Honorable Curtis Hockenbury, Mayor



Attest:



Tammy Richmond /s/                     



Tammy Richmond, City Clerk



 



 

Votes for: 6;

 

Votes Against: 0;

 

Abstentions: 0.



Donna Burke
 

x

 


 




Lisa Carter
 

x

 


 




Stacey Cline
 

x

 


 




Bonnie Enlow
 

x

 


 




Mike Hibbard Sr.
 

x

 


 




Gloria Taft
 

x

 


 





 



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter



      10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY



CHAPTER 10:  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY



Section



   10.01   Short titles



   10.02   Definitions



   10.03   Rules of construction



   10.04   Computation of time



   10.05   Majority may act for all; authorized agent



   10.06   Writings and signatures



   10.07   Severability



   10.08   Revivor



   10.09   Rights and liabilities accruing before repeal of ordinance



   10.10   Construction of section references



   10.11   Ordinances repealed



   10.12   Ordinances unaffected



   10.13   Ordinances saved



   10.14   Amendments to code; amendatory language



   10.15   Conflicting provisions



   10.16   Reference to offices



   10.17   Errors and omissions



   10.18   Historical and statutory references



 



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  SHORT TITLES.



   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city
as revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters and sections shall be known and designated as the
Shepherdsville Code, for which designation “codified ordinances” or
“code” may be substituted. Title heads, chapter heads and section and
division heads or titles, and explanatory notes and cross-references, do not
constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.



(KRS446.140)



   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters and sections are to
those components of the code unless otherwise specified. Any component code
may be referred to and cited by its name, such as the “traffic code”.
Sections may be referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by
the number, such as “§ 10.01”. Headings and captions used in this code
other than the title, chapter and section numbers are employed for reference
purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACTION. Includes all proceedings in any court of the state.



(KRS446.010(1))



   AND. May be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the sense requires it.



   ANIMAL. Includes every warm-blooded living creature, except a human
being.



(KRS446.010(2))



   AVIS. The automated vehicle information system established and
maintained by the Transportation Cabinet to collect titling and registration
information on vehicles and boats and information on holders of motor vehicle
operator’s licenses and personal identification cards.



(KRS 446.010(55))



   CITY,MUNICIPAL CORPORATION or MUNICIPALITY. When used in this code,
shall denote the City of Shepherdsville, irrespective of its population or
legal classification.



   COMPANY. May extend and be applied to any corporation, company, person,
partnership, joint stock company or association.



(KRS 446.010(9))



   CORPORATION. May extend and be applied to any corporation, company,
partnership, joint stock company or association.



(KRS 446.010(10))



   COUNCIL. The city legislative body.



(KRS 83A.010(5))



   COUNTY. Bullitt County, Kentucky.



   CRUELTY. As applied to animals, includes every act or omission whereby
unjustifiable physical pain, suffering or death is caused or permitted.



(KRS 446.010(12))



   DIRECTORS. When applied to corporations, includes managers or trustees.



(KRS 446.010(13))



   DOMESTIC. When applied to a corporation, partnership, business trust or
limited liability company, means all those incorporated or formed by
authority of this state.



(KRS 446.010(14))



   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. Any animal converted to domestic habitat.



(KRS 446.010(15))



   EXECUTIVE AUTHORITY. The Mayor.



(KRS 83A.010(6), KRS 91A.010(4))



   FEDERAL. Refers to the United States.



(KRS 446.010(17))



   FOREIGN. When applied to a corporation, partnership, business trust or
limited liability company, includes all those incorporated or formed by
authority of any other state.



(KRS 446.010(18))



   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes all persons, whether acting by
themselves or as a servant, agent or employee.



   KRS. Kentucky Revised Statutes.



   LAND or REAL ESTATE. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments and
all rights thereto and interest therein, other than a chattel interest.



(KRS 446.010(23))



   LEGISLATIVE BODY. The City Council.



(KRS 91A.010(8))



   LEGISLATIVE BODY MEMBER. A City Council member.



(KRS 83A.010(8))



   LIVESTOCK.  Cattle, sheep, swine, goats, horses, alpacas, llamas,
buffaloes, or any other animals of the bovine, ovine, porcine, caprine,
equine, or camelid species.



(KRS 446.010(25))



   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.



(KRS446.010(26))



   MONTH. Calendar month.



(KRS446.010(27))



   MUNICIPALITY. The City of Shepherdsville, Kentucky.



   OATH. Includes affirmation, in all cases in which an affirmation may be
substituted for an OATH. (KRS446.010(28))



   PARTNERSHIP. Includes both general and limited partnerships.



(KRS 446.010(30))



   PEACEOFFICER. Includes sheriffs, constables, coroners, jailers,
metropolitan and urban-county government correctional officers, marshals,
police officers and other persons with similar authority to make arrests.



(KRS446.010(31))



   PERSON. May extend and be applied to bodies-politic and corporate,
societies, communities, the public generally, individuals, partnerships,
joint stock companies and limited liability companies.



(KRS446.010(33))



   PERSONALPROPERTY. Includes all property, except real.



   PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land and buildings.



   PROPERTY. Includes real, personal, mixed estates and interests.



   PUBLICAUTHORITY. Includes boards of education; the municipal, county,
state or federal government, its officers or an agency thereof; or any duly
authorized public official.



   PUBLICPLACE. Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school
yard, body of water or watercourse, public conveyance or any other place for
the sale of merchandise, public accommodation or amusement.



   REALPROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.



   REGULARELECTION. The election in even-numbered years at which members
of Congress are elected, and the election in odd-numbered years at which
state officers are elected.



(KRS446.010(37))



   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.



(KRS446.010(39))



   SIDEWALK. The portion of the street between the curb line and the
adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.



   STATE. The Commonwealth of Kentucky.



   STREET. Includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, highways,
viaducts and all other public thoroughfares within the city.



   SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a
heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the
chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of
the heading. Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.



   SWORN. Includes affirmed in all cases in which an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath.



(KRS446.010(43))



   TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person holding
a written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of
the premises, alone or with others.



   VACANCYINOFFICE. Exists when there is an unexpired part of a term of
office without a lawful incumbent therein, when the person elected or
appointed to an office fails to qualify according to law, or when there has
been no election to fill the office at the time appointed by law; it applies
whether the vacancy is occasioned by death, resignation, removal from the
state, county, city or district, or otherwise.



(KRS446.010(46))



   VIOLATE. Includes failure to comply with.



(KRS446.010(47))



   YEAR. Calendar year.



(KRS446.010(49))



§ 10.03  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Singular includes plural. A word importing the singular number
only may extend and be applied to several persons or things, as well as to
one person or thing, and a word importing the plural number only may extend
and be applied to one person or thing as well as to several persons or things.



(KRS446.020(1))



   (B)   Masculine includes feminine. A word importing the masculine
gender only may extend and be applied to females as well as males.



(KRS446.020(2))



   (C)   Liberal construction. All sections of this code shall be
liberally construed with a view to promote their objects and carry out the
intent of Council.



(KRS446.080(1))



   (D)   Retroactivity. No ordinance shall be construed to be
retroactive, unless expressly so declared.



(KRS446.080(3))



   (E)   Technical terms. All words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of language, but technical words
and phrases and others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in the law shall be construed according to that meaning.



(KRS446.080(4))



§ 10.04  COMPUTATION OF TIME.



   (A)   In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by order
of court, or by any applicable ordinance or regulation, the day of the act,
event or default after which the designated period of time begins to run is
not to be included. The last day of the period so computed is to be included,
unless it is a Saturday, a Sunday, a legal holiday or a day on which the
public office in which a document is required to be filed is actually and
legally closed, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day
which is not one of the days just mentioned. When the period of time
prescribed or allowed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays,
Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation.



   (B)   When an ordinance, regulation or order of court requires an
act to be done either a certain time before an event or a certain time before
the day on which an event occurs, the day of the event shall be excluded in
computing the time. If the day thereby computed on which or by which the act
is required to be done falls on a Saturday, Sunday, legal holiday or a day on
which the public office in which the act is required to be completed is
actually and legally closed, the act may be done on the next day which is
none of the days just mentioned.



   (C)   If any proceeding is directed by law to take place, or any act
is directed to be done, on a particular day of a month and that day is
Sunday, the proceeding shall take place, or the act shall be done, on the
next day that is not a legal holiday.



(KRS446.030)



   (D)   In all cases where the law requires any act to be done in a
reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR NOTICE
shall mean the time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of
the duty or compliance with the notice.



§ 10.05  MAJORITY MAY ACT FOR ALL; AUTHORIZED AGENT.



   (A)   Words giving authority to three or more public officers or
other persons shall be construed as giving the authority to a majority of the
officers or other persons.



(KRS 446.050)



   (B)   When the law requires an act to be done which may, by law, as
well be done by an agent as by the principal, the requirement shall be
construed to include those acts when done by an authorized agent.



§ 10.06  WRITINGS AND SIGNATURES.



   (A)   When this code requires any writing to be signed by a party
thereto, it shall not be deemed to be signed unless the signature is
subscribed at the end or close of the writing.



   (B)   Every writing contemplated by this code shall be in the
English language.



(KRS446.060)



§ 10.07  SEVERABILITY.



   It shall be considered that it is the intent of Council in enacting any
ordinance that, if any part of the ordinance be held unconstitutional, the
remaining parts shall remain in force, unless the ordinance provides
otherwise, or unless the remaining parts are so essentially and inseparably
connected with and dependent upon the unconstitutional part that it is
apparent that Council would not have enacted the remaining parts without the
unconstitutional part; or unless the remaining parts, standing alone, are
incomplete and incapable of being executed in accordance with the intent of
Council.



(KRS446.090)



§ 10.08  REVIVOR.



   (A)   A repealed ordinance without a delayed effective date is
revived when the ordinance that repealed it is repealed by another ordinance
enacted at the same meeting of Council.



   (B)   A repealed ordinance with a delayed effective date is revived
by the enactment of a repealer of the ordinance that repealed it at the same
or any subsequent meeting of Council as long as it takes effect prior to the
effective date of the original repealer.



   (C)   An amended ordinance without a delayed effective date remains
unchanged with respect to an amendment which is repealed at the same meeting
of Council which enacted the amendment.



   (D)   An amended ordinance with a delayed effective date remains
unchanged with respect to that amendment if the ordinance making the
amendment is repealed at the same or at a subsequent meeting of Council, as
long as the repealing ordinance takes effect prior to the effective date of
the original amendment.



   (E)   No other action of Council repealing a repealer or an
amendment shall have the effect of reviving the original language of the
repealer or amendment, as the case may be.



(KRS446.100)



§ 10.09  RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES ACCRUING BEFORE REPEAL OF ORDINANCE.



   No new ordinance shall be construed to repeal a former ordinance as to
any offense committed against a former ordinance, nor as to any act done, or
penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred, or any right accrued or claim
arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any
offense or act so committed or done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment
so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance
takes effect; except that, the proceedings thereafter had shall conform, so
far as practicable, to the laws in force at the time of the proceedings. If
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment is mitigated by any provision of the
new ordinance, the provision may, by the consent of the party affected, be
applied to any judgment pronounced after the new ordinance takes effect.



(KRS446.110)



§ 10.10  CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION REFERENCES.



   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation
of a section or an inclusive group of sections, the reference shall be
construed to mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections
included in the reference.



   (B)   References in the code to action taken or authorized under
designated sections of the code include, in every case, action taken or
authorized under the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by
this code.



   (C)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section
hereof, the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered, unless the subject
matter be changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.11  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this
code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code
of ordinances.



§ 10.12  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature, and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this code of
ordinances, shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed
expressly or by necessary implication.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES SAVED.



   Whenever an ordinance, by its nature, either authorizes or enables the
Council, or a certain city officer or employee, to make additional ordinances
or regulations for the purpose of carrying out the intent of the ordinance,
all ordinances and regulations of a similar nature serving the purpose
effected prior to the codification and not inconsistent thereto shall remain
in effect and are saved.



§ 10.14  AMENDMENTS TO CODE; AMENDATORY LANGUAGE.



   (A)   Any chapter, section or division amended or added to this code
by ordinances passed subsequent to this code may be numbered in accordance
with the numbering system of this code and printed for inclusion herein. Any
chapter, section or division repealed by subsequent ordinances may be
excluded from this code by omission from reprinted pages. Subsequent
ordinances as printed or omitted shall be prima facie evidence of the
subsequent ordinances until Council shall adopt a new code of ordinances.



   (B)   The method of amendment should be used by the city to amend,
add or repeal a chapter, section or division of this code of ordinances.



§ 10.15  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.



   If the provisions of different codes, chapters or sections of the
codified ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions
bearing the latest passage date shall prevail. If the conflicting provisions
bear the same passage date, the conflict shall be so construed as to be
consistent with the meaning or legal effect of the questions of the subject
matter taken as a whole.



§ 10.16  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.17  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error be discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
word or words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the
intention of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no
meaning can be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or
words was clearly intended to express the intention, the spelling shall be
corrected and the word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will
conform with the manifest intention, and the provision shall have the same
effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as originally
published. No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.18  HISTORICAL AND STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance and the amending ordinances, if any,
are listed following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed
5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25,
passed 1-1-1985)



   (B)   If a KRS cite is included in the history, this indicates that
the text of the section reads either verbatim or substantially the same as
the statute. Example: (KRS 83A.090)



   (C)   If a KRS cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should
refer to that statute for further information. Example:



      § 39.01  PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.



         This municipality shall make available to any person for
inspection



      or copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state
law.



      Statutory reference:



         Inspection of public records, see KRS 61.870 et seq.



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   Where an act or omission is prohibited or declared unlawful in
this code of ordinances, and no penalty is otherwise provided, the offense
shall be deemed a violation, and the offender shall be fined not more than
$250 for each offense.



   (B)   Violations of ordinances that are enforced by the city’s
Code Enforcement Board shall be subject to the following schedule of civil
fines.



      (1)   If a citation for a violation of an ordinance is not
contested by the person charged with the violation, the penalties set forth
in this division (B)(1) shall apply. Each day the violation exists
constitutes a separate fine that accumulates per day.



 


Violation

 

1st Offense

 

2nd Offense

 

All Others





Abandoned property
 

$75

 

$150

 

$300



Building Codes
 

$150

 

$250

 

$350



Business License
 

$75

 

$150

 

$300



Business License tax
 

$75

 

$150

 

$300



Dilapidated/rundown property
 

$75

 

$150

 

$300



Dumping trash
 

$75

 

$150

 

$300



Fencing around dumpsters
 

$75

 

$150

 

$300



Grass/weeds
 

$75

 

$150

 

$300



Junk vehicles per vehicle per day
 

$75

 

$150

 

$300



Littering
 

$75

 

$150

 

$300



Livestock
 

$75

 

$150

 

$300



Nuisance
 

$75

 

$150

 

$300



Parking
 

$75

 

$150

 

$300



Signage
 

$75

 

$150

 

$300



Stop work order
 

$150

 

$250

 

$350



Trash, junk, debris
 

$75

 

$150

 

$300



Trees and shrubbery in right-of-way
 

$75

 

$150

 

$300





 



      (2)   If the citation is contested and a hearing before the
Code Board is required, the following maximum penalties may be imposed at the
discretion of the Code Board. Each day the violation exists constitutes a
separate fine that accumulates per day.



 


Violation

 

1st Offense

 

2nd Offense

 

All Others





Abandoned property
 

$150

 

$300

 

$600



Building Codes
 

$300

 

$500

 

$700



Business License
 

$150

 

$300

 

$600



Business License tax
 

$150

 

$300

 

$600



Dilapidated/rundo wn property
 

$150

 

$300

 

$600



Dumping trash
 

$150

 

$300

 

$600



Fencing around dumpsters
 

$150

 

$300

 

$600



Grass/weeds
 

$150

 

$300

 

$600



Junk vehicles, each per day
 

$150

 

$300

 

$600



Littering
 

$150

 

$300

 

$600



Livestock
 

$150

 

$300

 

$600



Nuisance
 

$150

 

$300

 

$600



Parking
 

$150

 

$300

 

$600



Signage
 

$150

 

$300

 

$600



Stop work order
 

$300

 

$500

 

$700



Trash, junk, debris
 

$150

 

$300

 

$600



Trees and shrubbery in right-of-way
 

$150

 

$300

 

$600





 



(Ord. 004-610, passed 2-23-2004; Ord. 018-262, passed 7-9-2018)



Statutory reference:



   Enforcement of ordinances, see KRS 83A.065



   Maximum fine for violations, see KRS 534.040(2)(c)



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



      30.   MAYOR AND COUNCIL



      31.   ORGANIZATIONS



      32.   OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES



      33.   CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION



      34.   CODE OF ETHICAL CONDUCT



      35.   GENERAL POLICIES



      36.   FINANCE AND REVENUE



CHAPTER 30:  MAYOR AND COUNCIL



Section



   30.01   Regular meeting time and place



   30.02   Presiding officer



   30.03   Compensation



Statutory reference:



   Mayor-Council plan; powers and duties, see KRS 83A.130



§ 30.01  REGULAR MEETING TIME AND PLACE.



   The regular meeting of the City Council shall be on the second and
fourth Monday of each month commencing at the hour of 6:30 p.m. All regularly
scheduled meetings of the City Council shall be held at City Hall, 634
Conestoga Parkway, Shepherdsville, Kentucky.



(1991 Code, § 2-26)  (Ord. 015-180, passed 4-13-2015; Ord. 017-225, passed
1-24-2017)



Statutory reference:



   Meetings, see KRS 83A.130



§ 30.02  PRESIDING OFFICER.



   (A)   When the Mayor is absent from the city or is unable to fulfill
his or her duties provided for in KRS 83A.130(5), the duty to preside at the
City Council meeting shall be carried out by a Council member.



   (B)   The Council member who shall preside at meetings in the
absence of the Mayor shall be elected by the members of the City Council from
within their ranks by a secret ballot. The Council member receiving the
majority vote shall be elected to fulfill this capacity.



(1991 Code, § 2-27)  (Ord. 984-111, passed 1-23-1984)



§ 30.03  COMPENSATION.



   (A)   The annual salary of the Mayor of the City of Shepherdsville
is $69,000.



   (B)   The monthly salary of each Councilmember of the city of
Shepherdsville is $925.



(1991 Code, § 2-28)  (Ord. 017-230, passed 5-8-2017)



CHAPTER 31:  ORGANIZATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   31.01   Planning Commission



   31.02   Joint Board of Adjustment



Code Enforcement Board



   31.15   Definitions



   31.16   Creation and membership



   31.17   Powers



   31.18   Appointment of members; terms of office; removal from
office; oath; compensation



   31.19   Organization of Board; meetings; quorum



   31.20   Conflict of interest



   31.21   Enforcement proceedings



   31.22   Hearing; notice; final order



   31.23   Presentation of cases



   31.24   Appeals; final judgment



   31.25   Ordinance fine schedule



   31.26   Liens, fines, charges and fees



   31.27   Lienholder notification system



   31.28   Liens



   31.29   Immediate action



Tourist and Convention Commission



   31.40   Appointment of members



   31.41   Terms of members



   31.42   Election of officials



   31.43   Books and records



   31.44   Removal from office



Volunteer Fire Department



   31.55   Created; composition



   31.56   Supervision, control of Department; apparatus



   31.57   Command at fires



   31.58   Records, reports



   31.59   Personnel, activities



   31.60   Function



   31.61   Failure to obey orders of firefighters, citizens



   31.62   Unauthorized entry into Fire Department areas



   31.63   Enforcement



 



   31.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 31.01  PLANNING COMMISSION.



   (A)   Joint Planning Unit.



      (1)   A Joint Planning Unit has been established and is hereby
established and ratified for the entire county and all of the cities situated
therein.



      (2)   It is agreed that the Joint Planning Commission shall be
supported by the levy of fees for services rendered, with the county
contributing the balance necessary to fund the combined planning operations.



      (3)   It is agreed that the county’s Fiscal Court will
approve a budget annually for the Joint Planning Commission, amended as
needed, and bear the expense incurred under the budget, except those borne by
the cities as set out above. Nothing contained in this agreement shall
prohibit the acceptance of funds from other sources for the expenses of the
planning unit or the administration of KRS Ch. 100.



(1991 Code, § 2-62)



   (B)   Joint Planning Commission.



      (1)   The name of the Planning Commission shall be the
“Bullitt County Planning Commission”.



      (2)   The Planning Commission shall be composed of 14 members
which shall include:



         (a)   Six members who are residents of the county living
outside the city limits of Lebanon Junction, Shepherdsville, Mt. Washington
or Hillview and these six members shall be appointed by the County Judge
subject to the approval of the county’s Fiscal Court;



         (b)   Two members who are residents of the City of
Lebanon Junction, appointed by the Mayor of Lebanon Junction, subject to the
approval of the City Council of Lebanon Junction;



         (c)   Two members who are residents of the City of
Shepherdsville, appointed by the Mayor of Shepherdsville subject to the
approval of the City Council of Shepherdsville;



         (d)   Two members who are residents of the City of Mt.
Washington, appointed by the Mayor of Mt. Washington, subject to the approval
of the City Council of Mt. Washington; and



         (e)   Two members who are residents of the City of
Hillview, appointed by the Mayor of Hillview subject, to the approval of the
City Council of Hillview.



      (3)   The term of office of all Commission members shall be
four years and shall expire on December 31 of the last year of the term.
Commission members shall serve until their successors are appointed and
qualified. The term of office for Commission members first appointed under
this section shall be as follows:



         (a)   One-year term. One Commissioner each representing
the City of Mt. Washington and two Commissioners representing the
unincorporated area of the county;



         (b)   Two-year term. One Commissioner each representing
the City of Lebanon Junction, the City of Hillview and the unincorporated
area of the county;



         (c)   Three-year term. One Commissioner each
representing the City of Shepherdsville and the City of Hillview and two
Commissioners representing the unincorporated area of the county; and



         (d)   Four-year term. One Commissioner each representing
the City of Lebanon Junction, the City of Mt. Washington and the
unincorporated area of the county and one Commissioner representing the City
of Shepherdsville.



      (4)   All Commission members shall be reimbursed for any
necessary expenses. Such expenses shall be approved and paid by the
county’s Fiscal Court. Citizen members shall receive compensation for each
Commission or public meeting attended of not less than $25 with such
compensation to be fixed and paid by the county’s Fiscal Court. No
Commission member shall be paid for attending more than 40 meetings during
any fiscal year of the Commission without prior approval of the county’s
Fiscal Court.



      (5)   All other details which are necessary for the
establishment, operation and administration of the Commission, for the
preparation of plans, and for the aids to help implement the plans shall be
as provided by law.



      (6)   The Commission may employ such administrative officials
and staff as it may deem necessary for its work and may contract with
professional planners and for personal services as it may require with each
to be approved and paid by the county’s Fiscal Court.



(1991 Code, § 2-62)



(Ord. 980-53, passed 8-14-1980)



§ 31.02  JOINT BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.



   (A)   A Board of Adjustment, to be known as the county’s Board of
Zoning Adjustment, has been established and is hereby established and
ratified.



   (B)   The Board shall be composed of seven members which shall
include:



      (1)   Three members not residents of any incorporated city in
the county, each appointed by the County Judge, subject to the approval of
the county’s Fiscal Court;



      (2)   One member who is a resident of the City of Lebanon
Junction, appointed by the Mayor of Lebanon Junction, subject to the approval
of the City Council of Lebanon Junction;



      (3)   One member who is a resident of the City of Mt.
Washington, appointed by the Mayor of Mt. Washington, subject to the approval
of the City Council of Mt. Washington;



      (4)   One member who is a resident of Shepherdsville,
appointed by the Mayor of Shepherdsville, subject to the approval of the City
Council of Shepherdsville; and



      (5)   One member who is a resident of the City of Hillview,
appointed by the Mayor of Hillview, subject to the approval of the City
Council of Hillview.



   (C)   The term of office of all Board members shall be four years
and shall expire on December 31 of the last year of the term. Board members
shall serve until their successors are appointed and qualified. The term of
office of Board members first appointed under this section shall be staggered
as follows:



      (1)   One-year term. Board member of the City of Lebanon
Junction;



      (2)   One-year term. Board member of the City of Hillview;



      (3)   Two-year term. Board member of the City of Mt.
Washington;



      (4)   Three-year term. Board member of the City of
Shepherdsville; and



      (5)   Four-year term. Two Board members of the county who do
not reside in the city limits.



   (D)   (1)   All Board members shall be reimbursed for any
necessary expenses and shall be approved and paid by the county’s Fiscal
Court.



      (2)   Board members shall receive compensation for each Board
or public meeting attended of not less than $25 with such compensation to be
fixed and paid by the county’s Fiscal Court. No Board member shall be paid
for attending more than 40 meetings during any fiscal year of the Board,
without prior approval of the county’s Fiscal Court.



   (E)   All other details which are necessary for the establishment,
operation and administration of the Board of Zoning Adjustment shall be as
provided by law.



(1991 Code, § 2-81)  (Ord. 980-53, passed 8-14-1980)



CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD



§ 31.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABATEMENT COSTS.  The city’s necessary and reasonable costs for and
associated with clearing, preventing unauthorized entry to, or demolishing
all or the portion of a structure or premises, or taking any other action
with regard to a structure or premises necessary to remedy a violation and to
maintain and preserve the public health, safety, and welfare in accordance
with any city ordinance.



   CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD. An administrative body created and acting under
the authority of the Local Government Code Enforcement Board Act, being KRS
65.8801 to 65.8839.



   CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. A city police officer, safety officer, Code
Enforcement Officer, or other public law enforcement officer with the
authority to issue a citation.



   FINAL ORDER.  Any order:



      (1)   Issued by the Code Enforcement Board following a hearing
in accordance with § 31.22(E);



      (2)   Created because a violator neither paid nor contested
the citation within seven days as provided in § 31.21(F); or



      (3)   Created because a violator failed to appear at a hearing
the violator requested to contest the citation as provided in § 31.22(C).



   IMMINENT DANGER.  A condition which is likely to cause serious or
life-threatening injury or death at any time.



   ORDINANCE. An official action of the city, which is a regulation of a
general and permanent nature and enforceable as a local law and shall include
any provision of a code of ordinances adopted by the City Council which
embodies all or part of an ordinance.



   OWNER.  A person, association, corporation, partnership, or other
legal entity having a legal or equitable title in real property.



   PREMISES.  A lot, plot, or parcel of land, including any structures
upon it.



(Ord. 018-262, passed 7-9-2018)



§ 31.16  CREATION AND MEMBERSHIP.



   There is hereby created within the city, pursuant to KRS 65.8801 to KRS
65.8839, a Code Enforcement Board which shall be composed of three members,
all of whom shall be at least 21 years of age and a resident of the city for
a period of at least one year prior to their appointment and shall reside
there throughout the term of the office.



(Ord. 018-262, passed 7-9-2018)



§ 31.17  POWERS.



   (A)   (1)   The Code Enforcement Board shall have the power to
issue remedial orders and impose civil fines as a method enforcing city
ordinances when a violation of the ordinance has been classified as a civil
offense by its express terms.



      (2)   The Code Enforcement Board shall not have the authority
to enforce any ordinance regulating conduct which would also, under any
provision of the Kentucky Revised Statutes, constitute a criminal offense or
a moving motor vehicle offense.



   (B)   The city’s Code Enforcement Board shall have the following
powers and duties:



      (1)   To adopt rules and regulations to govern its operations
and the conduct of its hearings consistent with this subchapter;



      (2)   To conduct hearings to determine if there has been a
violation of an ordinance over which it has jurisdiction;



      (3)   To subpoena alleged violators, witnesses and evidence to
its hearings. Subpoenas issued by the Code Enforcement Board may be served by
any Code Enforcement Officer;



      (4)   To take testimony under oath. The Chairperson shall have
the authority to administer oaths for the purpose of taking testimony;



      (5)   To make findings of fact and issue orders necessary to
remedy any violation of a city ordinance or code provision which the Board is
authorized to enforce; and



      (6)   To impose civil fines, as authorized, on any person
found to have violated an ordinance over which the Board has jurisdiction.



(Ord. 018-262, passed 7-9-2018)



§ 31.18  APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS; TERMS OF OFFICE; REMOVAL FROM OFFICE;
OATH; COMPENSATION.



   (A)   Members of the Code Enforcement Board shall be appointed by
the Mayor, subject to the approval of the City Council.



   (B)   The initial appointment to the Code Enforcement Board shall be
as follows:



      (1)   One member appointed to a one-year term;



      (2)   One member appointed to a two-year term; and



      (3)   One member appointed to a three-year term.



   (C)   All subsequent appointments shall be for a term of three
years. A member may be reappointed, subject to the approval of the City
Council.



   (D)   The Mayor may appoint, subject to the approval of the
legislative body, two alternate members to serve on the Code Enforcement
Board in the absence of regular members. Alternate members shall meet all of
the qualifications and shall be subject to all of the requirements that apply
to regular members of the Code Enforcement Board. One of the alternate
members shall be appointed for an initial term of two years and one shall be
appointed for an initial term of three years. Thereafter, appointments of
alternate members shall be for three years.



   (E)   Any vacancy on the Board shall be filled by the Mayor, subject
to approval of the City Council, within 60 days of the vacancy. If the
vacancy is not filled within that time period, the remaining Code Board
members shall fill the vacancy. A vacancy shall be filled for the remainder
of the unexpired term.



   (F)   A Code Board member may be removed from office by the Mayor
for misconduct, inefficiency or willful neglect of duty. A Board member who
is absent for three or more consecutive meetings and/or hearings without good
cause shall be deemed to have abandoned his or her position and the position
shall be deemed vacant. The Mayor shall submit a written statement to the
member and the City Council setting forth the reasons for removal. The member
so removed shall have the right of appeal to the Circuit Court by filing a
civil action in the Bullitt County Circuit Court but must do so within 30
days of his or her removal.



   (G)   All members of the Code Enforcement Board shall, before
entering upon the duties of their office, take the oath of office prescribed
by § 228 of the Kentucky Constitution.



   (H)   Members of the Code Enforcement Board shall be reimbursed for
actual expenses and compensated in the amount of $50 per meeting.



   (I)   No member of the Code Enforcement Board may hold any other
elected or appointed office, paid or unpaid, or any position of employment
with the city.



(Ord. 018-262, passed 7-9-2018)



§ 31.19  ORGANIZATION OF BOARD; MEETINGS; QUORUM.



   (A)   The Board shall annually elect a Chair from among its members.
The Chairperson shall be the presiding officer and a full voting member of
the Board. In the absence of the Chair, the remaining members of the Board
shall select a member to preside in place of and exercise the powers of the
Chair.



   (B)   Regular meetings of the Code Enforcement Board shall be held
on the third Tuesday of each month at 5:30 p.m. and at such other times and
dates as a majority of the Board may direct. Meetings other than those
regularly scheduled shall be special meetings or emergency meetings. Meetings
shall not conflict with regular meetings of the Shepherdsville City Council.



   (C)   All meetings and hearings of the Code Enforcement Board shall
be public meetings held in accordance with the requirements of KRS 65.8815(5)
and the Kentucky Open Meetings Act, being KRS 61.805 to 61.850.



   (D)   The presence of at least a majority of the Board’s entire
membership shall constitute a quorum. The affirmative vote of a majority of a
quorum of the Board shall be necessary for any official action to be taken.



   (E)   Minutes shall be kept for all proceedings of the Code
Enforcement Board and the vote of each member on any issue decided by the
Board shall be recorded in the minutes.



(Ord. 018-262, passed 7-9-2018)



§ 31.20  CONFLICT OF INTEREST.



   Any member of the Code Enforcement Board who has any direct or indirect
financial or personal interest in any matter to be decided shall disclose the
nature of the interest and shall disqualify himself or herself from voting on
the matter in which he or she has an interest and shall not be counted for
purposes of establishing quorum.



(Ord. 018-262, passed 7-9-2018)



§ 31.21  ENFORCEMENT PROCEEDINGS.



   The following requirements shall govern all enforcement proceedings
before the Board.



   (A)   Enforcement proceedings before the Code Enforcement Board
shall only be initiated by the issuance of a citation by a Code Enforcement
Officer.



   (B)   Except when immediate action is necessary pursuant to §
31.29, if a Code Enforcement Officer believes, based on his or her personal
observation or investigation, that a person has violated a city ordinance, he
or she shall issue a notice of violation to the offender allowing the alleged
violator a specified period of time to remedy the violation without incurring
a fine. If the alleged violator fails or refuses to remedy the violations
within the specified time, the Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to
issue a citation.



   (C)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a citation by one of
the following methods:



      (1)   Personal service to the alleged violator; or



      (2)   Leaving a copy of the citation with any person 18 years
of age or older who is on the premises, if the alleged violator is not on the
premises at the time the citation is issued.



   (D)   The citation issued by the Code Enforcement Officer shall
contain the following information:



      (1)   The date and time of issuance;



      (2)   The name and address of the person to whom the citation
is issued;



      (3)   The physical address of the premises where the violation
occurred;



      (4)   The date and time the offense was committed;



      (5)   The facts constituting the offense;



      (6)   The section of the code or number of the ordinance
violated;



      (7)   The name of the Code Enforcement Officer;



      (8)   The civil fine that will be imposed for the violation,
including, if applicable:



         (a)   The civil fine that will be imposed if the person
does not contest the citation; and



         (b)   The maximum civil fine that may be imposed if the
person elects to contest the citation;



      (9)   The procedure for the person to follow in order to pay
the civil fine or to contest the citation; and



      (10)   A statement that if the person fails to pay the civil
fine set forth in the citation, or contest the citation, within the time
allowed, the person shall be deemed to have waived the right to a hearing
before the Code Enforcement Board to contest the citation and that the
determination that the violation was committed shall be final, and the person
shall be deemed to have waived the right to appeal the final order to
District Court.



   (E)   After issuing a citation to an alleged violator, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall notify the Code Enforcement Board by delivering the
citation to the City Clerk.



   (F)   If the person fails to pay the civil fine set forth in the
citation, or request, in writing, a hearing to contest the citation within
seven days of the date the citation is issued, the person shall have waived
the right to a hearing before the Code Enforcement Board to contest the
citation, the determination that the violation was committed shall be final,
the citation as issued shall be a final order determining that the violation
was committed and imposing the civil fine set forth in the citation, and the
person shall have waived the right to appeal the final order to District
Court.



   (G)   Notice of a final order based upon division (F) of this
section shall be provided to the cited violator by regular first-class mail;
certified mail, return receipt requested; personal delivery; or by leaving a
copy of the order at that person’s usual place of residence with any
individual residing therein who is 18 years of age or older and who is
informed of the contents of the order.



(Ord. 018-262, passed 7-9-2018)



§ 31.22  HEARING; NOTICE; FINAL ORDER.



   (A)   When a hearing has been timely requested, the Code Enforcement
Board or its administrative staff shall schedule a hearing.



   (B)   Not less than seven days before the date of the hearing, the
Code Enforcement Board shall notify the requester of the date, time and place
of the hearing. This notice may be given by regular first- class mail;
certified mail, return receipt requested; personal delivery; or by leaving
notice at the person’s usual place of residence with any individual
residing therein who is 18 years of age or older and who is informed of the
contents of the notice.



   (C)   (1)   Any person requesting a hearing before the Code
Enforcement Board who fails to appear at the time and place set for the
hearing shall be deemed to have waived the right to a hearing to contest the
citation and the determination that a violation was committed shall be final.
In this event, the citation as issued shall be deemed a final order
determining the violation was committed and imposing the civil fine set forth
in the citation, and the alleged violator shall be deemed to have waived the
right to appeal the final order to the Bullitt County District Court.



      (2)   A copy of the final order shall be provided to the cited
violator by regular first- class mail; certified mail, return receipt
requested; personal delivery; or by leaving the notice at the person’s
usual place of residence with any individual residing therein who is 18 years
of age or older and who is informed of the contents of the order.



   (D)   All testimony at the hearing shall be taken under oath and
recorded. Testimony shall be taken from the Code Enforcement Officer, the
alleged violator and any witnesses to the violation offered by the Code
Enforcement Officer or alleged violator. Formal rules of evidence shall not
apply, but fundamental due process shall be observed and shall govern the
proceedings.



   (E)   The Code Enforcement Board shall, based on the evidence,
determine whether a violation was committed. If it determined that no
violation was committed, an order dismissing the citation shall be entered.
If it determines that a violation was committed, an order may be issued
upholding the citation and such order shall be in writing and include the
findings and conclusions of the Board. The Board may impose a fine up to the
maximum authorized by § 10.99(B) or require the offender to remedy a
continuing violation to avoid a fine, or both.



   (F)   (1)   Every final order following a hearing shall be
reduced to writing, which shall include the findings and conclusions reached
and the date the order was issued. A copy shall be furnished to the person
named in the citation.



      (2)   If the person named in the citation is not present when
the final order based upon divisions (C) or (E) of this section is issued,
the order shall be delivered to the person by regular first- class mail;
certified mail, return receipt requested; personal delivery; or by leaving
the notice at the person’s usual place of residence with any individual
residing therein who is 18 years of age or older and who is informed of the
contents of the notice.



(Ord. 018-262, passed 7-9-2018)



§ 31.23  PRESENTATION OF CASES.



   Each case before the Code Enforcement Board shall be presented by an
attorney selected by the city, by a Code Enforcement Officer for the city, or
by a member of the city’s administrative staff. The City Attorney may
either be counsel to the Code Enforcement Board or may present cases before
the Code Enforcement Board, but in no case shall he or she serve in both
capacities.



(Ord. 018-262, passed 7-9-2018)



§ 31.24  APPEALS; FINAL JUDGMENT.



   (A)   An appeal from a final order of a Code Enforcement Board
following a hearing conducted pursuant to § 31.22 may be made to the Bullitt
County District Court within 30 days of the date the order is issued. The
appeal shall be initiated by the filing of a complaint and a copy of the
final order in the same manner as any civil action under the Kentucky Rules
of Civil Procedure.



   (B)   If no appeal from a final order of the Code Enforcement Board
is filed within the time period set in division (A) above, the Code
Enforcement Board’s order shall be deemed final for all purposes.



(Ord. 018-262, passed 7-9-2018)



§ 31.25  ORDINANCE FINE SCHEDULE.



   See § 10.99(B) of this code of ordinances for the fine schedule.



(Ord. 018-262, passed 7-9-2018)



§ 31.26  LIENS, FINES, CHARGES AND FEES.



   (A)   The city shall possess a lien on property owned by the person
found by a non-appealable final order as defined in § 31.15, or by a final
judgment of the court, to have committed a violation of a city ordinance. The
lien shall be for all civil fines assessed for the violation and for all
charges and fees incurred by the city in connection with the enforcement of
the ordinance, including abatement costs. An affidavit of the Code
Enforcement Officer shall constitute prima facie evidence of the amount of
the lien and regularity of the proceedings pursuant to KRS 65.8801 to 65.8839.



   (B)   The lien shall be recorded in the office of the County Clerk.
The lien shall be notice to all persons from the time of its recording and
shall bear interest at 6% per annum compounded annually from the date of
assessment until paid. The lien shall continue for ten years following the
date of the non- appealable final order or final court judgment.



   (C)   Subject to § 31.28, the lien shall take precedence over all
other liens, except sate, county, school board and city taxes and may be
enforced by judicial proceedings, including a foreclosure action.



   (D)   In addition to the remedy prescribed in division (A) above,
the person found to have committed the violation shall be personally
responsible for the amount of the lien, including all civil fines assessed
for the violation and for all charges, fees, and abatement costs incurred by
the city in connection with the enforcement of the ordinance, and interest at
6% per annum, compounded annually from the date of assessment. The city may
bring civil action against the person and shall have the same remedies as
provided for the recovery of a debt.



(Ord. 018-262, passed 7-9-2018)



§ 31.27  LIENHOLDER NOTIFICATION SYSTEM.



   The city shall obtain and maintain priority over previously filed liens
as provided in § 31.26, in accordance with the following provisions.



   (A)   Individuals and entities, including, but not limited to
lienholders, may register with the city to receive electronic notification of
final orders entered pursuant to this subchapter.



   (B)   In order to receive the notification, the registrant shall
submit the following information to the City Clerk:



      (1)   Name;



      (2)   Mailing address;



      (3)   Phone number; and



      (4)   Electronic mailing address.



   (C)   A registrant may use the electronic form provided on the city
website to submit the information required by division (B). It shall be the
responsibility of the registrant to maintain and update the required contact
information with the city. The city shall inform a registrant of any evidence
it receives that the electronic mailing address is invalid or not functional
so that the registrant may provide an updated electronic mailing address.



   (D)   Once per month, the city shall send electronic mail
notification of all final orders entered pursuant to this subchapter since
the last date of notification to each party registered pursuant to this
section. The notification shall provide an electronic link to a document, or
the city Code Enforcement database, which includes the following information
regarding each final order:



      (1)   The name of the person charged with a violation;



      (2)   The physical address of the premises where the violation
occurred;



      (3)   The last known mailing address for the owner of the
premises where the violation occurred if, in the exercise of reasonable
diligence, it is ascertainable;



      (4)   A copy of the full citation;



      (5)   A copy of the full final order; and



      (6)   The status of the final order regarding its ability to
be appealed.



   (E)   If a timely appeal is filed on a final order, the city shall
send an update to registrants by electronic mail.



   (F)   At the same time that it sends the electronic notification
required by divisions (D) or (E) above, the city shall post this notification
in a conspicuous place upon the city website.



   (G)   The city shall maintain the records created under this section
for ten years following their issuance.



(Ord. 018-262, passed 7-9-2018)



§ 31.28  LIENS.



   (A)   A lienholder of record may, within 45 days from the date of
issuance of notification under § 31.27(D):



      (1)   Correct the violation, if it has not already been
abated; or



      (2)   Pay all civil fines assessed for the violation, and all
charges and fees incurred by the city in connection with enforcement of the
ordinance, including abatement costs.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from taking
immediate action if necessitated under § 31.29.



   (C)   The lien provided by § 31.26 shall not take precedence over
previously recorded liens if:



      (1)   The city failed to comply with the requirements of §
31.28 for notification of the final order; or



      (2)   A prior lienholder corrected the violation or paid all
civil fines assessed for the violation and all charges and fees incurred by
the city in connection with the enforcement of the ordinance, including
abatement costs, within 45 days as provided in division (A).



   (D)   A lien that does not take precedence over previously recorded
liens under division (C) of this section shall, if the final order remains
partially unsatisfied, continue to take precedence over all other subsequent
liens except liens for state, county, school board, and city taxes.



   (E)   The city may record a lien before the 45 day period
established in division (A) expires. If the lien is fully satisfied prior to
the expiration of that 45 day period, the city shall release the lien in the
County Clerk’s office where the lien is recorded within 15 days of
satisfaction.



   (F)   Failure of the city comply with §§ 31.27 and 31.28, or
failure of a lien to take precedence over previously filed liens as provided
in division (C) of this section, shall not limit or restrict any other
remedies the city has against the property or the violator.



(Ord. 018-262, passed 7-9-2018)



§ 31.29  IMMEDIATE ACTION.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit the city from taking
immediate action to remedy a violation of its ordinances when there is reason
to believe that the violation presents imminent danger, a serious threat to
the public health, safety, and welfare, or if in the absence of immediate
action, the effects of the violation will be irreparable or irreversible.



(Ord. 018-262, passed 7-9-2018)



TOURIST AND CONVENTION COMMISSION



§ 31.40  APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.



   (A)   Three Commissioners shall be appointed from a list of six or
more names submitted by the county’s Hotel and Motel Association. If no
formal county hotel and motel association is in existence upon the
establishment of this Commission or upon the expiration of the term of a
Commissioner appointed pursuant to this section, then up to three
Commissioners shall be appointed from a list of six or more names of persons
residing within the jurisdiction of the Commission, submitted by the
state’s Hotel and Motel Association. The county’s Hotel and Motel
Association need not be affiliated with the state’s Hotel and Motel
Association to be recognized as the official county hotel and motel
association;



   (B)   One Commissioner shall be appointed from a list of three or
more names of persons residing within the jurisdiction of the Commission,
submitted by the local Restaurant Association. A local restaurant association
or associations shall not be required to be affiliated with the state’s
Restaurant Association to be recognized as the official local restaurant
association or associations;



   (C)   One Commissioner from a list of three or more names submitted
by the county’s Chamber of Commerce;



   (D)   One Commissioner appointed by the chief executive officer of
the county;



   (E)   One Commissioner appointed by the chief executive officer of
the city; and



   (F)   A candidate submitted for appointment to the Commission,
pursuant to divisions (A), (B) and (C) above, shall be appointed by joint
action of the chief executive officers of the county and the city within 30
days of the receipt of the required list or lists; if not, the association or
associations shall, by election within ten days, determine the Commissioner
from the list or lists submitted by plurality vote of the aggregate
membership. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner that original
appointments are made.



(Ord. 997-418, passed 11-10-1997)



§ 31.41  TERMS OF MEMBERS.



   Commissioners shall be appointed for terms of three years; provided
that, in making the initial appointments, the chief executive officers of the
county and the city shall appoint two Commissioners for a term of three
years, two Commissioners for a term of two years and three Commissioners for
a term of one year. There shall be no limitation on the number of terms to
which a Commissioner is reappointed. Subsequent appointments shall be for
three-year terms.



(Ord. 997-418, passed 11-10-1997)



§ 31.42  ELECTION OF OFFICIALS.



   The Commission shall elect from its membership a Chairperson and a
Treasurer and may employ such personnel and make contracts necessary to carry
out the purpose of KRS 91A.350 to 91A.390. The contracts may include, but
shall not be limited to, the procurement of promotional services, advertising
services and other services and materials relating to the promotion of
tourist and convention business. Contracts of the type enumerated shall be
made only with persons, organizations and firms with experience and
qualifications for providing promotional services and materials, such as
advertising firms, chambers of commerce, publishers and printers.



(Ord. 997-418, passed 11-10-1997)



§ 31.43  BOOKS AND RECORDS.



   (A)   The books of the Commission shall be audited annually by an
independent auditor who shall make a report to the Commission, to the
associations submitting names from which Commission members are selected, to
the chief executive officers of the county and the city and to the county’s
Fiscal Court and the City Council.



   (B)   A copy of the audit report shall be made available by the
Commission to members of the public upon request and at no charge.



(Ord. 997-418, passed 11-10-1997)



§ 31.44  REMOVAL FROM OFFICE.



   A Commissioner may be removed from office by joint or separate action
of the county’s Fiscal Court or the City Council, consistent with the
method by which the Commission was established, and as provided by KRS 65.007.



(Ord. 997-418, passed 11-10-1997)



VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT



§ 31.55  CREATED; COMPOSITION.



   There is hereby created and established a Volunteer Fire Department,
consisting of a Chief and such other members of the Volunteer Fire Department
as may from time to time be provided for by the Mayor and City Council.
Members shall be appointed by the Fire Chief subject to the approval of the
Mayor and City Council.



(1991 Code, § 2-416)  (Ord. 310.2, passed --)



§ 31.56  SUPERVISION, CONTROL OF DEPARTMENT; APPARATUS.



   (A)   The Fire Chief shall have the control, subject to the order
and direction of the Mayor and the City Council, of the Volunteer Fire
Department and all fire apparatus belonging to the city.



   (B)   Whenever any fire apparatus needs repairing, the Fire Chief
shall cause the same to be done without delay, after first securing approval
of the Mayor and Financial Officer of the city.



(1991 Code, § 2-417)  (Ord. 310.2, passed --)



§ 31.57  COMMAND AT FIRES.



   (A)   In case of fire, the Fire Chief, and his or her assistants,
shall rank in the order named and the officer of the highest rank at the fire
shall take command of the Volunteer Fire Department and direct the management
thereof for the suppression of the fire, in the best manner possible.



   (B)   When it may be necessary for the protection of other property
and to prevent the spread of the conflagration, the officer in command may
cause buildings to be removed, torn down or destroyed in the best manner
possible.



(1991 Code, § 2-418)  (Ord. 310.2, passed --)



§ 31.58  RECORDS, REPORTS.



   The Fire Chief shall keep or cause to be kept a record of all meetings
of the company and the attendance of the members, a record of all fires and,
during the last week in January of each year, file with the City Clerk a full
report of such records and attendance and fires, which report shall be under
oath.



(1991 Code, § 2-419)  (Ord. 310.2, passed --)



§ 31.59  PERSONNEL, ACTIVITIES.



   The Volunteer Fire Department shall consist of as many members as may
be decided upon by the Mayor and the City Council. The Volunteer Fire
Department may have any organization approved by the Council and may hold
meetings and engage in social activities with the approval of the City
Council. The Secretary of the Volunteer Fire Department, if any is elected or
appointed, shall keep a record of all meetings and shall make a report to the
City Council of all meetings and all activities of the Volunteer Fire
Department. No officer shall be elected or appointed within the organization
of the Volunteer Fire Department without the approval of the Mayor and City
Council. Any member may be removed by the Mayor or Fire Chief, subject to
review of the City Council.



(1991 Code, § 2-420)  (Ord. 310.2, passed --)



§ 31.60  FUNCTION.



   It shall be the function and duty of the Volunteer Fire Department and
every member thereof to extinguish accidental or destructive fires and to
prevent the occurrence or spread of such fires.



(1991 Code, § 2-421)  (Ord. 310.2, passed --)



Statutory reference:



   Standards of safety, minimum fire prevention and protection standards,
see KRS 227.300



§ 31.61  FAILURE TO OBEY ORDERS OF FIREFIGHTERS, CITIZENS.



   (A)   Any firefighter in attendance at a fire who neglects or
refuses to obey the orders of the officer in command at such fire shall, upon
conviction, be fined as set out in § 31.99 of this chapter.



(1991 Code, § 2-422)



   (B)   Every male person above the age of 18 years who is present at
a fire shall be subject to the orders of the officer in command at such fire
and shall render all assistance in his power and in such manner as he may be
directed in the extinguishment of the fire, and in the removal of and
protection of property. No person shall be bound to obey any such officer
unless such officer’s official authority is made known to such person.



(1991 Code, § 2-423)



(Ord. 310.2, passed --)  Penalty, see § 31.99



§ 31.62  UNAUTHORIZED ENTRY INTO FIRE DEPARTMENT AREAS.



   It shall be and hereby is declared unlawful for any person to enter the
Volunteer Fire Department house or any place where the equipment and
apparatus of the Volunteer Fire Department is stored, at any time, except on
business pertaining to the Volunteer Fire Department or other city business.



(1991 Code, § 2-424)  (Ord. 310.2, passed --)  Penalty, see § 31.99



§ 31.63  ENFORCEMENT.



   It shall be the duty of the police officers of the city to see that the
provisions of this subchapter are enforced and to arrest, on view, any person
who is found violating any of the provisions of this subchapter or who
hinders, resists or refuses to obey any such officer in the discharge of his
or her duty.



(1991 Code, § 2-425)  (Ord. 310.2, passed --)



§ 31.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   (1)   Any firefighter in attendance at a fire who neglects
or refuses to obey the orders of the officer in command at such fire, per §
31.61(A) of this chapter, shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $5,
nor more than $50, for each offense.



(1991 Code, § 2-422)



      (2)   Any person refusing to obey such orders, per § 31.61(B)
of this chapter, shall, upon conviction, be fined in any sum not exceeding
$200.



(1991 Code, § 2-423)



   (C)   The penalty for the violation of § 31.62 of this chapter
shall be a fine of not less than $3, nor more than $10.



(1991 Code, § 2-424)



(Ord. 310.2, passed --)



CHAPTER 32:  OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES



Section



General Provisions



   32.01   Policy and Procedure Manual adopted by reference



   32.02   Non-partisan elections



   32.03   Grievance procedure for handicapped persons



   32.04   Participation in county employees retirement system



Officers



   32.15   Alcoholic Beverage Control Officer



   32.16   City Attorney; legal counsel



   32.17   City Clerk and Treasurer



   32.18   Fire Chief and Disaster Coordinator



   32.19   Fire Marshal



   32.20   Maintenance worker



   32.21   Police Chief



   32.22   Police officer



   32.23   Public works foreperson



   32.24   Sewer plant operator



   32.25   Computer Systems Specialist



Incentive Program



   32.40   Definitions



   32.41   Adoption of city officials training program; application



   32.42   Incentive payment amount; required training participation



   32.43   Policy regarding payment or reimbursement for training
courses



   32.44   Administration of city officials training program



   32.45   Status of incentive payments



Collective Bargaining Program for Police Officers



   32.60   Establishment of policy



   32.61   Preliminary investigation; election



   32.62   Tentative agreement



   32.63   Petitions for decertification



   32.64   Groups; presented by unions



   32.65   Strikes and/or slowdowns prohibited



   32.66   Definition



Statutory reference:



   Non-elective offices and officers created by ordinance and appointed by
the Mayor, see KRS 83A.080, 83A.130(12)



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 32.01  POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The city’s Policy and Procedure Manual, and any and all amendments,
is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if set out in full.



(Ord. 013-138, passed 7-22-2013)



§ 32.02  NON-PARTISAN ELECTIONS.



   (A)   All elections of city officers shall henceforth be under
non-partisan city election laws as provided in KRS 83A.045, 83A.165, 83A.170
and 83A.175 (or such successor or replacement sections of said statutes as
may be adopted by the General Assembly in the future).



   (B)   The city does hereby forgo the conduction of a non-partisan
primary election as allowed and provided by KRS 83A.045(2)(b)(1) (or such
successor or replacement section of said statute as may be adopted by the
state legislature in the future), and all candidates for city offices shall
file nomination papers with county’s Court Clerk no less than 91 days
before the regular election.



   (C)   This section shall be effective beginning with elections to be
held in the calendar year 2016, and shall not be changed sooner than five
years from the date of final passage thereof.



   (D)   The city shall pay the costs of city elections only if city
elections are held at a time other than prescribed by law for elections
generally.



   (E)   Each appointed and elected city office existing on 7-15-2015
shall continue until abolished by ordinance; except that, the offices of
Mayor and City Council members may not be abolished.



   (F)   No abolition of any elected office shall take effect until
expiration of the term of the current holder of the office.



(Ord. 015-199, passed 11-24-2015)



§ 32.03  GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE FOR HANDICAPPED PERSONS.



   There is on file at the office of the City Clerk a grievance procedure
for anyone who believes he or she may have been discriminated against by the
city based on handicapped status with respect to federally funded programs.
These grievance procedures are incorporated herein by reference as if
enumerated in full. These procedures may be obtained by contacting the City
Clerk who shall forward a copy to any party requesting it.



(1991 Code, § 2-101)  (Ord. 984-117, passed 10-22-1984)



§ 32.04  PARTICIPATION IN COUNTY EMPLOYEES RETIREMENT SYSTEM.



   (A)   The city is hereby authorized to participate in the county
employees retirement system effective October 1, 1992, and that all eligible
regular full-time officers and employees are hereby authorized and directed
to comply with the statutory requirements of this retirement system.



   (B)   All employees of the city whose duties require an average of
100 hours during each working month be considered as regular full-time
employees for county retirement purposes except those employees excluded
which may participate in the system as a separate agency and those other
persons who are employed as temporary, part-time and seasonal workers, as
defined in KRS 78.510(21).



(Ord. 992-273, passed - -1992)



OFFICERS



§ 32.15  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL OFFICER.



   (A)   Position created. There is hereby created the position of
Alcoholic Beverage Control Officer.



(1991 Code, § 2-116)



   (B)   Qualifications.



      (1)   High school graduate or minimum two years’ experience
as an Alcohol Beverage Control Officer; and



      (2)   Must be age 21 or over.



(1991 Code, § 2-117)



   (C)   Duties. The Alcohol Beverage Control Officer of the city shall
be responsible for:



      (1)   The enforcement of all Kentucky Revised Statutes which
relate to their respective field;



      (2)   The enforcement of all city ordinances relating to their
specific field;



      (3)   The enforcement of all administrative regulations
relating to their specific field;



      (4)   Direct and maintain the preparation of the necessary
records and files relating to their field;



      (5)   Conduct the necessary correspondence, requisition
supplies and recommend the purchase of necessary equipment; and



      (6)   Meet with and answer questions for the public.



(1991 Code, § 2-118)



   (D)   Tenure. Upon appointment by the Mayor, this position shall
exist until a successor is duly appointed and qualified in the event of
position vacancy.



(1991 Code, § 2-119)



   (E)   Compensation. The rate of compensation for the Alcohol
Beverage Control Officer will be set by the annual budget each fiscal year.



(1991 Code, § 2-120)



(Ord. 982-82, passed 1-4-1982; Ord. 983-107, passed 12-27-1983; Ord. 916-208,
passed 4-26-2016)



§ 32.16  CITY ATTORNEY; LEGAL COUNSEL.



   (A)   (1)   Position created. There is hereby created the
position of City Attorney.



(1991 Code, § 2-156)



      (2)   Qualifications. The applicant for the position of City
Attorney shall have graduated from an accredited law school and be licensed
to practice law in the state.



(1991 Code, § 2-157)



      (3)   Duties. The City Attorney shall be responsible for:



         (a)   Attendance at regular and special City Council
meetings;



         (b)   Being available at all reasonable times to render
legal opinions to the Mayor, City Council and city employees concerning their
municipal duties;



         (c)   Preparing all legal documents and reviewing all
legal documents on behalf of the city;



         (d)   Representing the city in all courts and
administrative hearings and acting at all times as general legal counsel for
the city; and



         (e)   Preparing all ordinances and the revision of
ordinances.



(1991 Code, § 2-158)



      (4)   Tenure. The position of City Attorney shall exist until
terminated by appropriate action of the City Council.



(1991 Code, § 2-159)



      (5)   Compensation. The rate of compensation of the City
Attorney shall be as fixed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
City Council.



(1991 Code, § 2-160)



   (B)   (1)   The City Council authorizes the employment of
counsel, licensed to practice law in the commonwealth pursuant to KRS
83A.130(9). Said Counsel shall represent the Council collectively and not
represent, advise or otherwise provide service to a minority of the Council.



      (2)   The City Council shall vote in open meeting of the
conditions of employment and identify the contractor at said time of voting.



      (3)   The Council shall provide, by ordinance, the conditions
of employment and provide for compensation.



      (4)   This division (B) shall not restrict the City Attorney.



(Ord. 982-83, passed 1-4-1982; Ord. 983-108, passed 12-27-1983; Ord. 015-185,
passed 6-8-2015)



§ 32.17  CITY CLERK AND TREASURER.



   (A)   Position created. There is hereby created the positions of
City Clerk and City Treasurer.



(1991 Code, § 2-176)



   (B)   Positions unmerged. The offices of City Clerk and City
Treasurer are hereby unmerged, pursuant to KRS 87.175, and the acts of all
prior clerks-treasurers are hereby ratified and confirmed.



(1991 Code, § 2-177)



   (C)   Duties. The City Clerk and Deputy City Clerk shall be
responsible for:



      (1)   Establishing the City Council agenda;



      (2)   Maintaining permanent records of City Council meetings;



      (3)   Maintaining ordinance books and executive orders;



      (4)   Collecting all accounts receivable by the city and
receipting all bills or charges against the city;



      (5)   Handling routine complaints, correspondence and regular
inquiries not involving action by the Council;



      (6)   Assisting and preparing the annual budget;



      (7)   Receiving and receipting all taxes due the city;



      (8)   Completing all clerical work required by the Mayor
and/or City Council members;



      (9)   Filing the required federal and/or state government
forms;



      (10)   Accounting for all city revenues;



      (11)   Preparing city payroll and maintaining records;



      (12)   Preparing monthly financial reports; and



      (13)   Maintaining all financial reports in conformity with
the adoptive budget.



(1991 Code, § 2-178)



   (D)   Qualifications. The applicant for the position of City Clerk
and City Treasurer shall have graduated from high school, have two to four
years’ experience in bookkeeping or related fields in clerical work, be
over the age of 20 years and be bondable for insurance purposes.



(1991 Code, § 2-179)



   (E)   Tenure. The position of City Clerk and City Treasurer shall
exist until terminated by appropriate action taken by the City Council.



(1991 Code, § 2-180)



   (F)   Compensation.



      (1)   The rate of compensation for the City Clerk and City
Treasurer shall be fixed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City
Council.



      (2)   The rate of compensation for the Deputy City Clerk shall
be fixed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council.



(1991 Code, § 2-181)



(Ord. 130.2, passed --; Ord. 982-78, passed 1-4-1982; Ord. 983-103, passed
12-27-1983; Ord. 006-709, passed 6-8-2015)



§ 32.18  FIRE CHIEF AND DISASTER COORDINATOR.



   (A)   Position created. There is hereby created the position of Fire
Chief and Disaster Coordinator.



(1991 Code, § 2-201)



   (B)   Qualifications. The applicant for the position of Fire Chief
and Disaster Coordinator shall have graduated from high school and have two
years’ experience as a firefighter and be over the age of 20.



(1991 Code, § 2-202)



   (C)   Duties. The Fire Chief and Disaster Coordinator shall be
responsible for:



      (1)   Planning, directing and exercising general supervision
over the work of the Fire Department;



      (2)   Formulating and enforcing rules and regulations, work
methods and procedures;



      (3)   Enforcing disciplinary measures when necessary;



      (4)   Ascertaining that firefighters receive adequate training
in modern firefighting methods and procedures;



      (5)   Directing and maintaining the preparation of Fire
Department records and files;



      (6)   Conducting Department correspondence, requisitioning
supplies and recommending the purchase of necessary equipment; and



      (7)   Meeting with and answering questions for the public.



(1991 Code, § 2-203)



   (D)   Tenure. The position of Fire Chief and Disaster Coordinator
shall exist until terminated by appropriate action of the City Council.



(1991 Code, § 2-204)



   (E)   Compensation. The rate of compensation for the Fire Chief and
Disaster Coordinator shall be fixed by the Mayor with the advice and consent
of the City Council.



(1991 Code, § 2-205)



(Ord. 982-81, passed 1-4-1982; Ord. 983-106, passed 12-27-1983)



§ 32.19  FIRE MARSHAL.



   (A)   Position created. There is hereby created the position of Fire
Marshal.



(1991 Code, § 2-221)



   (B)   Qualifications. The applicant for the position of Fire Marshal
shall have two years’ experience as a firefighter and be over the age of 21
years.



(1991 Code, § 2-222)



   (C)   Duties. The Fire Marshal shall be responsible for:



      (1)   The enforcement of all state statutes which relate to
the specific field;



      (2)   The enforcement of all city ordinances relating to the
specific field;



      (3)   The enforcement of all administrative regulations
relating to the specific field;



      (4)   Directing and maintaining the preparation of the
necessary records and files relating to the field;



      (5)   Conducting the necessary correspondence, requisitioning
supplies and recommending the purchase of necessary equipment; and



      (6)   Meeting with and answering questions for the public.



(1991 Code, § 2-223)



   (D)   Tenure. The position of Fire Marshal shall exist until duly
terminated by the City Council.



(1991 Code, § 2-224)



   (E)   Compensation. The rate of compensation for the Fire Marshal
shall be as established by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City
Council.



(1991 Code, § 2-225)



(Ord. 982-82, passed 1-4-1982; Ord. 983-107, passed 12-27-1983)



§ 32.20  MAINTENANCE WORKER.



   (A)   Position created. There is hereby created the position of
maintenance worker.



(1991 Code, § 2-241)



   (B)   Qualifications. The maintenance worker shall have a minimum of
a high school diploma and have practical experience in heavy manual labor
which provides the necessary knowledge, skills and abilities to effectively
perform the duties of the position. Any person who applies for the position
of maintenance worker must be at least 18 years of age.



(1991 Code, § 2-242)



   (C)   Duties. Maintenance workers shall be responsible for all
maintenance activities, repair activities or construction activities carried
out at the order of the City Council and/or the Mayor.



(1991 Code, § 2-243)



   (D)   Tenure. The position of maintenance worker shall exist until
terminated by appropriate action taken by the City Council.



(1991 Code, § 2-244)



   (E)   Compensation. The rate of compensation for maintenance workers
shall be as fixed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City
Council.



(1991 Code, § 2-245)



(Ord. 983-109, passed 12-27-1983)



§ 32.21  POLICE CHIEF.



   (A)   Position created. There is hereby created the position of
Police Chief.



(1991 Code, § 2-281)



   (B)   Qualifications. The applicant for Police Chief shall have
graduated from high school and completed the ten-week basic training program
with the division of law enforcement training or have completed seven to ten
years of practical experience and completed the ten-week basic training
program with the Division of Law Enforcement Training. All applicants for
this position shall be over the age of 21.



(1991 Code, § 2-282)



   (C)   Duties. The Police Chief shall be responsible for:



      (1)   Planning, directing and exercising general supervision
over the work of the Police Department;



      (2)   Formulating and enforcing rules and regulations, work
methods and procedures;



      (3)   Making and reviewing all personnel assignments within
the Department;



      (4)   Reviewing activities and reports of officers;



      (5)   Making recommendations to the Police Commissioner and
City Council for the appointment, promotion and dismissal of officers;



      (6)   Enforcing disciplinary measures when necessary;



      (7)   Ascertaining that officers receive adequate training in
modern police methods and procedures;



      (8)   Directing the preparation and maintenance of police
records and files;



      (9)   Directing the investigation of major criminal offenses;



      (10)   Cooperating with state and federal officers in the
apprehension of wanted persons;



      (11)   Seeing that reports are prepared for the City Council,
the National Safety Council and the Federal Bureau of Investigation;



      (12)   Preparing budget estimates and controlling the
expenditure of Department funds;



      (13)   Conducting Department correspondence, requisitioning
supplies and recommending the purchase of needed equipment;



      (14)   Meeting with and answering questions for the public; and



      (15)   Attending police conferences and meetings with various
citizens’ groups.



(1991 Code, § 2-283)



   (D)   Tenure. The position of Police Chief shall exist until
terminated by appropriate action taken by the City Council.



(1991 Code, § 2-284)



   (E)   Compensation. The rate of compensation for the Police Chief
shall be as established by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City
Council.



(1991 Code, § 2-285)



(Ord. 982-80, passed 1-4-1982; Ord. 983-105, passed 12-27-1983)



§ 32.22  POLICE OFFICER.



   (A)   Position created. There is hereby created the position of
police officer.



(1991 Code, § 2-301)



   (B)   Qualifications. The applicants for police officer shall have
graduated from high school and shall meet the requirements established by the
City Council in its rules and regulations regarding the city’s Police
Department which have been adopted. All applicants for these positions shall
be over the age of 21.



(1991 Code, § 2-302)



   (C)   Duties. The duties of a police officer shall be as follows:



      (1)   Patrol a designated area of the city in a patrol car to
prevent and discover the commission of crime and to enforce traffic
regulations; answer calls and complaints; administer first aid; serve
warrants; and answer questions for the public;



      (2)   Conduct preliminary investigations at the scene of
crimes and serious accidents; gather evidence; locate and interview
witnesses; make arrests and interrogate prisoners; compile accident
statistics;



      (3)   Direct traffic at intersections and at accidents and
fires; maintain order in crowds, at parades and other public meetings;



      (4)   Operate electronic equipment for speed detection;



      (5)   Process prisoners, provide for their needs and supervise
their activities; appear in court to present evidence and testify against the
person accused of crimes;



      (6)   Prepare and maintain necessary records and reports;



      (7)   Participate in training activities;



      (8)   Give advice on laws and ordinances and general
information to the public; and



      (9)   Perform related work as required.



(1991 Code, § 2-303)



   (D)   Tenure. The position of police officer shall exist until
terminated by appropriate action taken by the City Council.



(1991 Code, § 2-304)



   (E)   Compensation. The rate of compensation for full-time and
part-time city police officers shall be as established by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the City Council.



(1991 Code, § 2-305)



   (F)   Law Enforcement Foundation Program Fund.



      (1)   The city hereby declares its intention and agreement to
participate in the Law Enforcement Foundation Program Fund established by KRS
15.410 through KRS 15.510.



      (2)   Each officer of the city’s Police Department shall be
paid from city funds an annual salary of at least $7,200 based on a standard
work year of 2,080 hours.



      (3)   Each police officer of the city employed on a full-time
basis shall have obtained a minimum education of a high school degree or its
equivalent as determined by the state’s Law Enforcement Council.



      (4)   Each officer employed shall, within one year after his
or her date of employment, complete a basic training course of at least 400
hours’ duration at a school certified or recognized by the state’s Law
Enforcement Council.



      (5)   Each full-time officer shall successfully complete each
year an in-service training course of a minimum 40 hours’ duration at a
school certified or recognized by the state’s Law Enforcement Council. Each
officer taking the course shall receive five days off, with pay, for the
purpose of taking and completing the required in-service training.



      (6)   No officer shall have his or her base salary reduced or
be denied a normal salary increase to which he or she is otherwise entitled
because of the salary incentive payments received from the state’s Crime
Commission under KRS 15.410 through KRS 15.510.



      (7)   The Police Department and each officer employed thereby
shall comply with all provisions of the state statutes applicable to local
police, including the transmission of data to the Bureau of Criminal
Information and Statistics as required by KRS 17.150.



      (8)   The Chief of the Police Department or an official
designated by the Mayor shall prepare or cause to be prepared such quarterly
or other reports as may be reasonably required by the state’s Crime
Commission to facilitate administration of the funds and further the purposes
of KRS 15.410 through KRS 15.510.



      (9)   The Police Department and each officer thereof and the
city shall further comply with all the reasonable rules and regulations
issued by the state’s Crime Commission to facilitate the administration of
the funds and further the purposes of KRS 15.410 through KRS 15.510.



      (10)   The Controller of the city shall deposit in an
appropriate account which is specifically designated as “KLEFPF Funds”
separate from all other sources all monies received under KRS 15.410 through
KRS 15.510.



      (11)   Upon receipt of any monies under KRS 15.410 through KRS
15.510, the Controller shall pay to each officer entitled thereto the full
amount received on his or her behalf, giving to such officer a check stub or
receipt on which the gross amount of moneys paid to him or her under KRS
15.410 through KRS 15.510 is included and identified.



      (12)   All financial records relating to monies received under
KRS 15.410 through KRS 15.510 shall be retained for a period of three years
or until the completion of an audit approved by the state’s Crime
Commission and the U.S. Law Enforcement Assistance Administration.



      (13)   The Mayor, as chief executive officer and head of the
Police Department, shall prepare a plan in keeping with the rules and
regulations of the state’s Law Enforcement Foundation Program Fund for
education incentive and budget the necessary moneys to implement the program
on a matching basis.



(1991 Code, § 2-306)



(Ord. 982-80, passed 1-4-1982; Ord. 982-88, passed 4-26-1982; Ord. 983-105,
passed 12-27-1983)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to appoint auxiliary police force, see KRS 95.445



§ 32.23  PUBLIC WORKS FOREPERSON.



   (A)   Position created. There is hereby created the position of
public works foreperson.



(1991 Code, § 2-321)



   (B)   Qualifications.



      (1)   The public works foreperson shall have a high school
diploma and have five years’ experience in the operation of equipment and
maintenance work; or any combination of education, training and experience
which provides the necessary knowledge, skills and ability to effectively
perform the duties of this position.



      (2)   Any person who applies for the position of public works
foreperson must be at least 21 years of age.



(1991 Code, § 2-322)



   (C)   Duties. The public works foreperson shall be responsible for:



      (1)   Personally participating, supervising and checking the
work of crews engaged in street, sewer, park and general municipal
maintenance and repair projects;



      (2)   Operating any necessary city equipment involved in city
projects; and



      (3)   Doing any other work directed by the Mayor and/or City
Council within the city.



(1991 Code, § 2-323)



   (D)   Tenure. The position of public works foreperson shall exist
until terminated by appropriate action taken by the City Council.



(1991 Code, § 2-324)



   (E)   Compensation. The rate of compensation for the public works
foreperson shall be as fixed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
City Council.



(1991 Code, § 2-325)



(Ord. 983-109, passed 12-27-1983)



§ 32.24  SEWER PLANT OPERATOR.



   (A)   Position created. There is hereby created the position of
sewer plant operator.



(1991 Code, § 2-336)



   (B)   Qualifications. The applicant for sewer plant operator shall
have graduated from high school or its equivalent; or have two to five
years’ experience and have a valid sewer treatment plant operator’s
license, Class 3.



(1991 Code, § 2-337)



   (C)   Duties. The sewer plant operator shall be responsible for:



      (1)   Maintaining the plant, internally and externally, in a
clean, safe and workmanlike manner;



      (2)   Performing normal maintenance on the building and
surrounding grounds;



      (3)   Meeting all federal and state regulations for the
quality of the plant product;



      (4)   Performing any test required by local, state or federal
health officials;



      (5)   Maintaining all records and reports required by any
governmental agency;



      (6)   Any and all other work required by the Mayor and/or City
Council.



(1991 Code, § 2-338)



   (D)   Tenure. The position of sewer plant operator shall exist until
terminated by appropriate action taken by the City Council.



(1991 Code, § 2-339)



   (E)   Compensation. The rate of compensation for the sewer plant
operator shall be established by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
City Council.



(1991 Code, § 2-340)



(Ord. 982-79, passed 1-4-1982; Ord. 983-104, passed 12-27-1983)



§ 32.25  COMPUTER SYSTEMS SPECIALIST.



   There is created one position of Computer Systems Specialist. This
position shall comply with all duties, qualifications and requirements
provided in the position classification attached to the ordinance codified
herein.



(Ord. 014-162, passed 9-8-2014)



INCENTIVE PROGRAM



§ 32.40  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADMINISTRATOR. The Kentucky League of Cities City Officials Training
Center.



   EXCESS HOURS. Credit hours earned beyond 15 during a single calendar
year.



   QUALIFYING COURSE. Any training, seminar, educational or learning event
that provides instruction or information that is relevant to the duties and
functions of city government and city officials and that has been approved by
the Administrator.



   TRAINING UNIT. Fifteen clock hours of attendance or participation in
qualifying courses during a calendar year.



(Ord. 014-149, passed 1-13-2014)



§ 32.41  ADOPTION OF CITY OFFICIALS TRAINING PROGRAM; APPLICATION.



   In accordance with House Bill 119 of the 2011 General Assembly, as
codified in KRS Ch. 64, the city hereby adopts and establishes a City
Officials Training Program to make available incentive payments as specified
by this subchapter to the elected city officials, including the Mayor and all
members of the City Council for obtaining education and training as required
under the provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 014-149, passed 1-13-2014)



§ 32.42  INCENTIVE PAYMENT AMOUNT; REQUIRED TRAINING PARTICIPATION.



   (A)   (1)   Each city official eligible for participation in the
City Officials Training Program shall receive training incentive payments of
$100 for completion of each training unit during his or her continuous
service as a city official within the city.



      (2)   The city official shall only receive training incentive
payments for a maximum of four training units.



      (3)   The city official shall not be awarded more than one
training unit per calendar year.



   (B)   The city official may continue to receive training incentive
payments for four training units in each calendar year following the fourth
year; provided that, the officer continues to earn a training unit each
subsequent calendar year.



   (C)   The failure of a city official to obtain a training unit
during any calendar year shall disqualify the officer from receiving any
training incentive payments for the calendar year and the city official shall
lose any previously accumulated training units earned during previous
calendar years.



   (D)   Any city official earning excess hours during a calendar year
shall be permitted to carry forward a maximum of ten hours to apply to the
earning of a training unit in the following calendar year.



   (E)   Training incentive payments shall be made to a city official
presenting proof of completion of a training unit for a calendar year within
60 days of the conclusion of the calendar year.



(Ord. 014-149, passed 1-13-2014)



§ 32.43  POLICY REGARDING PAYMENT OR REIMBURSEMENT FOR TRAINING COURSES.



   Subject to the constraints and the appropriations established by the
city’s annual budget, the city shall consider paying the cost of attendance
or participation in advance of a city official’s attendance or
participation in the qualifying course if proper application is made to the
Mayor, or his or her designee. Alternatively, and subject to the constraints
and appropriations established by the city’s annual budget, the city shall
consider reimbursing a city official for the cost of attendance or
participation in a qualifying course upon presentation of proof to the Mayor,
or his or her designee, that the official has received credit for the course.



(Ord. 014-149, passed 1-13-2014)



§ 32.44  ADMINISTRATION OF CITY OFFICIALS TRAINING PROGRAM.



   (A)   The city’s Officials Training Program shall be administered
by the state’s League of Cities City Officials Training Center, which shall
be responsible for approving courses as qualifying under the terms of this
subchapter, shall maintain records of attendance and participation and shall
notify the city when a city official earns a training unit and the number of
training units earned by a city official during his or her continuous service
as a city official within the city.



   (B)   The Administrator shall evaluate and approve courses as
qualifying for credit based on the relation of the course to the operation of
city government. In addition to other courses which may be approved as
qualifying courses by the Administrator, courses that provide instruction on
the statutory duties of cities and city officials, intergovernmental
relationships, municipal finance and budgeting, municipal taxation, ethics,
open records, open meetings, economic development or municipal police powers
shall be approved as qualifying courses under this subchapter. The
Administrator shall require the submission of the course or conference
agenda, curriculum, name of the provider and other course materials to
determine whether a course should be approved as a qualifying course.



   (C)   A city official shall submit proof of attendance or
participation in a qualifying course to the Administrator. A city official
shall submit the course name, date, location, name of the instructor or
provider and sufficient proof of attendance or participation in the
qualifying course before the Administrator shall award credit. The
Administrator shall not award credit to a city official for attendance or
participation in a qualifying course that is not, in the Administrator’s
opinion, substantially different from another course the city official
attended or participated in during the same calendar year.



   (D)   The Administrator shall maintain records that reflect each of
the courses and hours completed by the city official and shall provide it to
each city official upon request. The Administrator shall, within 30 days of
the close of the calendar year, provide written or electronic certification
to each participating city official of completed courses and hours and shall,
if applicable, certify the completion of a training unit and total number of
accumulated training units. Upon receipt, a city official shall present a
copy of the certification of the completion of the training unit and the
total accumulated training units to the city in order to receive his or her
training incentive payments.



(Ord. 014-149, passed 1-13-2014)



§ 32.45  STATUS OF INCENTIVE PAYMENTS.



   (A)   Training incentive payments do not constitute wages under KRS
Ch. 337, creditable compensation under the county employees retirement system
under KRS Ch. 78, or compensation for the purposes of setting maximum
compensation or modification of compensation under KRS Ch. 83A, and may be
repealed or modified by the city at any time.



   (B)   The training incentive payment amount established in the
ordinance shall not be adjusted by any index reporting changes to consumer
prices or any other method to account for inflation.



(Ord. 014-149, passed 1-13-2014)



COLLECTIVE BARGAINING PROGRAM FOR POLICE OFFICERS



§ 32.60  ESTABLISHMENT OF POLICY.



   The City Council hereby establishes a policy of the city to participate
in collective bargaining with a duly authorized representative of the
city’s police officers. To effect that policy, the following procedures
shall be utilized.



(Ord. 015-200, passed 12-22-2015)



§ 32.61  PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATION; ELECTION.



   (A)   In the event a petition for recognition as collective
bargaining representative of a group of police officers of the city’s
Police Department is presented to the Mayor, the Mayor shall cause a
preliminary investigation to be conducted to verify that such petition is
bona fide and presents a question whether the petitioning organization
represents the officers of the Police Department.



   (B)   If the Mayor’s investigation indicates that the petition is
bona fide and presents a question whether the petitioning organization
represents the police officers, the Mayor shall cause to be conducted a
secret ballot election among the officers.



   (C)   If such election determines that the police officers desire to
be represented in collective bargaining by the petitioning organization, the
Mayor shall present those results to the City Council. The City Council may
then pass an ordinance recognizing the petitioning organization as the
exclusive bargaining representative of the unit of officers.



   (D)   Not more than one such election for any group of officers
shall be conducted in any one calendar year. Once a union or other
organization is so recognized, such recognition shall continue in force from
year to year thereafter unless repealed by validly passed and signed
ordinance.



(Ord. 015-200, passed 12-22-2015)



§ 32.62  TENTATIVE AGREEMENT.



   (A)   Following passage and approval of an ordinance recognizing an
organization as the collective bargaining representative of a unit of police
officers, the Mayor shall designate a negotiator (who may be the Mayor or an
individual appointed by the Mayor) to meet with representatives of the union
or organization for the purpose of negotiating a collective bargaining
agreement regarding the terms and conditions of employment of the police
officers in the unit.



   (B)   Upon the reaching of tentative agreement regarding a
collective bargaining agreement, an ordinance containing the collective
bargaining contract shall be presented to the City Council for its action
and, on the passage and approval of such ordinance, it shall become a
contract binding on all parties for a term not to exceed the biennium or the
existing term of the incumbent members of the City Council. Upon the
expiration of a collective bargaining agreement, the parties shall negotiate
in good faith for a new agreement.



(Ord. 015-200, passed 12-22-2015)



§ 32.63  PETITIONS FOR DECERTIFICATION.



   Petitions for decertification of a recognized collective bargaining
representative shall be processed in a manner consistent with the process for
recognition set forth above, subject to the limitations that only one
decertification election shall be conducted among officers in any one year.



(Ord. 015-200, passed 12-22-2015)



§ 32.64  GROUPS; PRESENTED BY UNIONS.



   (A)   Officers at or above the rank of Captain shall not be included
in the group of police officers presented by a union or other organization
for collective bargaining purposes.



   (B)   The City Council hereby finding the election by the city’s
police personnel consisting of those officers below the rank of captain and
including civilian police clerks, to designate the Fraternal Order of Police,
Lodge 80, as the officers bargaining agent: now, it is ordained the Fraternal
Order of Police, Lodge 80 is the collective bargaining agent for the city’s
police personnel, below the rank of captain and including civilian police
clerks.



(Ord. 015-200, passed 12-22-2015; Ord. 016-204, passed 3-22-2016)



§ 32.65  STRIKES AND/OR SLOWDOWNS PROHIBITED.



   Strikes and slowdowns by officers of the city’s Police Department
shall be strictly prohibited and shall, without waiver of any other remedies
or relief, constitute grounds for immediate termination.



(Ord. 015-200, passed 12-22-2015)



§ 32.66  DEFINITION.



   COLLECTIVE BARGAINING, as used in this subchapter, shall mean the
performance of the mutual obligation of the employer, by and through the
Mayor, or his or her designee, and the recognized representative of police
officers to meet at reasonable times, to negotiate in good faith with respect
to wages, hours and other terms and conditions of employment, to negotiate an
agreement and to execute a written contract incorporating such agreement.
Such obligation shall not compel either party to agree to any proposal or
require the making of a concession.



(Ord. 015-200, passed 12-22-2015)



CHAPTER 33:  CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION



Section



   33.01   Creation



   33.02   Definitions



   33.03   Authority



   33.04   Purpose



   33.05   Scope



   33.06   Classified service



   33.07   Prohibition on political activities



   33.08   Commission operations



   33.09   Officers and their elections



   33.10   Meetings



   33.11   Secretary



   33.12   Reports to the Commission



   33.13   Records and files



   33.14   Job descriptions



   33.15   Announcements



   33.16   Applications; qualifications; eligible persons, appointees



   33.17   Examinations; scope; admission; administration



   33.18   Transfer eligibility; vacancies



   33.19   Types of appointments



   33.20   Probation



   33.21   Discipline; actions



   33.22   Amendments and repeals



§ 33.01  CREATION.



   Pursuant to KRS 90.310 et seq. and KRS 95.761 et seq., and other
authority, the City Council hereby has created a Civil Service Commission and
hereby reaffirms the creation of its Civil Service Commission.



(Ord. 013-145, passed 9-23-2013)



§ 33.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABSENCE WITHOUT LEAVE. An unapproved absence from work.



   APPEAL. A request made by an employee to the Commission to review a
dismissal, suspension, reduction or demotion.



   APPLICANT. A person seeking admission to the examination process.



   APPOINTING AUTHORITY. The person or group of persons having the power
of appointment to and/or removal from positions in the city by statute,
ordinance or by designation of the Mayor.



   APPOINTMENT. The selection of an eligible person to fill a vacancy.



   APPOINTMENT, PERMANENT. An appointment made without limitation of
duration, following the satisfactory completion of appropriate examinations
and probationary periods.



   APPOINTMENT, PROBATIONARY. An appointment made to a position subject to
a probationary period which is 12 months from the date of hire for all
employees, except members of the Police Department and Fire Department. The
probationary period for members of the Police Department and Fire Department
shall extend for at least 12 months from the date they are sworn as police
officers or firefighters. The probationary period for any and all employees
may be extended an additional six months by the Mayor on the recommendation
of the probationary employee’s department head.



   CANDIDATE. An applicant who has met all qualifications and is
completing all required examinations.



   CLASS or CLASSIFICATION. A group of positions sufficiently similar with
respect to duties and responsibilities such that they may be treated
similarly as to job title, job requirements, examination for employment or
promotion and other personnel practices.



   COMMISSION. The Shepherdsville Civil Service Commission.



   DEMOTION. The movement of an employee from one position to another
position of a lower class.



   DEPARTMENT. The city’s Police Department; the city’s Fire
Department; the Department of Public Works; the Sewer-Wastewater Department;
administrative offices of the city.



   DISMISSAL. An involuntary separation of an employee from the service of
the city.



   ELIGIBLE PERSON. A person who has successfully completed all required
examinations, interviews and possesses required qualifications.



   EMPLOYEE. Any employee who is a member of the classified service.



   EMPLOYEE, PERMANENT. An employee who has completed his or her initial
employment probationary period.



   EMPLOYEE, PROBATIONARY. An employee, newly-hired or newly-promoted, who
is serving a probation period in the position to which the employee seeks
permanent appointment.



   EQUIVALENT POSITION. A position of the same class and/or same
minimum/maximum pay level.



   FINAL EARNED RATING. A numerical score achieved by a candidate on the
combination of all numerically-rated components of the total examination
process.



   FIRE CHIEF. The Chief of the Fire Department of the city.



   HIRING ELIGIBILITY LIST. A list of names of eligible persons in order
of final earned rating compiled for an entry level class based on open
competitive examination, interview and published qualifications.



   JOB DESCRIPTION. A written statement containing the duties typically
assigned to positions of a class, the essential functions and the minimum
qualifications necessary for appointment to positions in the class. Reference
is made to the city’s Job Classification Manual.



   PASSING POINT. A numerical point value set for an examination or a
segment of an examination such that all scores equal to it or above it are
considered to be successful in that portion of the examination and all scores
below it are considered to be unsuccessful.



   POLICE CHIEF. The Chief of the Police Department of the city.



   POSITION. A group of duties and responsibilities which require the
employment of one person.



   PROBATION PERIOD. An on-the-job working test following the probationary
appointment, during which a newly-hired or newly-promoted employee is
required to demonstrate fitness by actual performance of the duties of the
position to which the employee seeks permanent appointment.



   PROMOTION. The movement of an employee from one position to a position
assigned to a higher class.



   PROMOTION ELIGIBILITY LIST. A list of names of eligible persons in
order of final earned rating compiled for a promotion class based on
promotional competitive examination, interviews and published qualifications.



   QUALIFICATIONS. The minimum requirements necessary to perform the work
of positions assigned to a class.



   REINSTATEMENT (COMMISSION). The re-employment of a former employee
after review by the Commission of an appeal directing reinstatement.



   RESIGNATION. A voluntary separation of an employee from the service of
the city.



   SENIORITY (TIME IN GRADE). The status or priority given an employee
based on length of service of the employee in grade. For the purpose of these
rules, SENIORITY only applies in the calculation of the final earned rating
of an employee in a promotional examination.



   SEPARATION. The termination of employment from the service of the city.



   SIMILAR POSITION. A position which is approximately equivalent to
another position in the level of authority, responsibility, compensation and
minimum requirements.



   SUSPENSION. An involuntary leave of absence from the service of the
city.



(Ord. 013-145, passed 9-23-2013)



§ 33.03  AUTHORITY.



   The city’s Civil Service Commission shall adopt rules governing the
qualification, examination, appointment, promotion and hearings concerning
disciplinary action or termination of employees of the city in conformity
with this chapter, other ordinances of the city and state law.



(Ord. 013-145, passed 9-23-2013)



§ 33.04  PURPOSE.



   This chapter and the rules adopted by the Commission shall guide
personnel actions of the city in a manner consistent with generally accepted
merit principles and concepts of sound human resources management.



(Ord. 013-145, passed 9-23-2013)



§ 33.05  SCOPE.



   (A)   The employees of the city that are included in the classified
service as set out in § 33.06 of this chapter.



   (B)   The jurisdiction of the Commission is limited to those matters
contained in this chapter and in applicable statutes. They may lawfully apply
to the city. In other personnel matters of the city, the Commission has no
jurisdiction.



(Ord. 013-145, passed 9-23-2013)



§ 33.06  CLASSIFIED SERVICE.



   (A)   Police Department.



      (1)   Chief of Police (excluded);



      (2)   Assistant Chief of Police (excluded);



      (3)   Major (excluded);



      (4)   Captain (included);



      (5)   Sergeant (included);



      (6)   Police Officer (included);



      (7)   Clerk (included);



      (8)   Probationary employee (excluded); and



      (9)   Part-time employee (excluded).



   (B)   Fire Department.



      (1)   Fire Chief (excluded);



      (2)   First Assistant Fire Chief (excluded);



      (3)   Second Assistant Fire Chief (excluded);



      (4)   Major (excluded);



      (5)   Captain (included);



      (6)   Lieutenant (included);



      (7)   Sergeant (included);



      (8)   Firefighter (included);



      (9)   Probationary employee (excluded);



      (10)   Part-time employee (excluded);



      (11)   Volunteer firefighter (excluded); and



      (12)   Volunteer service provider (excluded).



   (C)   Administrative offices personnel.



      (1)   City Clerk (excluded);



      (2)   Controller (excluded);



      (3)   Treasurer (under Controller) (included);



      (4)   Deputy City Clerk (included);



      (5)   General Office Assistant (included);



      (6)   Probationary employee (excluded); and



      (7)   Part-time employee (excluded).



   (D)   Public Works Department personnel.



      (1)   Public Works Superintendent/Department;



      (2)   Head (public works foreperson) (excluded);



      (3)   Maintenance worker (included);



      (4)   Mechanic (included);



      (5)   Probationary employee (excluded); and



      (6)   Part-time employee (excluded).



   (E)   Sewer-Wastewater Department Personnel.



      (1)   Sewer-Wastewater Superintendent (excluded);



      (2)   Sewer-Wastewater maintenance technician (included);



      (3)   Waste collection supervisor (included);



      (4)   Full-time waste collection personnel (included);



      (5)   Probationary employee (excluded); and



      (6)   Part-time employee (excluded).



   NOTE: Effective upon the enactment of this chapter, the employees
designated in this section hereof are classified within and subject to the
protections provided by this chapter. Those employees in positions that have
been designated as “excluded” shall not be subject to the protection of
the provisions of this Civil Service Commission and shall be employees at
will, subject to removal and termination at the discretion of the Mayor with
approval of the City Council. Those persons who, at the date of enactment of
this chapter, hold positions that were by previous ordinance included and, by
this chapter, are excluded being: the Chief of Police; Assistant Chief of
Police; Police Major; Fire Chief; First Assistant Fire Chief; Second
Assistant Fire Chief; Major of the Fire Department; City Clerk; Public Works
Superintendent/department head; and Sewer-Wastewater Superintendent; shall
continue during their personal tenure as protected employees under the rules,
regulations and ordinance regarding civil service in the city. Upon the
vacancy of any of said positions, any newly appointed or promoted employee to
those positions shall, in conformity with this chapter, be excluded from the
civil service classification.



(Ord. 013-145, passed 9-23-2013)



§ 33.07  PROHIBITION ON POLITICAL ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   No employee of the city covered by the provisions of this
chapter shall directly or indirectly solicit, receive or be in any manner
whatever concerned in receiving, soliciting or publicizing any assessment,
gift, subscription or contribution to or for any political party or candidate
for public office while on duty or in uniform.



   (B)   No person shall use or promise to use his or her personal
influence or official authority to secure any appointment or promotion to any
position of employment covered by the provisions of this chapter as a reward
or return for personal or partisan political service.



   (C)   No employee covered by the provisions of this chapter shall be
suspended, demoted, promoted, disciplined, threatened or in any way changed
in rank, duty or compensation for withholding or neglecting to pay or make
any contribution of any sort or character, either in money, goods or services
or anything of value for any political purpose whatsoever.



   (D)   No examination question in any examination held by the
Commission shall relate to any political or religious opinion, belief,
affiliation or service and no appointment, promotion, demotion, suspension or
removal shall be brought about, affected or influenced by such opinions,
beliefs, affiliations or services.



   (E)   No employee covered by this chapter shall foster, promote or
be concerned with any actions involving political or religious controversies
or prejudices while in uniform. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to
prohibit any employee from exercising his or her religious beliefs while in
or out of uniform; nor shall it be deemed to prohibit the attendance at
religious services while in uniform.



   (F)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be so construed as to
abridge the rights of any officer or employee with respect to his or her
personal opinions or beliefs or right to vote.



   (G)   Employees, while off duty and out of uniform, shall be
entitled to:



      (1)   Place political bumper stickers on their privately-owned
vehicles;



      (2)   Wear political buttons;



      (3)   Contribute money to political parties, political
candidates and political groups of their choice;



      (4)   Work at the polls on election days;



      (5)   Aid in registration or purgation of voters;



      (6)   Become members of political groups; and



      (7)   Hold office in political groups and carry out the
mandates of that group.



(Ord. 013-145, passed 9-23-2013)



§ 33.08  COMMISSION OPERATIONS.



   (A)   (1)   The Mayor, subject to the approval of the City
Council, shall appoint three persons who shall constitute the Civil Service
Commission of the city.



      (2)   The qualifications of the members shall be as follows.



         (a)   Each member shall be at least 30 years of age.



         (b)   No member shall be related by blood or marriage to
the Mayor or any member of the City Council.



         (c)   Each member shall meet the qualifications as
prescribed by KRS Ch. 90 or KRS Ch. 95, as those chapters of the Kentucky
Revised Statutes relate to cities of the class of which the city is at any
given time, including, but not limited to, the requirement that members shall
have been taxpayers and voters of the city for not less than five years
immediately preceding their appointment and shall continue their residence
and status as voters within the city during their tenure as Commission
members.



   (B)   The terms of service of the Commission members shall be for a
period of three years with one appointment (the current Chairperson)
currently set to expire on 7-23-2017. Another appointment currently set to
expire on 1-12-2017 and a third appointment (the Vice-Chairperson) currently
set to expire on 10-10-2018. The Commissioners currently serving shall
continue to serve until their terms expire and their successor is appointed
and sworn in. No Commissioner shall be removed other than for cause and then
only with the approval of a majority of the members of the City Council. No
more than two members of the Commission may be members of the same political
party. (Registration as an independent shall not be construed as registering
as a member of a political party.)



   (C)   If the Mayor fails to submit the name of a qualified potential
appointee to the Commission when a vacancy occurs within 30 days, the City
Council may, by majority vote, appoint a qualified individual to serve on the
Civil Service Commission. In the appointment to fill a vacancy on the
Commission, such individual shall hold office until the expiration of the
term of the Commission member whose resignation or removal created the
vacancy.



   (D)   The Civil Service Commissioners may receive a salary as fixed
by the City Council.



   (E)   (1)   The Civil Service Commission shall make and enforce
rules, not inconsistent with the provisions of KRS Ch. 90 and KRS Ch. 95 and
the ordinances of the city, for the examination and hiring of employees for
the city and the promotion of employees of the city and for the conduct of
hearings. The Commission shall have the discretion to exercise its authority
in hearings in a manner consistent with procedural due process and the
principles of justice and fair dealing with all parties that may come before
it. The Commission shall have authority to seek legal advice from and obtain
counsel of its choosing, with the costs of same to be borne by the city.



      (2)   The Civil Service Commission shall have its counsel at
any and all appeal hearings.



(Ord. 013-145, passed 9-23-2013)



§ 33.09  OFFICERS AND THEIR ELECTIONS.



   (A)   The Officers of the Commission shall be a Chairperson and a
Vice-Chairperson.



   (B)   The Commission shall elect its officers annually at the
Commission’s regular meeting in January and at any other time there is a
vacancy in one of the offices. The officers shall serve terms of one year or,
in the event of an election to fill an officer’s unexpired term, for the
duration of that term. The officers may be re-elected to their respective
offices.



   (C)   (1)   The duties of the Chairperson are as follows:



         (a)   Shall preside at meetings and hearings of the
Commission;



         (b)   Shall review and sign the minutes of meetings; and



         (c)   Shall represent the Commission, when necessary.



      (2)   The duty of the Vice-Chairperson is as follows: to serve
as Chairperson in the absence or incapacity of the Chairperson.



(Ord. 013-145, passed 9-23-2013)



§ 33.10  MEETINGS.



   (A)   General.



      (1)   Regular meetings of the Commission will be held on the
third Tuesday of each month, at 10:00 a.m., unless there is no pending
business requiring Commission action. Anyone with business to be brought
before the Commission should notify the Secretary, in writing, by 5:00 p.m.
on the first Tuesday of the month. If there is business to be conducted, the
Secretary will post the meeting agenda via e-mail and shall notify the
Commission members by phone and e-mail by noon on the Wednesday following the
first Tuesday of the month. The Secretary shall mail to the Commission
members the notification of the meeting, including a list of the agenda items
to be taken up no later than the Monday following the first Tuesday of each
month that a Commission meeting is to be held. If there is no business to be
conducted, the Secretary will post a notice via phone and e-mail to the
Commission members that the meeting is cancelled. Said notice of no meeting
shall be posted by noon on the Wednesday following the first Tuesday of each
month.



      (2)   All Commission meetings are open to the public; however,
the Commission may elect, in appropriate circumstances, to convene in
executive session. Special meetings of the Commission may be held from time
to time as needed. A special meeting of the Commission may be called by a
majority of the Commission members or by the Chairperson of the Commission.



      (3)   In the event that a special meeting is called, the
Secretary, upon receiving appropriate notice, shall notify each member of the
Commission and The Pioneer News, as well as any other media outlet that has a
written request for notification on file with the city in accordance with the
open meetings law of the commonwealth. Said notice shall include the place,
date and time of the special meetings, as well as the specific business to be
considered at the meeting.



      (4)   Notice shall be given no less than 24 hours in advance
of the meeting.



   (B)   Quorums. The presence of two Commissioners shall constitute a
quorum and the votes of any two Commissioners concurring shall be sufficient
for the decision of all matters and the transaction of all business by the
Commission.



   (C)   Minutes. The Secretary shall be responsible for preparing the
minutes of all meetings of the Commission. The minutes shall be submitted for
approval at the next regular meeting of the Commission. The minutes shall be
signed by the Secretary or Secretary’s designee and the Chairperson of the
Civil Service Commission. In the absence of the Chairperson of the Civil
Service Commission, the Vice-Chairperson of the Commission may sign the
minutes.



   (D)   Executive session. The Commission may convene in executive
session at any time, subject to the provisions of the Kentucky Revised
Statutes concerning open meetings; upon motion duly made, seconded and
approved by a majority of the members of the Commission present, and after
stating the purpose for convening an executive session, the Commission
members may retire to executive session and discuss any appropriate matters
therein. Any and all action taken in regard to matters discussed in executive
session shall be taken up in an open session of the Commission and voted upon
in open session.



   (E)   Procedural rules.



      (1)   Robert’s Rules of Order shall guide the Commission in
its proceedings, except as otherwise provided herein.



      (2)   All Commission members, including the Chairperson, shall
have a vote and each may have recorded in the minutes said individual’s
approval or dissent from any action of the Commission together with the
reason therefor.



(Ord. 013-145, passed 9-23-2013)



§ 33.11  SECRETARY.



   The City Clerk, or his or her designee, will serve as Secretary of the
Commission and shall be responsible for:



   (A)   Attending all meetings of the Commission;



   (B)   Recording and keeping minutes of all meetings of the
Commission;



   (C)   Keeping all records of the Commission and maintaining Civil
Service Commission files;



   (D)   Making necessary arrangements for, and supervise all
examinations for hiring city employees or promotion of city employees unless
disqualified for personal reasons. Said supervision of examinations may be
delegated to supervisory personnel of the various departments of the city
with approval of the Civil Service Commission;



   (E)   Keep a record of all examinations;



   (F)   Arrange for preparation and posting or distribution of meeting
notices;



   (G)   Arrange for preparation of correspondence and other
secretarial work required to discharge the duties of the Civil Service
Commission; and



   (H)   Perform such other duties as prescribed by the Civil Service
Commission.



(Ord. 013-145, passed 9-23-2013)



§ 33.12  REPORTS TO THE COMMISSION.



   The Mayor shall notify the Commission members, in writing, of all
appointments, reclassifications, vacancies and the creation and/or abolition
of positions in the classified service within five days of any said action.



(Ord. 013-145, passed 9-23-2013)



§ 33.13  RECORDS AND FILES.



   (A)   (1)   Unless otherwise provided for, all records and
minutes of the Civil Service Commission activities shall be considered public
records and shall be kept under lock and key at the City Hall.



      (2)   The Chairperson of the Commission shall have sole
authority to grant access to said records.



      (3)   In the Chairperson’s absence, the Vice-Chair shall
have said authority.



   (B)   The Chairperson may designate the Secretary as custodian of
the Civil Service Commission’s records.



   (C)   Any and all of said records shall be preserved and/or
destroyed based upon current state records retention schedule and the
direction of the Civil Service Commission. Any destruction of records shall
be authorized by the Civil Service Commission prior to said destruction.



   (D)   All open records requests must be made pursuant to the Open
Records Act, being KRS 61.870 to 61.884. The City Clerk shall make such
records public only upon authority of the Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson of
the Civil Service Commission.



(Ord. 013-145, passed 9-23-2013)



§ 33.14  JOB DESCRIPTIONS.



   (A)   The provisions of the city’s Policy and Procedure Manual,
the Police Department standard operating procedures, the Fire Department
standard operating procedures and the city employment guidelines adopted by
the City Council shall apply to all covered positions.



   (B)   The Mayor shall notify the Civil Service Commission members of
any changes in job descriptions, in writing, within ten days after any change
of said job description is adopted and/or approved by the City Council.



(Ord. 013-145, passed 9-23-2013)



§ 33.15  ANNOUNCEMENTS.



   (A)   Announcements of examinations shall be circulated according to
procedures determined by the Mayor. Announcement of a promotional examination
shall be made at least 90 days prior to the conduct of the examination.



   (B)   Notice of open competitive examinations may be advertised
publicly not less than ten days prior to the filing deadline.



   (C)   The Mayor shall notify the Civil Service Commission members in
writing of any announcement of examination at least 48 hours prior to any
public announcement of said examination.



(Ord. 013-145, passed 9-23-2013)



§ 33.16  APPLICATIONS; QUALIFICATIONS; ELIGIBLE PERSONS, APPOINTEES.



   (A)   (1)   Applications must be signed by the applicant. The
applicant’s signature shall be understood as certifying the truthfulness of
all statements made on the application form. The Secretary may require
applicants to provide any and all proof necessary to support claims made on
the application.



      (2)   Applications shall not be distributed for any class
unless an examination announcement has been issued for that class.



   (B)   (1)   General qualifications. The Commission shall provide
for open competitive, written and oral examinations to determine the relative
fitness of all candidates for original appointment.



      (2)   Promotion. Before being eligible for promotion,
candidates must meet the criteria set forth below.



         (a)   Police personnel.



            1.   a.   Captain: successful and progressively
responsible experience as a police officer. Four years police experience at
the Sergeant level or above;



               b.   Lieutenant: successful and
progressively responsible experience as a police officer. Two years police
experience at the Sergeant level or above; and



               c.   Sergeant: two years of certified law
enforcement experience.



            2.   All promotions in the Police Department of
Captain and below shall be made from regular employees occupying positions in
the classified service. These promotions shall be made after open competitive
examination. The Mayor may, after open competitive examination, make an
appointment for Major and above that may or may not include eligibles that
are current employees.



         (b)   Fire personnel.



            1.   a.   Captain: graduation from high school
or its equivalent and at least three years as a line officer; and



               b.   Sergeant: graduation from high school
or its equivalent and at least two years as a driver operator.



            2.   All promotions in the Fire Department of
Captain and below shall be made from regular employees occupying positions in
the classified service. These promotions shall be made after open competitive
examination. The Mayor may, after open competitive examination, make an
appointment for Major and above that may or may not include eligibles that
are current employees.



            3.   If there are three or fewer qualified regular
employees occupying positions in the classified service, the Mayor may, after
open competitive examination make an appointment for any position that may or
may not include eligibles that are current employees.



         (c)   City Hall personnel. The Mayor may, after open
competitive examination, make an appointment for City Administrator or City
Clerk that may or may not include eligibles that are current employees.



         (d)   Public Works personnel. The Mayor may, after open
competitive examination make an appointment for Public Works Director that
may or may not include eligibles that are current employees.



         (e)   Sewer and Wastewater personnel. The Mayor may,
after open competitive examination, make an appointment for Wastewater
Superintendent or may or may not include eligibles that are current employees.



      (3)   Relative fitness. The Commission shall provide
provisions for open, competitive, written, oral and other mental and physical
examinations to determine the relative fitness of all candidates for original
appointment and for promotion.



   (C)   The application of any applicant who makes a false statement
regarding a police arrest or conviction record shall automatically be
rejected. The Secretary may reject an application, may refuse to examine a
candidate, may remove an eligible’s name from the eligibility list, may
refuse to certify the name of an eligible and may seek to remove an employee
already appointed, if it is found that the person:



      (1)   Does not meet the minimum special or physical
requirements (with reasonable accommodation where appropriate) for the
position as announced;



      (2)   Has made a false statement of material fact on the
application;



      (3)   Has used or attempted to use political pressure or
bribery to secure an advantage in testing or appointment;



      (4)   Has directly or indirectly solicited or obtained
information regarding the examination to which the applicant was not entitled;



      (5)   Has failed to submit the application correctly or within
the prescribed time limits;



      (6)   Has taken part in the compilation, administration or
correction of the examination for which the applicant has applied;



      (7)   Has been found cheating in any way on an examination;



      (8)   Has previously been dismissed from a position in the
classified service for cause or has resigned while charges for dismissal for
cause were pending;



      (9)   Has been convicted of a felony or multiple misdemeanors;



      (10)   Has established an unsatisfactory employment or
personnel record, as evidenced by reference check, of such nature as to
indicate unsuitability for employment;



      (11)   Has practiced or attempted to practice deception or
fraud in making application or taking test;



      (12)   Fails to notify the Commission in writing of any change
in address. For this purpose, the return of a letter by the postal
authorities, if properly addressed to the last address on record, shall be
deemed sufficient grounds for this action;



      (13)   Fails to notify the Commission of any change which
would affect the eligible’s availability for employment;



      (14)   Requests removal from the list;



      (15)   Fails to report for duty or scheduled selection
procedures;



      (16)   Resigns and the eligible’s name appears on a
promotional eligibility list. In the event of reemployment, said employee’s
name shall not be put back on the promotional list unless said employee has
successfully passed a new promotional examination;



      (17)   Refuses a job offer;



      (18)   Fails to respond to any request for information from
the Civil Service Commission;



      (19)   Waives certification more than once;



      (20)   Is selected for a position from an eligibility list or
his or her term of eligibility expires; and



      (21)   Has otherwise violated provisions of this chapter, or
for such other reason considered by the Secretary to indicate that employment
of the individual would be detrimental to the best interests of the
Department.



   (D)   (1)   All applicants for a position covered by the Civil
Service, who obtain a total weighted score of 70% or better, with 50% of the
total score assigned to the written exam, 25% of the score assigned to the
oral exam/interview, and the remaining 25% of the total score assigned to the
related work experience of the applicant, shall be entered upon the list in
order of total weighted average score in the examination.



      (2)   All applicants for sworn police officer positions with
the city’s Police Department (other than lateral transfer applicants) shall
take a general knowledge written exam administered by the Civil Service
Commission or its designee. The applicants who score the ten highest grades
on said written test shall proceed in the application process for sworn
positions with the city’s Police Department. Other applications shall be
discharged. The second phase of the application process for the city’s
Police Department shall consist of a written exam to test one’s aptitude
for work in the law enforcement field, an oral interview, and a resume review
process to examine applicant’s work and life experience. The applicants
shall be graded and scored utilizing the following formula: the exam shall
make up 25% of an applicant’s score; the oral interview shall make up 50%
of an applicant’s score and the resume review of the applicant’s work and
life experience shall make up 25% of the applicant’s score. Lateral
transfer applicants shall sit for an oral interview and shall have their work
and life experience reviewed by resume review. A lateral transfer
applicant’s score shall be composed of the following formula: 50% of score
shall be based upon the oral interview and 50% of the applicant’s score
shall be based upon the work and life experience review.



      (3)   Military veterans, honorably discharged from the U.S.
Military, shall receive five points of a scale of 100 in consideration of
their service.



      (4)   Whenever two or more persons have the same score, they
shall have the same numerical position on the list.



      (5)   Candidate entry level eligibility shall expire one year
from the date the candidate is placed on the list, unless extended with the
written approval of the Civil Service Commission. Promotional eligibility
lists shall expire one year from the date the list is established by the
Commission, unless extended with written approval of the Civil Service
Commission.



      (6)   The Commission may, upon good cause, discard an entry
level eligibility list. An action to consider discarding an eligibility list
may be initiated by the Commission itself, or upon request with a showing of
telling evidence. It may be based upon a determination that a substantial
number of background investigations have shown that the testing process did
not produce a list of qualified candidates from which to fill available
positions. A request to discard an entry level eligibility list made by the
city must be presented to the Civil Service Commission in written form and
shall include justification supporting the request.



   (E)   (1)   Open competitive eligibility lists contain the names
of eligible persons who are qualified for further selection procedures or
appointment as a result of open competitive, numerically-rated examinations
for positions assigned to the class covered by the list. This type of list
shall be effective for one year, unless otherwise directed by the Mayor.
However, no list may be extended beyond two years.



      (2)   The names of all eligible persons who have obtained a
score which is equal to or greater than the passing-point score in the
examination(s), shall be placed in rank order on the eligibility list for the
class for which they were examined.



      (3)   In the event that two or more eligible persons achieve
the same final earned rating, the same rank shall be assigned to all eligible
persons with the same score. When the Mayor deems that circumstances appear
to warrant, an examination shall be given for the purpose of obtaining
candidates for the open competitive list. The Mayor will have the option to
allow the list to expire and create a new list or to replenish the current
list.



      (4)   When the list is replenished, all eligibles whose names
are on the existing list shall be notified of the new examination and shall
be granted the option of either retaining their present score or taking the
examination.



      (5)   When an eligible person elects to not take the new
examination, the eligible person’s name, with existing rating, shall be
integrated into the new list in rank order and shall remain on the list only
as long as the eligible person’s name would have remained on the original
list.



      (6)   When an eligible person elects to take the new
examination, the eligible person’s name shall be placed on the eligibility
list with the score attained on the new examination; that name shall remain
on the list for as long as the new list shall be effective. If a candidate
fails the examination re-take, the eligible person’s name shall be removed
from the original list.



      (7)   The names of new eligible persons will be integrated in
rank order with the existing names on the list. Each eligible person shall
remain on the list only as long as the name would have remained on an
original list.



   (F)   (1)   Promotional eligibility lists contain the names of
employees in the classified service who have completed all numerically-rated
promotional examinations and who are eligible for promotion to positions
assigned to the class covered by the list.



      (2)   The names of all persons who have obtained a score which
is equal to or exceeds the passing point score in an examination shall be
placed on the eligibility list for the class for which they were examined in
the order of their final earned rating.



      (3)   The certified rank list for promotions shall be valid
for one year and shall not be extended. Under no circumstances shall
promotional eligibility lists be consolidated with newly prepared lists. In
compiling every competitive promotion list for examinations given after the
effective date of this regulation as amended, the eligible candidates shall
be ranked in the order of their ratings earned in the examination given for
the purpose of establishing the list.



      (4)   Promotional eligibility lists shall contain the names of
successful candidates in the order of their standing through examination. In
filling promotional vacancies, the Mayor shall select from not more than
three candidates, graded highest on the appropriate eligibility list. If a
person is selected from the top three persons on the eligibility list, then
the fourth person on the eligibility list moves up to the top three grouping,
and so on and so forth, until the eligibility list expires after one year.
Any person who is aggrieved by the selection process may seek relief from a
court of competent jurisdiction. Appeals of promotional decisions shall not
be made to the Civil Service Commission.



   (G)   After a request from the Mayor and upon completion of final
earned ratings for all required numerically-rated examinations, the
Commission shall certify to the Mayor the list of eligible persons prepared
for the class to which the position to be filled is assigned.



(Ord. 013-145, passed 9-23-2013)



§ 33.17  EXAMINATIONS; SCOPE; ADMISSION; ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   Examinations shall be job related in character, practical in
nature and relevant to those factors which test thoroughly the capabilities
and qualifications of the applicant to discharge both proficiently and
deficiently the duties of the classified position. The design of the
examination shall be guided by legal and professional standards.



   (B)   (1)   All examinations shall be under the direction of the
Civil Service Commission, and conducted by the head of the department or
other person as designated by the Civil Service Commission. All examinations
shall be job related in character, and related to those matters tending
fairly to test the capacity and qualifications of the applicant to discharge
proficiently the duties of the positions to which appointment is sought.
Examinations may consist of any one or a combination of the following:
written tests; selection interviews; assessment centers; physical fitness or
ability tests; medical examinations; stress tests; demonstration of manual or
performance skills; experience; training; or any other selection method
deemed appropriate by the department head and approved by the Civil Service
Commission.



      (2)   As far as practical and feasible, vacancies in the
classified service shall be filled by promotion of regular employees
occupying positions in the classified service. Promotional examinations may
be held with the permission of the Civil Service Commission and opened
exclusively within a department or citywide. With the approval of the Civil
Service Commission, departmental examinations may be waived in the case where
peculiar and exceptional qualifications are required.



   (C)   Only persons who have met all qualifications and whose
applications are submitted and accepted in accordance with filing deadlines
shall be admitted to participate in the examination.



   (D)   (1)   The department head of any city department intending
to conduct an examination pursuant to the direction of the Council or the
Mayor shall be responsible for overseeing the administration, the integrity
and the security of all examinations. Department heads may (with the written
consent of the Civil Service Commission) employ the services of a
professional in the testing field who may formulate, give and grade the
examinations and who may otherwise be designated as Examination Manager. No
candidate shall be allowed to take an examination other than at the time and
place designated for such in advance, unless there are conditions which, in
the opinion of the Civil Service Commission, or the Chairperson of the
Commission, if the full Commission is not available, may justify otherwise.



      (2)   All examination materials shall be privileged and
confidential and not available for public inspection. Any member of the
classified service, city employee, employee of the Commission or Commission
member who engages in an activity which destroys the integrity,
confidentiality or security of the examination process, shall be subject to
immediate dismissal or removal and, if warranted, criminal prosecution.



      (3)   Any and all examination processes, procedures and
policies, concerning the administration of any examination, shall be
submitted in writing by the department head or the Mayor to the Civil Service
Commission not less than 30 days before the public announcement of an
examination for the Commission’s written approval.



      (4)   The Commission shall review the intended procedure and
provide its approval or an amended procedure within seven days after its
regular meeting held the month prior to the public announcement of
examination.



      (5)   Errors in grading an examination shall be corrected when
they are discovered, as well as any error made in an eligibility list as a
result; however, any such error shall not invalidate any appointment made
prior to the discovery of the error. The Civil Service Commission may take
such action as necessary to correct errors in grading.



   (E)   (1)   Waiver. Upon approval by the Civil Service
Commission, promotional examinations may be waived by the Mayor, or the
Mayor’s designee, in the event that there are less than three qualified
applicants. Candidates will be placed on the eligibility list in order of
length of service. Such a waiver shall not be granted until after the
application period for the position has closed.



      (2)   Notice.



         (a)   Notice shall be given at least 90 days before a
promotional examination is conducted. Promotional tests shall be graded, as
determined by the Commission, to include written, oral and/or other
examination scores. The head of the department intending to engage in a
promotional examination shall, with approval of the Mayor, develop an
examination procedure and submit same to the Civil Service Commission not
less than 120 days prior to the date which the department intends to conduct
the examination. The Commission shall examine the procedure submitted and
either approve, disapprove or amend the procedure as it deems appropriate
within seven days after the regularly scheduled Civil Service Commission
meeting conducted the month prior to the ninetieth day before the promotion
exam is scheduled to take place.



         (b)   The departments shall, immediately upon the
completion of the promotional examination, submit all the results of the
promotional examinations to the Secretary (the City Clerk, or his or her
designee). Upon completion of grading of examinations, candidates shall be
informed of the final evaluated ratings attained and their individual ranking
on the eligibility list. Promotional eligibility lists shall contain the
names of the successful candidates in the order of their standing through the
examination process. An individual’s results and ratings are subject to
review by the individual candidate, but are otherwise confidential, and
subject only by the Civil Service Commission, the Commission’s Secretary,
the department head and the Mayor.



         (c)   Errors in grading an examination shall be
corrected when they are discovered, as well as any error made in an
eligibility list as a result; however, any such error shall not invalidate
any appointment made prior to the discovery of the error. The Civil Service
Commission may take such action as necessary to correct errors in grading
examinations.



   (F)   (1)   The Civil Service Commission may require stress and
medical examinations for classifications requiring medical and physical
standards. In the event that such examinations are required, they shall be
conducted by a designated medical examiner, designated by the Civil Service
Commission, and paid by the city.



      (2)   Performance on the stress and medical examinations shall
be reported on a pass/fail basis.



   (G)   (1)   Prior to the scheduling of an examination, the
department head shall determine, with approval of the Board, the weights to
be assigned to the various qualifying elements comprising the total grade or
rating through which an applicant may earn placement on the eligibility list.
Such weights shall apply to subsequent examinations for the same
classification, unless changed with the approval of the Civil Service
Commission. Failure in one phase of an examination shall be grounds for the
applicants failing the entire examination. A scaled score of 70 shall be the
minimum rating through which eligibility on an employment list may be earned.
This score shall be derived by equating the cut-off point to a score of 70,
and the highest possible score to a score of 100. All other raw scores
between these two scores shall be converted to the scale in even increments.



      (2)   On every competitive promotional and original
appointment list, the eligible persons shall be ranked in the order of their
ratings earned in the examination given for the purpose of establishing the
list. When it is necessary to certify the rank consisting of tied scores, all
candidates having tied scores shall be certified. The department head may
determine that ratings earned in the examination process shall be divided
into bands.



      (3)   All scores falling within a given band shall be
considered tied.



(Ord. 013-145, passed 9-23-2013)



§ 33.18  TRANSFER ELIGIBILITY; VACANCIES.



   (A)   Police/firefighter-lateral entry.



      (1)   A lateral transfer eligibility list contains the names
of sworn police officers and sworn firefighters of any other jurisdiction who
meet the qualifications for employment. Lateral transfer eligibility lists
shall be valid for one year from the date accepted by the Commission.
Applications for lateral entry will be accepted only when posted by the
Department and just prior to the expiration of the current lateral list.
Police lateral applicants are persons with three years of police experience,
post- graduation from the Department of Criminal Justice training, basic
police academy or any police academy recognized by the state’s Law
Enforcement Council or the state’s Police Academy. Out-of-state police
lateral applicants must have three years’ post-academy work experience and
have graduated from a police academy recognized by the state’s Law
Enforcement Council.



      (2)   The Civil Service Commission shall consider this list an
open competitive original entrance list and treat it as such. Lateral entry
applicants for the city’s Police Department shall be scored utilizing the
system set out in § 33.16(D) of this chapter. All other lateral entry
applicants shall have their ranking determined by a scoring system determined
by the Civil Service Commission at a later time.



      (3)   The Civil Service Commission shall determine the scoring
system for the city’s Fire Department as follows:



         (a)   The Chief of the Fire Department, or his or her
designee, shall submit to the Civil Service Commission a written scoring
system for the Civil Service Commission’s review, approval, disapproval or
amendment. Said written scoring system shall be submitted to the Civil
Service Commission within 60 days of the enactment of this chapter; and



         (b)   Any future changes to the scoring system after
adoption of this chapter shall be approved by the Civil Service Commission by
an affirmative vote of a majority of the Civil Service Commission, not less
than 60 days prior to any date that said scoring system would be utilized for
any applicants for positions with the city’s Police Department or the
city’s Fire Department. Any proposed scoring system shall be submitted as
any other business to come before the Commission on the first Tuesday of any
given month.



      (4)   The manner in which the Civil Service Commission shall
determine said scoring system is as follows.



         (a)   The Chief of the Police Department and the Chief
of the Fire Department, or their designee, shall submit to the Civil Service
Commission a written scoring system for the Civil Service’s review,
approval or disapproval, or amendment. Said written scoring system shall be
submitted to the Civil Service Commission within 60 days of the enactment of
this chapter.



         (b)   In the event that the Chief of the Police
Department or the Chief of the Fire Department wish to change the scoring
system at any time after it has been approved by the Civil Service
Commission, they shall submit any amendments thereto in writing, to the Civil
Service Commission, not less than 60 days prior to any date that they wish
the scoring system to be changed. The Civil Service Commission shall consider
the scoring system at its next regularly scheduled meeting, after submission
by the Chief of the Fire Department, or the Chief of the Police Department,
or their designee.



         (c)   Said scoring system, or amendments thereto, shall
be submitted, along with any other business to come before the Commission, on
or before 5:00 p.m., on the first Tuesday of any given month, as all other
business submitted for consideration by the Civil Service Commission.



   (B)   Requisition. In order to fill a vacancy in the classified
service, the Mayor shall request the Commission to certify a list of eligible
persons.



(Ord. 013-145, passed 9-23-2013)



§ 33.19  TYPES OF APPOINTMENTS.



   (A)   Original and promotional appointments.



      (1)   The Mayor shall notify the Commission members, in
writing, which eligible person or persons have been selected for appointment
within 48 hours of said selection. The names of the eligible persons not
selected shall move up one spot, replacing the appointed eligible person on
the certification list.



      (2)   The Mayor may appoint only persons whose names appear on
the certified list of eligible persons. If a vacancy exists, the Mayor may
re-employee any former employee that left his or her employment in good
standing without that employee going through the civil service process.



      (3)   The employee may be appointed to the same or lesser
classification that he or she held at the time of his or her separation. Any
employee that has separated from the city for a period of more than 12 months
must follow all of the hiring conditions as set forth in this chapter and be
placed on the eligibility list.



   (B)   Probationary appointment. When filling a permanent position,
newly-employed and newly- promoted employees are initially granted a
probationary appointment, after which they are required to serve a probation
period in the class to which they are appointed.



   (C)   Permanent appointment. Following the successful completion of
the original probation period, employees shall be granted a permanent
appointment in their class after which they obtain the full status and
benefits of the classified service.



   (D)   Police/firefighter, lateral entry appointment.



      (1)   Lateral appointments shall be considered original
appointments and treated as such.



      (2)   A person selected for appointment as a
police/firefighter, lateral entry, must provide a complete record of previous
police or fire service as appropriate, which shall become a part of the
employee’s permanent personnel file.



      (3)   For purposes of promotion, police officers or
firefighters who laterally transfer from a police department or a fire
department of another jurisdiction shall not be granted seniority credit for
time served in other jurisdictions.



(Ord. 013-145, passed 9-23-2013)



§ 33.20  PROBATION.



   (A)   The probation period shall be used as an opportunity to
observe and appraise the newly- appointed or newly-promoted employee’s
work, to aid the employee in adjusting to the new position, and to take
appropriate action to remove from the position any employee whose work
performance fails to meet required standards.



   (B)   A probationary employee shall not be included in the civil
service system until that employee has satisfactorily completed his or her
initial probationary period which shall be one year from his or her date of
hire. A police officer’s or a firefighter’s probationary period will
begin upon being sworn in and continue for a period of one year thereafter.



   (C)   Employees covered by this chapter and serving promotional
probationary periods shall not be deemed excluded from the civil service
system during the promotional probationary periods.



   (D)   Any unpaid interruption of service during the probation
period, except for required military training purposes, shall not be counted
as part of the probation period, and the probation period shall be extended
by the same number of days as the employee was absent.



   (E)   The probation period may be extended for any period of time up
to an additional six months, upon request by the department head and approval
by the Mayor. The department head’s request for extension of a probation
period shall be in writing, and shall specify the reasons for such action and
recommended length of extension. The Mayor shall, at his or her discretion,
approve such extension prior to the end of the probation period.



   (F)   The employee and the Civil Service Commission members shall
receive written notice prior to the probationary employee’s probationary
period of any extension of probation. The effective date of an employee’s
permanent appointment shall be the day immediately following the last day of
the employee’s probationary period. In the event that the Civil Service
Commissioner’s or the employee do not receive written notice, as specified
herein, it shall be deemed that the employee did satisfactorily complete the
probation period and the employee shall be granted an permanent appointment.



   (G)   An employee serving a probationary period may be removed or
terminated from the position by the Mayor for the efficiency of the service
at any time during the probationary period. Written notice of the removal
shall be provided to the affected employee and to the Commission Members. An
employee so removed during any initial probationary period shall be
dismissed. This action is not appealable by the employee.



   (H)   An employee so removed during a promotional probation period
shall be demoted to the class held immediately prior to the promotion.



   (I)   On or before the tenth day prior to the end of an employee’s
probation, the department head shall notify the employee and each
Commissioner in writing, stating whether or not the employee’s performance
has been satisfactory and whether or not the employee is recommended for
appointment.



   (J)   The effective date of the permanent appointment shall be the
day immediately following the date of the completion of the probation period.



   (K)   In the event the department head fails to give written notice,
as specified herein, it shall be deemed that the employee did satisfactorily
complete the probation period and the employee shall be granted a permanent
appointment.



   (L)   An employee serving a probation period may be removed from the
position by the Mayor for the efficiency of the service at any time during
the probation period.



   (M)   Employees covered by the provisions of this chapter and
serving promotional probationary periods shall not be deemed excluded from
the civil service system during the promotional probationary periods.



(Ord. 013-145, passed 9-23-2013)



§ 33.21  DISCIPLINE; ACTIONS.



   (A)   General. Employees may be disciplined by the Commission based
on a recommendation of the Mayor or based on charges, signed and in writing,
preferred to the Mayor, by any person. Grounds for discipline may include,
but need not be limited to, one or more of the following:



      (1)   In competency or inefficiency in the performance of job
duties;



      (2)   Conduct, on or off the job, unbecoming an employee of
the city;



      (3)   Violations of departmental rules, city wide policies,
laws of the commonwealth or the United States;



      (4)   Behavior which has threatened or injured the health and
safety of the employee or others;



      (5)   Any absence without leave;



      (6)   Insubordination; and



      (7)   Solicitation or acceptance of any reward, gift or other
form of remuneration aside from regular compensation for the performance of
duties.



   (B)   Types of disciplinary action.



      (1)   Reprimands. The Civil Service Commission may reprimand
an employee in accordance with division (C) below and as required by KRS
90.360.



      (2)   Suspension.



         (a)   The Civil Service Commission may suspend an
employee for a period of not more than six months, in accordance with
division (C) below and as required by KRS 90.360.



         (b)   In a case where the head of the department or
Mayor has probable cause to believe that an employee has been guilty of
conduct justifying his or her removal or punishment, he or she shall
immediately suspend that employee from duty or from both pay and duty pending
trial and that employee shall not be placed on duty or allowed pay thereafter
until the charges are heard by the Civil Service Commission.



      (3)   Demotions.



         (a)   No employee shall be demoted for any reason,
except inefficiency, misconduct, insubordination or violation of law
involving moral turpitude or failure to comply with any rule adopted by the
city’s legislative body or Civil Service Commission.



         (b)   The process for the demotion of an employee is
outlined fully in division (C) below.



      (4)   Dismissal.



         (a)   No employee shall be dismissed for any reason
except inefficiency, misconduct, insubordination or violation of law
involving moral turpitude or any for failure to comply with any rule adopted
by the city’s legislative body or Civil Service Commission.



         (b)   The process for the dismissal of an employee is
outlined fully in division (C) below.



         (c)   Employees who are dismissed may not be reemployed,
reinstated or rehired within the classified service, except by reinstatement
by the Commission on review of a dismissal.



   (C)   Disciplinary action.



      (1)   In conformity with KRS 90.360, as required by the
city’s adoption of citywide civil service as authorized by KRS 95.761(3),
no employee in the classified service of the city shall be dismissed,
suspended or reduced in grade or pay for any reason except inefficiency,
misconduct, insubordination or violation of law involving moral turpitude,
or, violation of any rule adopted by the city legislative body or the Civil
Service Commission.



      (2)   Any person may prefer charges in writing against any
employee by filing them with the Mayor who shall communicate the charges
without delay to the Civil Service Commission of the city. The charges must
be signed by the person making them and must set out clearly each charge. The
Mayor shall, whenever probable cause appears, prefer charges against any
employee whom he or she believes guilty of conduct justifying his or her
removal. Upon the filing of charges, the Clerk of the Civil Service
Commission shall notify its members and serve a copy of the charges upon the
accused employee with a statement of the date, place and hour at which the
hearing of charges will begin. This hearing shall not be held within three
days of the date of the service of charges upon the accused employee. The day
on which the charges are served on the accused employee shall count as one of
the days of notice. The employee accused may, in writing, waive the service
of charges and request a trial within three days after they have been filed
with the Clerk of the Civil Service Commission.



      (3)   Upon the hearing, the charges shall be considered
traversed and put in issue, and the trial shall be limited to the issues
presented by the written charges.



      (4)   The Civil Service Commission shall have the power to
summon and compel attendance of witnesses at all hearings by subpoena issued
by the Clerk of that body and served upon the witnesses by members of the
Police Department of the city or any officer authorized to serve subpoenas.
If any witness fails to appear in response to a summons or refuses to testify
concerning any matter on which he or she may lawfully be interrogated, any
District Judge, on application of the Commission, may compel obedience by
proceedings for contempt as in the case of disobedience of a subpoena issued
from the District Court. The accused employee shall have the right to have
subpoenaed any witnesses he or she may desire, upon furnishing their names to
the Clerk. As many as ten subpoenas may be served on the request of the
accused employee without charge, but each additional subpoena requested by
him or her shall be issued by the Clerk and served by the Police Department
only upon payment of $0.50 to the City Clerk by the employee. The action and
decision of the Civil Service Commission on the charges shall be reduced to
writing and kept in a book for that purpose and the written charge shall be
attached to the book containing the body’s decision.



      (5)   In cases where the head of the department or the
appointing authority has probable cause to believe an employee has been
guilty of conduct justifying his or her removal or punishment, he or she
shall immediately suspend that employee from duty or from both pay and duty
pending trial and the employee shall not be placed on duty or allowed pay
thereafter until the charges are heard by the Civil Service Commission.



      (6)   The Civil Service Commission shall punish any employee
found guilty by reprimand or a suspension for any length of time not to
exceed six months, or by reducing the grade, if the employee’s
classification warrants, or by combining any two or more these punishments,
or by dismissal. No employee shall be reprimanded, removed, suspended or
dismissed, except as provided in this section.



   (D)   Conduct of hearings and appeals.



      (1)   The Civil Service Commission shall conduct disciplinary
hearings according to hearing procedures and rules as adopted by the Civil
Service Commission in conformity with the standards of due process.



      (2)   The Civil Service Commission shall have counsel present
at each meeting of the Commission wherein any disciplinary matter is to be
considered and at any hearing conducted by the Civil Service Commission.



      (3)   Any employee may be represented by counsel at any
hearing of the Commission at the employee’s expense.



      (4)   Appeals from the Civil Service Commission’s
determination shall be filed in the county’s Circuit Court in conformity
with state law.



(Ord. 013-145, passed 9-23-2013)



§ 33.22  AMENDMENTS AND REPEALS.



   It shall take a majority vote of the entire legislative body to amend
or repeal any portion of this chapter.



(Ord. 013-145, passed 9-23-2013)



CHAPTER 34:  CODE OF ETHICAL CONDUCT



Section



General Provisions



   34.001   Title



   34.002   Findings



   34.003   Purpose and authority



   34.004   Definitions



   34.005   Reprisals against persons disclosing violations prohibited



Conduct Standards



   34.020   Conflicts of interest in general



   34.021   Conflicts of interest in contracts



   34.022   Incompatible offices



   34.023   Withdrawal from participation



   34.024   Receipt of gifts



   34.025   Use of city property, equipment and personnel



   34.026   Nepotism prohibited



   34.027   Representation of interests before city government



   34.028   Misuse of confidential information



   34.029   Political solicitation



   34.030   Patronage



   34.031   Outside employment



   34.032   Post-employment restriction



   34.033   Fees and honoraria



   34.034   Endorsements



   34.035   Complicity with or knowledge of others’ violations



   34.036   Falsely impugning reputation



   34.037   Meeting attendance



Financial Disclosure



   34.050   Who must file



   34.051   When to file statements; amended statements



   34.052   Form of statement of financial interests



   34.053   Control and maintenance of the statements of financial
interests



   34.054   Contents of the financial interests statement



   34.055   Non-compliance with filing requirement



Ethics Commission



   34.070   Created



   34.071   Alternate members



   34.072   Facilities and staff



   34.073   Initial meeting



   34.074   Powers and duties



   34.075   Training and education



   34.076   Annual reports; annual review of Ethics Code



   34.077   Filing and investigation of complaints



   34.078   Notice of hearings



   34.079   Hearing procedure



   34.080   Appeals



   34.081   Limitation of actions



   34.082   Advisory opinions



 



   34.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 34.001  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “City of
Shepherdsville, Kentucky, Code of Ethics”.



(Ord. 015-175, passed 2-23-2015)



§ 34.002  FINDINGS.



   The legislative body of the city finds and declares that:



   (A)   Public office and employment of the city are public trusts;



   (B)   The vitality and stability of the government of this city
depends upon the public’s confidence in the integrity of its elected and
appointed officers and employees. Whenever the public perceives a conflict
between the private interests and public duties of a city officer or
employee, that confidence is imperiled; and



   (C)   The government of the city has a duty to provide its citizens
with standards by which they may determine whether public duties are being
faithfully performed, and to make its officers and employees aware of the
standards which the citizenry rightfully expects them to comply with while
conducting their public duties.



(Ord. 015-175, passed 2-23-2015)



§ 34.003  PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.



   (A)   It is the purpose of this chapter to provide a method of
assuring that standards of ethical conduct and financial disclosure
requirements for officers and employees of the city shall be clearly
established, uniform in their application, and enforceable, and to provide
the officers and employees of the city with advice and information concerning
potential conflicts of interest which might arise in the conduct of their
public duties.



   (B)   It is the further purpose of this chapter to meet the
requirements of KRS 65.003 as enacted by the 1994 Kentucky General Assembly
and any amendments made subsequent to that date.



   (C)   This chapter is enacted under the power vested in the city by
KRS 82.082 and pursuant to the requirements of KRS 65.003.



(Ord. 015-175, passed 2-23-2015)



§ 34.004  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUSINESS. Any corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, firm,
enterprise, franchise, association, organization, self-employed individual,
holding company, joint stock company, receivership, trust, professional
service corporation or any legal entity through which business is conducted
for profit.



   CANDIDATE. Any individual who seeks nomination or election to a city
office. An individual is a CANDIDATE when the individual files a notification
and declaration for nomination for office with the County Clerk or the
Secretary of State, or is nominated for office by a political party, or files
a declaration of intent to be a write-in candidate with the County Clerk or
Secretary of State.



   CITY. The City of Shepherdsville, Kentucky.



   CITY AGENCY. Any board, commission, authority, non-stock corporation or
other entity created, either individually or jointly, by the city.



   CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION. Information obtained in the course of holding
public office or employment, or as a contractor to the city, which is not
available to members of the public and which the officer or employee is not
authorized to disclose, except to designated individuals or bodies, including
written and non-written information. When such information is also available
through channels open to the public, officers and employees are not
prohibited from disclosing the availability of those channels.



   CONSULTANT. An independent contractor or professional person or entity
engaged by the city or advising a city officer, and in a position to
influence a city decision or action, or have access to confidential
information.



   CUSTOMER or CLIENT.



      (1)   Any person or entity to which a person or entity has
supplied goods or services during the previous 24 months, having a total
value greater than $1,000; or



      (2)   Any person or entity to which an officer or employee’s
outside employer or business has supplied goods or services during the
previous 24 months, having a total value greater than $1,000, but only if the
officer or employee knows or has reason to know the outside employer or
business supplied the goods or services.



   DOMESTIC PARTNER. An adult, unrelated by blood, with which an unmarried
or separated officer or employee has an exclusive committed relationship,
maintains a mutual residence and shares basic living expenses.



   EMPLOYEE. Any person, whether full-time, part-time, seasonal or
temporary, and whether paid or unpaid, who is employed or provides service to
the city. The term EMPLOYEE shall not include any contractor or subcontractor
or any of their employees.



   ETHICS COMMISSION or COMMISSION. The City of Shepherdsville Ethics
Commission which is created and vested by this chapter with the
responsibility of enforcing the requirements of the city’s Code of Ethics.



   FAMILY MEMBER. A spouse, domestic partner, parent, step-parent, child,
stepchild, brother, step-brother, sister, step-sister, mother-in-law,
father-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, grandparent or grandchild.



   FINANCIAL BENEFIT. Includes any money, service, license, permit,
contract, authorization, loan, discount, travel, entertainment, hospitality,
gratuity or any promise of any of these or anything else of value. This term
does not include campaign contributions authorized by law.



   FINANCIAL INTEREST. A relationship to something such that a direct or
indirect financial benefit has been, will be or might be received as a result
of it.



   HOUSEHOLD. Includes anyone whose primary residence is in the officer or
employee’s home, including non-relatives who are not rent payers or
servants.



   IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER. A spouse, domestic partner, a child or
step-child who is not emancipated and who resides in the officer’s or
employee’s household, or a person claimed by the officer or employee, or
the officer’s or employee’s spouse, as a dependent for tax purposes.



   OFFICER. Any person, whether full-time or part-time, and whether paid
or unpaid, who is one of the following:



      (1)   Mayor;



      (2)   Legislative body member;



      (3)   City Clerk;



      (4)   City Manager;



      (5)   City Administrator;



      (6)   Police Chief;



      (7)   Fire Chief;



      (8)   Any other person that occupies a non-elected office
created by pursuant to KRS 83A.080; and



      (9)   A member of the governing body of any city agency who
has been appointed to the governing body of the agency by the city.



   OFFICIAL ACT. Any legislative, administrative, appointive or
discretionary act of any public official or employee of the city or any
agency, board, committee or commission thereof.



   PERSONAL BENEFIT. Includes benefits other than those that are directly
financially advantageous. These include financial benefits to relatives,
business associates and others, as well as non-financial benefits to these
people and to oneself, including such things as reputation and the success of
one’s career.



   PERSONAL INTEREST. A relationship to something such that a personal
benefit has been, will be or might be obtained by certain action or inaction
with respect to it.



   RELATIVE. A spouse, child, step-child, brother, sister, parent or
step-parent, or a person claimed as a dependent on the officer or
employee’s latest individual state income tax return.



   SUBORDINATE. Another official or employee over whose activities an
official or employee has direction, supervision or control.



   TRANSACTION. Any matter, including but not limited to, contracts, work
or business with the city, the sale or purchase of real estate by the city,
and any request for zoning amendments, variances or special permits pending
before the city, upon which a public officer or employee performs an official
act or action.



(Ord. 015-175, passed 2-23-2015)



§ 34.005  REPRISALS AGAINST PERSONS DISCLOSING VIOLATIONS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No officer or employee of the city or any city agency shall be
subject to reprisal, or directly or indirectly use, or threaten to use, any
official authority or influence in any manner whatsoever which tends to
discourage, restrain, deter, prevent, interfere with, coerce or discriminate
against any person who in good faith reports, discloses, divulges or
otherwise brings to the attention of the Ethics Commission or any other
agency or officer of the city or the commonwealth any facts or information
relative to an actual or suspected violation of this chapter.



   (B)   This section shall not be construed as prohibiting
disciplinary or punitive action if an officer or employee of the city or any
city agency discloses information which he or she knows:



      (1)   To be false or which he or she discloses with reckless
disregard for its truth or falsity;



      (2)   To be exempt from required disclosure under the
provisions of the state’s Open Records Act, being KRS 61.870 to 61.884; and



      (3)   Is confidential under any other provision of law.



(Ord. 015-175, passed 2-23-2015)



CONDUCT STANDARDS



§ 34.020  CONFLICTS OF INTEREST IN GENERAL.



   Every officer and employee of the city and every city agency shall
comply with the following standards of conduct.



   (A)   No officer or employee, or any immediate family member or any
officer or employee, shall have an interest in a business or engage in any
business, transaction or activity which is in substantial conflict with the
proper discharge of the officer’s or employee’s public duties.



   (B)   No officer or employee shall intentionally use or attempt to
use his or her official position with the city to secure unwanted (or
unsolicited) privileges or advantages for himself or herself or others.



   (C)   No officer or employee shall intentionally take or fail to
take any discretionary action, or agree to take or fail to take any
discretionary action, or influence or attempt to influence any other officer
or employee to take or fail to take any discretionary action, on any matter
before the city in order to obtain a personal or financial benefit for any of
the following:



      (1)   The officer or the employee;



      (2)   A family member;



      (3)   An outside employer;



      (4)   Any business in which the officer or employee or any
family member has a financial interest, including, but not limited to:



         (a)   An outside employer or business of his or hers, or
of his or her family member, or someone who works for such outside employer
or business;



         (b)   A customer or client; and



         (c)   A substantial debtor or creditor of his or hers,
or of his or her family member.



      (5)   Any business with which the officer or employee or any
family member is negotiating or seeking prospective employment or other
business or professional relationship;



      (6)   A person or entity from whom the officer or employee has
received an election campaign contribution of a total of more than $200
during the past election cycle (this amount includes contributions from a
person’s immediate family or business as well as contributions from an
entity’s owners, directors or officers, as well as contributions to the
officer or employee’s party town committee or non-candidate political
committee); or



      (7)   A non-governmental civic group, social, charitable or
religious organization of which he or she (or his or her immediate family
member) is an officer or director.



   (D)   No officer or employee shall be deemed in violation of any
provision in this section if, by reason of the officer’s or employee’s
participation, vote, decision, action or inaction, no personal or financial
benefit accrues to the officer or employee, a family member, an outside
employer or a business as defined in divisions (C)(4) through (C)(7) above,
as a member of any business occupation, profession or other group, to any
greater extent than any gain could reasonably be expected to accrue to any
other member of the business, occupation, profession or other group.



(Ord. 015-175, passed 2-23-2015)  Penalty, see § 34.999



§ 34.021  CONFLICTS OF INTEREST IN CONTRACTS.



   (A)   Pursuant to KRS 61.252, no officer or employee of the city or
any city agency shall directly or through others undertake, execute, hold or
enjoy, in whole or in part, any contract made, entered into, awarded or
granted by the city or a city agency, except as follows.



      (1)   The prohibition in this division (A) shall not apply to
contracts entered into before an elected officer filed as a candidate for
city office, before an appointed officer was appointed to a city or city
agency office, or before an employee was hired by the city or a city agency.
However, if any contract entered into by a city or city agency officer or
employee before he or she became a candidate, was appointed to office or was
hired as an employee, is renewable after he or she becomes a candidate,
assumes the appointed office or is hired as an employee, then the prohibition
in this division (A) shall apply to the renewal of the contract.



      (2)   The prohibition in this division (A) shall not apply if
the contract is awarded after public notice and competitive bidding, unless
the officer or employee is authorized to participate in establishing the
contract specifications, awarding the contract or managing the contract
performance after the contract is awarded. If the officer or employee has any
of the authorities as set forth in the preceding sentence, then the officer
or employee shall have no interest in the contract, unless the requirements
set forth in division (A)(3) below are satisfied.



      (3)   The prohibition in this division (A) shall not apply in
any case where the following requirements are satisfied:



         (a)   The specific nature of the contract transaction
and the nature of the officer’s or employee’s interest in the contract
are publicly disclosed at a meeting of the governing body of the city or city
agency;



         (b)   The disclosure is made a part of the official
record of the governing body of the city or city agency before the contract
is executed;



         (c)   A finding is made by the governing body of the
city or city agency that the contract with the officer or the employee is in
the best interests of the public and the city or city agency before the
contract is executed; and/or



         (d)   The finding is made a part of the official record
of the governing body of the city or city agency before the contract is
executed.



   (B)   Any violation of this section shall constitute a Class A
misdemeanor, and upon conviction, the court may void any contract entered
into in violation of this section. Additionally, violation of this section
shall be grounds for removal from office or employment with the city in
accordance with any applicable provisions of state law and ordinances, rules
or regulations of the city.



(Ord. 015-175, passed 2-23-2015)  Penalty, see § 34.999



§ 34.022  INCOMPATIBLE OFFICES.



   (A)   Pursuant to § 165 of the Kentucky Constitution, no officer or
employee of the city may also be a state officer, deputy state officer or
member of the General Assembly or may fill more than one municipal office at
the same time, whether in the same or a different city.



   (B)   Pursuant to KRS 61.080, and effective until 1-1-2015, no city
officer may also hold a county office.



      (1)   In addition, the statute also states that the following
city and consolidated local government offices are incompatible with any
other public office:



         (a)   Member of the legislative body in cities of the
first class;



         (b)   Mayor and member of the legislative body in cities
of the second class;



         (c)   Mayor and member of Council in cities of the
fourth class; and



         (d)   Mayor and member of the legislative Council of a
consolidated local government.



      (2)   From 1-1-2015, no city officer may also hold a county
office. In addition, the statute also states that the following city and
consolidated local government offices are incompatible with any other public
office:



         (a)   Member of the legislative body of cities of the
first class;



         (b)   Mayor and member of the legislative Council of a
consolidated local government; and



         (c)   Mayor and member of the legislative body in cities
of the home rule class.



   (C)   In addition to the Constitution and statutory provisions,
there are common law incompatibilities that have been defined by the courts.
City officers and employment positions are deemed INCOMPATIBLE when one
office or position of employment was inherently inconsistent in function with
the other when there arises an implication that the duties and
responsibilities of both cannot be performed at the same time with a
necessary degree of impartiality and honesty.



   (D)   KRS 61.090 provides that the acceptance of an incompatible
office operates to vacate the first office.



(Ord. 015-175, passed 2-23-2015)



§ 34.023  WITHDRAWAL FROM PARTICIPATION.



   (A)   An officer or employee must refrain from acting on or
discussing, formally or informally, a matter before the city, if acting on
the matter, or failing to act on the matter, may personally or financially
benefit any of the persons or entities listed in § 34.020(C) of this
chapter. Such an officer or employee should join the public if the withdrawal
occurs at a public meeting, or leave the room if it is a legally conducted
closed meeting (executive session) under KRS 61.810 and KRS 61.815.



   (B)   Withdrawal at a meeting requires the public announcement, on
the record, of the reason for withdrawal.



   (C)   (1)   An officer or employee whose outside employment or
other outside activity or relationship can reasonably be expected to require
more than sporadic withdrawal must resign or cease such outside employment or
activity.



      (2)   An officer or employee should not begin employment or an
activity or relationship that can reasonably be expected to require more than
sporadic withdrawal.



      (3)   If a prospective officer or employee is in such a
situation, he or she should not accept the position with the city.



   (D)   If an officer or appointed board member is requested to
withdraw from participation in a matter, for the reason that he or she has a
conflict of interest, by:



      (1)   Another member;



      (2)   A party to the current matter; or



      (3)   Anyone else who may be affected by a decision relating
to this matter, the member must decide whether to withdraw on the official
record. If the member decides not to withdraw, the unchallenged members must
consider any relevant evidence concerning such claimed conflict of interest,
as defined in this code, and vote whether or not to allow the request and
require that the member withdraw from participating in the matter.



   (E)   (1)   If withdrawal by the member would leave the body with
less than a quorum capable of acting, the member must disclose the conflict
on the public record, and then the remaining members may vote to allow the
member with the disclosed conflict a vote.



      (2)   If the person is the only one authorized by law to act,
the person must disclose the nature and circumstances of the conflict to the
Ethics Commission and ask for a waiver or advisory opinion.



(Ord. 015-175, passed 2-23-2015)



§ 34.024  RECEIPT OF GIFTS.



   No officer or employee of the city or any city agency shall directly,
or indirectly through any other person or business, solicit or accept any
gift having a fair market value of more than $100, whether in the form of
money, service, loan, travel, entertainment, hospitality, thing or promise,
or any other form, under circumstances in which it could reasonably be
inferred that the gift was intended to influence, or could reasonably be
expected to influence the officer or employee in the performance of his or
her public duties.



(Ord. 015-175, passed 2-23-2015)  Penalty, see § 34.999



§ 34.025  USE OF CITY PROPERTY, EQUIPMENT AND PERSONNEL.



   No officer or employee of the city shall use or permit the use of any
city time, funds, personnel, equipment or other personal or real property for
the private use of any person, unless:



   (A)   The use is specifically authorized by a stated city policy; or



   (B)   The use is available to the general public, and then only to
the extent and upon the terms that such use is available to the general
public.



(Ord. 015-175, passed 2-23-2015)  Penalty, see § 34.999



§ 34.026  NEPOTISM PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No officer or employee of the city or a city agency shall
advocate, recommend or cause the following of a family member to an office or
position of employment with the city or a city agency:



      (1)   Employment;



      (2)   Appointment;



      (3)   Promotion;



      (4)   Transfer; or



      (5)   Advancement.



   (B)   No officer or employee of the city or a city agency shall
supervise or manage the work of a family member.



   (C)   No officer or employee shall participate in any action
relating to the employment or discipline of a family member; except that,
this prohibition shall not prevent an elected or appointed officer from
voting on or participating in the development of a budget which includes
compensation for a family member; provided that, the family member is
included only as a member of a class of persons or a group, and the family
member benefits to no greater extent than any other similarly situated member
of the class or group.



   (D)   The prohibitions in this section shall not apply to any
relationship or situation that would violate the prohibition, but which
existed prior to 6-30-2015.



(Ord. 015-175, passed 2-23-2015)  Penalty, see § 34.999



§ 34.027  REPRESENTATION OF INTERESTS BEFORE CITY GOVERNMENT.



   (A)   No officer or employee of the city or any city agency shall
represent any person or business, other than the city, in connection with any
cause, proceeding, application or other matter pending before the city or any
city agency.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit an employee from
representing another employee or employees where the representation is within
the context of official labor union or similar representational
responsibilities.



   (C)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit any officer or employee
from representing himself or herself in matters concerning his or her own
interests.



   (D)   No elected officer shall be prohibited by this section from
making any inquiry for information on behalf of a constituent, if no
compensation, reward or other thing of value is promised to, given to or
accepted by the officer, whether directly or indirectly, in return for the
inquiry.



(Ord. 015-175, passed 2-23-2015)  Penalty, see § 34.999



§ 34.028  MISUSE OF CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.



   No officer or employee of the city or any city agency shall
intentionally use or disclose information acquired in the course or his or
her official duties, if the primary purpose of the use or disclosure is to
further his or her personal financial interest or that of another person or
business. Information shall be deemed confidential, if it is not subject to
disclosure pursuant to the state’s Open Records Act, being KRS 61.870 to
61.884, at the time of its use or disclosure.



(Ord. 015-175, passed 2-23-2015)  Penalty, see § 34.999



§ 34.029  POLITICAL SOLICITATION.



   An officer, employee or municipal candidate may not knowingly request,
or authorize anyone else to request, that any subordinate or potential future
subordinate participate, or not participate, in any political activity,
including the making of a campaign contribution; nor may he or she engage in
any political activity while on duty for the city, with the use of city
funds, supplies, vehicles or facilities, in uniform, or during any period of
time during which he or she is normally expected to perform services for the
city, for which compensation is paid.



(Ord. 015-175, passed 2-23-2015)  Penalty, see § 34.999



§ 34.030  PATRONAGE.



   No officer or employee may promise an appointment or the use of his or
her influence to obtain an appointment to any position as a reward for any
political activity or contribution.



(Ord. 015-175, passed 2-23-2015)  Penalty, see § 34.999



§ 34.031  OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT.



   (A)   An officer or employee shall not accept any employment or
enter into any contracts that result in a conflict of interest with his or
her duties as an officer or employee of the city.



   (B)   An employee of the city may be self-employed or may take
occasional or part-time jobs if, in the opinion of his or her department
head, there is no conflict with working hours, the employee’s efficiency in
his or her city work or other interest of the city.



   (C)   Employees wishing to take off-duty employment shall have the
written approval of their department head.



   (D)   Employees or officers holding management level positions shall
notify the Mayor prior to creating, contracting with, or being employed by
any agency or business firm other than the city for their written approval.



   (E)   City employment shall remain the first priority and if, at any
time, the outside employment interferes with an employee’s job requirements
or performance for the city, the employee shall be required to modify the
conditions of the outside employment or terminate either the off-duty
employment or his or her city employment.



(Ord. 015-175, passed 2-23-2015)  Penalty, see § 34.999



§ 34.032  POST-EMPLOYMENT RESTRICTION.



   No officer or employee of the city or any city agency shall appear
before the city or any city agency or receive compensation for services
rendered on behalf of any person in relation to any particular matter with
respect to any matter on which the officer or employee personally worked
while in the service of the city or city agency for a period of one year
after the termination of the officer’s or employee’s service with the
city or city agency.



(Ord. 015-175, passed 2-23-2015)  Penalty, see § 34.999



§ 34.033  FEES AND HONORARIA.



   An officer or employee shall not accept any compensation or honorarium
in consideration for an appearance, speech or article unless the appearance,
speech or article is both related to the officer’s or employee’s
employment or activities outside of municipal service and is unrelated to the
officer’s or employee’s service with the city.



(Ord. 015-175, passed 2-23-2015)  Penalty, see § 34.999



§ 34.034  ENDORSEMENTS.



   No officer or employee in his or her official capacity may publicly
endorse products or services. However, this does not prohibit an officer or
employee from answering inquiries by other governmental officials, consumer
organizations or product information services regarding products or services.



(Ord. 015-175, passed 2-23-2015)  Penalty, see § 34.999



§ 34.035  COMPLICITY WITH OR KNOWLEDGE OF OTHERS’ VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   No officer or employee may, directly or indirectly, induce,
encourage or aid anyone to violate any provision of this code.



   (B)   If an officer or employee suspects that someone has violated
this code, he or she is required to report it to the Ethics Commission
pursuant to § 34.076 of this chapter.



(Ord. 015-175, passed 2-23-2015)  Penalty, see § 34.999



§ 34.036  FALSELY IMPUGNING REPUTATION.



   (A)   An officer or employee may not falsely impugn the reputation
of a city resident, employee or another officer of the city.



   (B)   If an officer or employee believes his or her accusation to be
true, and then learns that it was false, even in part, he or she should
apologize in the same forum the accusations were made.



   (C)   A failure to so apologize within a reasonable period of time
after learning of the falseness of the accusations will create the
presumption that the conduct was fully intentional.



(Ord. 015-175, passed 2-23-2015)  Penalty, see § 34.999



§ 34.037  MEETING ATTENDANCE.



   (A)   All elected city officers and members of city boards and
commissions are expected to attend their meetings.



   (B)   It is a violation of this code to miss more than one-third of
the meetings in a 12-month period.



(Ord. 015-175, passed 2-23-2015)  Penalty, see § 34.999



FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE



§ 34.050  WHO MUST FILE.



   The following classes of officers and employees of the city and city
agencies shall file an annual statement of financial interests with the
Ethics Commission:



   (A)   Candidates for elected office and elected city officials;



   (B)   Officers and employees who hold policy-making positions,
including members of municipal boards, such as ethics commissions, finance
boards, planning and zoning boards, boards of zoning, buildings, and
assessment appeals, wetlands and conservation boards, economic development
boards, and parks and recreation boards; and



   (C)   Officers or employees whose job descriptions or whose actual
duties involve:



      (1)   The negotiation, authorization or approval of contracts,
leases, franchises, revocable consents, concessions, variances, special
permits or licenses;



      (2)   The purchase, sale, rental or lease of real property,
personal property or services, or a contract for any of these; and



      (3)   The obtaining of grants of money or loans.



(Ord. 015-175, passed 2-23-2015)



§ 34.051  WHEN TO FILE STATEMENTS; AMENDED STATEMENTS.



   (A)   The initial statement of financial interests required by this
section shall be filed with the Ethics Commission, or the administrative
official designated as the custodian of its records by the Ethics Commission
no later than 12:00 p.m., 6-30-2015. All subsequent statements of financial
interest shall be filed no later than 12:00 p.m. June 30 each year; provided
that:



      (1)   An officer or employee newly-appointed to fill an office
or position of employment with the city or a city agency shall file his or
her initial statement no later than 30 days after the date of the
appointment; and



      (2)   A candidate for city office shall file his or her
initial statement no later than 30 days after the date on which the person
becomes a candidate for elected office.



   (B)   The Ethics Commission may grant a reasonable extension of time
for filing a statement of financial interests for good cause shown.



   (C)   In the event there is a material change in any information
contained in a financial statement that has been filed with the Commission,
the officer or employee shall, no later than 30 days after becoming aware of
the material change, file an amended statement with the Commission.



(Ord. 015-175, passed 2-23-2015)



§ 34.052  FORM OF STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL INTERESTS.



   The statement of financial interests shall be filed on a form
prescribed by the Ethics Commission, or the administrative official
designated by the Ethics Commission (Commission). The Commission, or the
designated administrative official, shall deliver a copy of the form to each
officer and employee required to file the statement, by first class mail,
email or hand delivery, no later than June 1 of each year. The failure of the
Commission, or the designated administrative official, to deliver a copy of
the form to any officer or employee shall not relieve the officer or employee
of the obligation to file the statement.



(Ord. 015-175, passed 2-23-2015)



§ 34.053  CONTROL AND MAINTENANCE OF THE STATEMENTS OF FINANCIAL INTERESTS.



   (A)   The Ethics Commission shall be the “official custodian” of
the statements of financial interests and shall have control over the
maintenance of the statements of financial interests. The statements of
financial interests shall be maintained by the Commission, or the
administrative official designated by the Commission as the “custodian”,
as public documents, available for public inspection immediately upon filing.



   (B)   A statement of financial interests shall be retained by the
Commission or the designated administrative official pursuant to the
state’s Department of Libraries and Archives schedule as follows.



      (1)   Upon the expiration of two years after a person ceases
to be an officer or employee of the city or a city agency, the Commission
shall cause to be destroyed any statements of financial interests or copies
of those statements filed by the person.



      (2)   Upon the expiration of two years after any election at
which a candidate for elected city office was not elected or nominated, the
Commission shall cause to be destroyed any statements of financial interests
or copies of those statements filed by the person.



(Ord. 015-175, passed 2-23-2015)



§ 34.054  CONTENTS OF THE FINANCIAL INTERESTS STATEMENT.



   (A)   The statement of financial interests shall include the
following information for the preceding calendar year:



      (1)   The name, current business address, business telephone
number and home address of the filer;



      (2)   The title of the filer’s office, office sought or
position of employment;



      (3)   The occupation of the filer and the filer’s spouse;



      (4)   Information that identifies each source of income of the
filer and the filer’s immediate family members exceeding $10,000 during the
preceding calendar year, and the nature of the income (e.g., salary,
commission, dividends, retirement fund distribution and the like);



      (5)   The name and address of any business located within the
state in which the filer or any member of the filer’s immediate family had
at any time during the preceding calendar year an interest of $10,000 at fair
market value or 5% ownership interest or more;



      (6)   The name and address of any business located outside of
the state, if the business has engaged in any business transactions with the
city during the past three years, or which is anticipated to engage in any
business transactions with the city, in which the filer or any member of the
filer’s immediate family had at any time during the preceding calendar year
an interest of $10,000 at fair market value or 5% ownership interest or more;



      (7)   A designation as commercial, residential or rural, and
the location of all real property within the county, other than the filer’s
primary residence, in which the filer or any member of the filer’s
immediate family had during the preceding calendar year an interest of
$10,000 or more;



      (8)   Each source by name and address of gifts or honoraria
having an aggregate fair market value of $100 or more from any single source,
excluding gifts received from family members, received by the filer or any
member of the filer’s immediate family during the preceding calendar year;
and



      (9)   The name and address of any creditor owed more than
$10,000, except debts arising from the purchase of a primary residence or the
purchase of consumer goods which are bought or used primarily for person,
family or household purposes.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any
officer or employee to disclose any specific dollar amounts, nor the names of
individual clients or customers of businesses listed as sources of income.



(Ord. 015-175, passed 2-23-2015)



§ 34.055  NON-COMPLIANCE WITH FILING REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   The Ethics Commission, or the designated administrative
official, shall notify by certified mail each person required to file a
statement of financial interests who fails to file the statement by the due
date, files an incomplete statement, or files a statement in a form other
than that prescribed by the Commission. The notice shall specify the type of
failure or delinquency, shall establish a date by which the failure or
delinquency shall be remedied and shall advise the person of the penalties
for a violation.



(Ord. 015-175, passed 2-23-2015)



ETHICS COMMISSION



§ 34.070  CREATED.



   (A)   There is hereby created an Ethics Commission which shall have
the authorities, duties and responsibilities as set forth in this chapter to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   The Ethics Commission shall consist of three members who shall
be appointed by the executive authority of the city, subject to the approval
of the legislative body (if different from the executive authority). The
initial members of the Ethics Commission shall be appointed within 60 days of
the effective date of this chapter. The members shall serve for a term of
three years; except that, with respect to the members initially appointed,
one member shall be appointed for a term of one year, one member shall be
appointed for a term of two years and one member shall be appointed for a
term of three years. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for a term of
three years. No more than three of the members shall be of the same political
party. The existing Commissioners shall remain in office and complete their
existing term under this chapter.



   (C)   An Ethics Commission member will serve until his or her
successor has been appointed, in the same manner as the original appointment.
Consecutive service on the Ethics Commission may not exceed four full terms.



   (D)   No member of the Ethics Commission shall hold any elected or
appointed office, whether paid or unpaid, or any position of employment with
the city or any city agency. No member of the Ethics Commission may be, or
have been within the three years prior to appointment, an officer or
employee, consultant or contractor of the city; an officer in a political
party or political committee; a candidate or an active member of the campaign
of a candidate for any office within the Commission’s jurisdiction; or a
lobbyist; nor should neither a member, nor any member of his or her immediate
family, have, within the three years prior to appointment, sought any special
benefits from the city, directly or indirectly. An Ethics Commission member
or staff member, or a member of his or her immediate family, may not,
directly or indirectly, seek any special benefits from the city, make
campaign contributions, nor participate in any way in the campaign of a
candidate for any office within the Commission’s jurisdiction, or of an
individual currently within the Commission’s jurisdiction.



   (E)   Each member of the Ethics Commission shall have been a
resident of the city for at least one year prior to the date of the
appointment and shall reside in the city throughout the term in office. The
members of the Ethics Commission shall be chosen by virtue of their known and
consistent reputation for integrity and their knowledge of local government
affairs.



   (F)   A member of the Ethics Commission may be removed by the
executive authority, subject to the approval of the legislative body (if
different from the executive authority) for misconduct, inability or willful
neglect of duties. Before any member of the Commission is removed from office
under this section, the member shall be afforded the opportunity for a
hearing before the executive authority and the legislative body (if different
from the executive authority).



   (G)   Vacancies on the Ethics Commission shall be filled within 60
days by the executive authority, subject to the approval of the legislative
body (if different from the executive authority). If a vacancy is not filled
by the executive authority within 60 days, the remaining members of the
Commission shall fill the vacancy. All vacancies shall be filled for the
remainder of the unexpired term.



   (H)   Members of the Ethics Commission shall serve without
compensation, unless otherwise approved by the legislative body, but shall be
reimbursed for all necessary and reasonable expenses incurred in the
performance of their duties.



   (I)   The Ethics Commission shall, upon the initial appointment of
its members, and annually thereafter, elect a Chairperson from among the
membership. The Chairperson shall be the presiding officer and a full voting
member of the Commission.



   (J)   Meetings of the Ethics Commission shall be held, as necessary,
upon the call of the Chairperson or at the written request of a majority of
the members.



   (K)   The presence of three or more members shall constitute a
quorum and the affirmative vote of three or more members shall be necessary
for any official action to be taken. Any member of the Ethics Commission who
has a conflict of interest with respect to any matter to be considered by the
Commission shall disclose the nature of the conflict, shall disqualify him or
herself from voting on the matter and shall not be counted for purposes of
establishing a quorum.



   (L)   Minutes shall be kept for all proceedings of the Ethics
Commission and the vote of each member on any issue decided by the Commission
shall be recorded in the minutes.



(Ord. 015-175, passed 2-23-2015)



§ 34.071  ALTERNATE MEMBERS.



   The executive authority of the city, with the approval of the
legislative body (if different than the executive authority), may appoint two
alternate members of the Ethics Commission who may be called upon to serve
when any regular member of the Commission is unable to discharge his or her
duties. An alternate member shall be appointed for a term of one year.
Alternate members shall meet all qualifications and be subject to all of the
requirements of this chapter that apply to regular members.



(Ord. 015-175, passed 2-23-2015)



§ 34.072  FACILITIES AND STAFF.



   Within the limits of the funds appropriated by the legislative body in
the annual budget, the city shall provide the Ethics Commission, either
directly or by contract or agreement, with the facilities, materials,
supplies and staff needed for the conduct of its business.



(Ord. 015-175, passed 2-23-2015)



§ 34.073  INITIAL MEETING.



   At its first meeting each January of the calendar year, the Ethics
Commission will elect a Chair and a Vice-Chair from among its regular
members. A majority of the regular members is required for the Commission to
take any action. The Chair or a majority of the regular members may call a
meeting of the Commission.



(Ord. 015-175, passed 2-23-2015)



§ 34.074  POWER AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The Ethics Commission shall have the following powers and
duties:



      (1)   To initiate on its own motion, receive and investigate
complaints, hold hearings and make findings of fact and determinations with
regard to alleged violations of the provisions of this chapter;



      (2)   To issue orders in connection with its investigations
and hearings requiring persons to submit in writing and under oath reports
and answers to questions that are relevant to the proceedings and to order
testimony to be taken by deposition before any individual designated by the
Commission who has the power to administer oaths;



      (3)   To administer oaths and to issue orders requiring the
attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of documentary
evidence relating to an investigation or hearing being conducted by the
Commission;



      (4)   To refer any information concerning violations of this
chapter to the executive authority of the city, the city legislative body,
the governing body of any city agency, the County Attorney or other
appropriate person or body, as necessary;



      (5)   To render advisory opinions to city and city agency
officers and employees regarding whether a given set of facts and
circumstances would constitute a violation of any provision of this chapter;



      (6)   To enforce the provisions of this chapter with regard to
all officers and employees of the city and city agencies who are subject to
its terms by issuing appropriate orders and imposing penalties authorized by
this chapter;



      (7)   To control and maintain all statements of financial
interests that are required to be filed by this chapter and to insure that
the statements are available for public inspection in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter and the state’s Open Records Act, being KRS
61.870 to 61.884;



      (8)   To adopt rules and regulations and to take other
actions, as necessary, to implement the provisions of this chapter; provided
that, the rules, regulations, and actions are not in conflict with the
provisions of this chapter or any state or federal law;



      (9)   To provide training and education on the city ethics
code to officials and employees; and



      (10)   To prepare and submit an annual report and any
recommended changes to this code to the legislative body; and to develop and
submit any reports regarding the conduct of its business that may be required
by the executive authority or legislative body of the city.



   (B)   The Ethics Commission will annually review the list of
officials and employees required to file annual disclosure statements, to
determine whether the lists are complete and accurate. Within ninety days
after it has been formed, and by February 1 each year thereafter, the Ethics
Commission must:



      (1)   Cause to be filed with the City Clerk a list of the
names and offices, or positions, of all officials and employees and others
required to file annual disclosure statements pursuant to § 34.050 of this
chapter; and



      (2)   Notify all such persons of their obligation to file an
annual disclosure statement.



   (C)   The Ethics Commission will prepare forms for complaints and
for financial disclosure statements, and will make these forms available at
the City Clerk’s office and on the city’s website, for easy downloading.



   (D)   By July 15 of each year, the Ethics Commission must review all
annual financial disclosure statements filed with it to determine whether any
person required to file such a statement has failed to file it, has filed a
deficient statement or has filed a statement that reveals a possible or
potential violation of this code. If the Commission determines that an annual
or transactional disclosure statement is deficient or reveals a possible or
potential violation of this code, the Commission will notify the person in
writing of the deficiency or possible or potential violation, and of the
penalties for failure to comply with this code.



(Ord. 015-175, passed 2-23-2015)



§ 34.075  TRAINING AND EDUCATION.



   The Ethics Commission will, within one year after its passage, make
this code and explanations of its provisions (including information on how to
fill out all forms and statements), available (including, but not limited to,
on the city website) to all officials and employees, candidates and
consultants, and to municipal residents and to all persons doing business or
interested in doing business with the city, and will develop educational
materials and a required educational program for the officials and employees
of the city regarding the provisions of this code. The educational program
must begin within 18 months after this code goes into effect. In addition,
the Ethics Commission will hold an annual workshop for new and experienced
officials and employees to discuss this code, its values and goals, its
enforcement and the ways in which it has affected their work and the working
of the city government.



(Ord. 015-175, passed 2-23-2015)



§ 34.076  ANNUAL REPORTS; ANNUAL REVIEW OF ETHICS CODE.



   (A)   The Ethics Commission must prepare and submit an annual report
to the legislative body, summarizing the activities, decisions and advisory
opinions of the Commission. The report may also recommend changes to the text
or administration of this code. The report must be submitted no later than
October 31 of each year, covering to the year ended July 31, and must be
filed with the City Clerk and made available on the city website.



   (B)   The Ethics Commission will periodically (no less than every
five years) review this code, the enforcement of the code and the
Commission’s rules, regulations and administrative procedures to determine
whether they promote integrity, public confidence and participation in city
government, and whether they set forth clear and enforceable, common-sense
standards of conduct.



(Ord. 015-175, passed 2-23-2015)



§ 34.077  FILING AND INVESTIGATION OF COMPLAINTS.



   (A)   All complaints alleging any violation of the provisions of
this chapter shall be submitted to the Ethics Commission, or the
administrative official designated by the Ethics Commission. All complaints
shall be in writing, signed by the complainant and shall meet any other
requirements established by the Commission. The Commission shall acknowledge
receipt of a complaint to the complainant within ten working days from the
date of receipt. The Commission shall forward within ten working days to each
officer or employee of the city or city agency who is the subject of the
complaint a copy of the complaint and a general statement of the applicable
provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   The Ethics Commission may, on its own initiative, determine
through an inquiry into informal allegations or information provided directly
to the Commission, by referral, in the public news media or otherwise that a
violation of this code may exist, and prepare a complaint of its own. The
Ethics Commission may also amend a complaint that has been filed with it by
adding further allegations, by adding respondents involved in the same
conduct, directly or indirectly, by action or inaction or by deleting
allegations that would not constitute a violation of this code, have been
made against persons or entities not covered by this code, or do not appear
to be supported by the facts. The Ethics Commission may also consolidate
complaints where the allegations are materially related. Amended complaints
must be sent to the complainant and respondent by the Ethics Commission.



   (C)   Within 30 days of the receipt of a proper complaint, the
Ethics Commission shall conduct a preliminary inquiry concerning the
allegations contained in the complaint. The Commission shall afford a person
who is the subject of the complaint an opportunity to respond to the
allegations in the complaint. The person shall have the right to be
represented by counsel, to appear and be heard under oath, and to offer
evidence in response to the allegations.



   (D)   The person who is the subject of the complaint (respondent)
may file with the Ethics Commission a response to the complaint within 30
days after his or her receipt of the complaint. The response, if any, must be
sent to the person filing the original complaint (complainant) by the Ethics
Commission within five days after its filing. Within 15 days after receipt,
the complainant may also file with the Ethics Commission a response to the
respondent’s response, which the Ethics Commission must send to the
respondent within five days after its filing.



   (E)   Extensions of time to any of the time limitations specified in
this section may be granted by the Ethics Commission upon a vote of the
majority of the members. If no meeting can be held before such time limit
runs out, the Chair may extend the limit until the following meeting. The
Ethics Commission must give written notice of any extension(s) of time to the
respondent and the complainant.



   (F)   All proceedings and records relating to a preliminary inquiry
being conducted by the Ethics Commission shall be confidential until a final
determination is made by the Commission, except:



      (1)   The Commission may turn over to the commonwealth’s
Attorney or County Attorney evidence which may be used in criminal
proceedings; or



      (2)   If the complainant or alleged violator publicly
discloses the existence of a preliminary inquiry, the Commission may publicly
confirm the existence of the inquiry and, at its discretion, make public any
documents which were issued to either party.



   (G)   The Commission shall make a determination based on its
preliminary inquiry whether the complaint is within its jurisdiction and, if
so, whether it alleges a minimal factual basis to constitute a violation of
this chapter. If the Commission concludes that the complaint is outside of
its jurisdiction, frivolous or without factual basis, the Commission shall
immediately terminate the inquiry, reduce the conclusion to writing and
transmit a copy of its decision to the complainant and to all officers or
employees against whom the complaint was filed.



   (H)   If the Ethics Commission concludes, based upon its preliminary
inquiry, that the complaint is within its jurisdiction and contains
allegations sufficient to establish a minimal factual basis to constitute a
violation, the Commission shall notify the officer or employee who is the
subject of the complaint and may initiate a hearing to determine whether
there has been a violation.



   (I)   If a complaint is accepted or prepared pursuant to division
(A) above, the Ethics Commission must conduct an investigation. From this
point on, the complainant may not withdraw his or her complaint, although he
or she may request that the Ethics Commission either make a finding of no
probable cause or no violation.



   (J)   (1)   In conducting an investigation, the Ethics Commission
may administer oaths or affirmations, subpoena witnesses, compel their
attendance and require the production of any books or records it deems
relevant and material. The Police Department and all city agencies, bodies,
officials and employees are required to respond fully and truthfully to all
enquiries and cooperate with all requests of the Ethics Commission or its
agents relating to an investigation. It is a violation of this code for any
official or employee to deny access to information requested by the Ethics
Commission in the course of an investigation or a public hearing, except to
the extent that such denial is required by federal, state or local law.



      (2)   Nothing in this section may be construed to permit the
Ethics Commission to conduct an investigation of itself or of any of its
members or staff. If the Ethics Commission receives a complaint alleging that
the Commission or any of its members or staff has violated any provision of
this code or any other law, the Commission must promptly transmit to the
legislative body a copy of the complaint.



   (K)   Any person who knowingly files with the Commission a false
complaint alleging a violation of any provision of this chapter by an officer
or employee of the city or any city agency shall be guilty of a Class A
misdemeanor.



(Ord. 015-175, passed 2-23-2015)  Penalty, see § 34.999



§ 34.078  NOTICE OF HEARINGS.



   If the Ethics Commission determines that a hearing regarding
allegations contained in the complaint is necessary, the Commission shall
issue an order setting the matter for a hearing within 30 days of the date
the order is issued, unless the alleged violator petitions for and the
Commission consents to a later date. The order setting the matter for
hearing, along with a copy of any pertinent regulations of the Commission
relating to the hearing all is sent to the alleged violator within 24 hours
of the time the order setting a hearing is issued.



(Ord. 015-175, passed 2-23-2015)



§ 34.079  HEARING PROCEDURE.



   (A)   The state’s Rules of Civil Procedure and the state’s Rules
of Evidence shall not apply to hearings conducted by the Ethics Commission;
however, the hearings shall be conducted in accordance with this section and
in accordance with any additional rules and regulations adopted by the
Commission so as to afford all parties the full range of due process rights
required by the nature of the proceedings.



   (B)   Prior to the commencement of the hearing, the respondent, or
his or her representative, shall have a reasonable opportunity to examine all
documents and records obtained or prepared by the Commission in connection
with the matter to be heard. The Commission shall inform the alleged
violator, or his or her representative, of any exculpatory evidence it its
possession.



   (C)   All testimony in a Commission hearing shall be taken under
oath, administered by the presiding officer. All parties shall have the right
to call and examine witnesses, to introduce exhibits, to cross-examine
witnesses, to submit evidence and to be represented by counsel. All witnesses
shall have the right to be represented by counsel.



   (D)   Any person whose name is mentioned during the hearing and who
may be adversely affected thereby may appear personally before the
Commission, with or without counsel, to give a statement regarding the
adverse mention, or may file a written statement regarding the adverse
mention for incorporation into the record of the proceeding.



   (E)   All hearings of the Ethics Commission shall be public, unless
the members vote to go into executive session in accordance with KRS 61.810.



   (F)   (1)   After the conclusion of the hearing, the Ethics
Commission shall, as soon as practicable, begin deliberations in executive
session for the purpose of reviewing the evidence before it and making a
determination whether a violation of this chapter has been proven.



      (2)   Within 30 days after completion of the hearing, the
Commission shall issue a written report of its findings and conclusions.



   (G)   If the Commission concludes in its report that no violation of
this chapter has occurred, it shall immediately send written notice of this
determination to the officer or employee who was the subject of the complaint
and to the party who filed the complaint.



   (H)   If the Commission concludes in its report that in
consideration of the evidence produced at the hearing there is clear and
convincing proof of a violation of this chapter, the Commission shall within
15 days:



      (1)   Issue an order requiring the violator to cease and
desist the violation;



      (2)   In writing, publicly reprimand the violator for the
violations and provide a copy of the reprimand to the executive authority and
governing body (if different than the executive authority) of the city or
city agency with which the violator serves;



      (3)   In writing, recommend to the executive authority and the
governing body (if different than the executive authority) that the violator
be sanctioned as recommended by the Commission, which may include a
recommendation for discipline or dismissal, or removal from office;



      (4)   Issue an order requiring the violator to pay a civil
penalty of not more than $1,000; and



      (5)   Refer evidence of criminal violations of this chapter or
state laws to the County Attorney or commonwealth’s Attorney of the
jurisdiction for prosecution.



(Ord. 015-175, passed 2-23-2015)



§ 34.080  APPEALS.



   Any person who is found guilty of a violation of any provision of this
chapter by the Ethics Commission may appeal the finding to the Circuit Court
of the county within 30 days after the date of the final action by the Ethics
Commission by filing a petition with the court against the Commission. The
Commission shall transmit to the Clerk of the Court all evidence considered
by the Commission at the public hearing.



(Ord. 015-175, passed 2-23-2015)



§ 34.081  LIMITATION OF ACTIONS.



   Except when the period of limitation is otherwise established by state
law, an action for a violation of this chapter must be brought within one
year after the violation is discovered.



(Ord. 015-175, passed 2-23-2015)



§ 34.082  ADVISORY OPINIONS.



   (A)   The Ethics Commission may render advisory opinions concerning
matters under its jurisdiction, based upon real or hypothetical facts and
circumstances, upon its own initiative, or when requested by any officer or
employee of the city or a city agency who is covered by this chapter.



   (B)   An advisory opinion shall be requested in writing and shall
state relevant facts and ask specific questions. The request for an advisory
opinion shall remain confidential unless confidentiality is waived, in
writing, by the requestor.



   (C)   The Commission may adopt regulations, consistent with the
state’s Open Records Law, being KRS 61.870 to 61.884 to establish criteria
under which it will issue confidential advisory opinions. All other advisory
opinions shall be public documents; except that, before an advisory opinion
is made public, it shall be modified so that the identity of any person
associated with the opinion shall not be revealed.



   (D)   The confidentiality of an advisory opinion may be waived
either:



      (1)   In writing by the person who requested the opinion; or



      (2)   By majority vote of the members of the Commission, if a
person makes or purports to make public the substance or any portion of an
advisory opinion requested by or on behalf of the person. The Commission may
vote to make public the advisory opinion request and related materials.



   (E)   A written advisory opinion issued by the Commission shall be
binding on the Commission in any subsequent proceeding concerning the facts
and circumstances of the particular case if no intervening facts or
circumstances arise which would change the opinion of the Commission if they
had existed at the time the opinion was rendered. However, if any fact
determined by the Commission to be material was omitted or misstated in the
request for an opinion, the Commission shall not be bound by the opinion.



   (F)   A written advisory opinion issued by the Commission shall be
admissible in the defense of any criminal prosecution or civil proceeding for
violations of this chapter for actions taken in reliance on that opinion.



   (G)   Advisory opinions (with unnecessary financial and personal
details redacted) will be indexed and maintained on file by the Ethics
Commission and will also be available on the city website. Officers,
employees and businesses should be notified about advisory opinions that may
directly affect their conduct.



(Ord. 015-175, passed 2-23-2015)



§ 34.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   (1)   Except when another penalty is specifically set forth
in this chapter, any officer or employee of the city or any city agency who
is found by the Ethics Commission to have violated any provision of this
chapter shall be deemed guilty of a civil offense and may be subject to a
civil fine imposed by the Ethics Commission not to exceed $1,000, which may
be recovered by the city in a civil action in the nature of debt if the
offender fails to pay the penalty within a prescribed period of time.



      (2)   In addition to all other penalties which may be imposed
under this chapter, any officer or employee of the city or any city agency
who is found by the Ethics Commission to have violated any provision of this
chapter shall forfeit to the city or the city agency an amount equal to the
economic benefit or gain which the officer or employee is determined by the
Commission to have realized as a result of the violation. The amount of any
forfeiture may be recovered by the city in a civil action in the nature of
debt, if the offender fails to pay the amount of the forfeiture within a
prescribed period of time.



      (3)   In addition to all other penalties which may be imposed
under this chapter, a finding by the Ethics Commission that an officer or
employee of the city or any city agency is guilty of a violation of this
chapter shall be sufficient cause for removal, suspension, demotion or other
disciplinary action by the executive authority of the city or city agency, or
by any other officer or agency having the power of removal or discipline. Any
action to remove or discipline any officer or employee for a violation of
this chapter shall be taken in accordance with all applicable ordinances and
regulations of the city and all applicable laws of the commonwealth.



   (B)   (1)   Any person who fails or refuses to file the statement
or who fails or refuses to remedy a deficiency in the filing identified in
the notice under § 34.055 of this chapter within the time period established
in the notice shall be guilty of a civil offense and shall be subject to a
civil fine imposed by the Commission in an amount not to exceed $25 per day,
up to a maximum total civil fine of $500. Any civil fine imposed by the
Commission under this section may be recovered by the city in a civil action
in the nature of debt if the offender fails or refuses to pay the penalty
within a prescribed period of time.



      (2)   Any person, per § 34.055 of this chapter, who
intentionally files a statement of financial interests which he or she knows
to contain false information or intentionally omits required information
shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.



(Ord. 015-175, passed 2-23-2015)



CHAPTER 35:  GENERAL POLICIES



Section



General Provisions



   35.01   Economic development incentives and credits



Emergency Wrecker Services



   35.15   Definitions



   35.16   Wrecker rotation list



   35.17   Participation



   35.18   Recommended fees



   35.19   Violations; indemnification



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 35.01  ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES AND CREDITS.



   The city may, in the interest of economic development, grant such
incentives and tax credits permissible under KRS Ch. 154. Such incentives and
tax credits as are permissible under law may be granted by resolution
approved by a majority of the City Council. Upon approval by the City
Council, the Mayor shall sign such resolution and, upon endorsement by the
Clerk, deliver same to the proper recipients.



(Ord. 001-518, passed 3-26-2001)



EMERGENCY WRECKER SERVICES



§ 35.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCIDENT. Any occurrence which renders a vehicle wrecked or disabled,
as defined in this section.



   AUTHORIZED PUBLIC AGENCY. The city’s Police Department, city’s Fire
Department or the city’s Code Enforcement.



   CITY. The City of Shepherdsville, Kentucky.



   COMBINATION VEHICLE. Any vehicle containing more than one unit
connected together by hitch or hitches, including, but not limited to,
semi-trailer truck units.



   DISABLED. Rendered unsafe to be driven as a result of some occurrence
other than a wreck, including, but not limited to, mechanical failures or
breakdowns, fire, vandalism; or in a safe driving condition, but the owner or
other authorized person is not present, able or permitted to drive, so as to
reasonably require that such vehicle be removed by a wrecker; and including
vehicles determined to be abandoned by an authorized public agency.



   EMERGENCY WRECKER COMPANY. A person or firm operating an emergency
wrecker service.



   EMERGENCY WRECKER SERVICE. Towing of a vehicle pursuant to this chapter
upon a request of an authorized public agency, and storage of such vehicles,
but does not include towing pursuant to an owner preference request.



   IMPOUNDED VEHICLE. Any vehicle which has been towed and impounded
pursuant to this subchapter, release of which may be authorized only by an
authorized public agency.



   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any vehicle which is self-propelled and which has a
vehicle identification number.



   OWNER. Any person who holds legal title to a vehicle.



   OWNER PREFERENCE REQUEST. A request directly from the owner or person
in charge of a wrecked or disabled vehicle to any tow service company,
including requests relayed by an authorized public agency, for the services
of a designated emergency wrecker company to remove a specific vehicle to a
specific location.



   STREET. Any street, alley, avenue, lane, public parking lot or highway
within the corporate limits of the city.



   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which persons or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a street and which has a vehicle
identification number, but not including devices moved by human power or used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.



   VEHICLE IDENTIFICATION NUMBER or VIN. An identifying number, serial
number, engine number, transmission number or other essential number or mark,
placed on a vehicle, engine, transmission or other essential part by its
manufacturer, by the authority of the state’s Division of Motor Vehicles or
in accordance with the laws of another state or county.



   WRECKED. Damaged as the result of mechanical breakdown or collision
with another vehicle or object so as to reasonably require that such vehicle
be removed by a wrecker.



   WRECKER. Any motor vehicle designed or used primarily for towing or
otherwise removing wrecked or disabled vehicles.



   WRECKER ROTATION LIST. A list of authorized emergency wrecker companies
maintained by the Code Enforcement Officer and used to establish the order in
which an emergency communications dispatcher will notify an emergency wrecker
company to remove a vehicle that is wrecked, disabled or which may otherwise
be ordered towed by an authorized public agency.



(Ord. 010-780, passed 6-28-2010)



§ 35.16  WRECKER ROTATION LIST.



   (A)   The city will operate a list for wrecker rotations. There will
be a limit of three wrecker companies allowed on this list.



   (B)   Each company will be placed upon the list in alphabetical
order. Calls are rotated on a one call basis. No company and/or owner will be
permitted to occupy more than one space on the list.



   (C)   For the purpose of this section, a wrecker company will be
designated as a single place of business. Multiple wrecker services operating
from a single location will be counted as one business.



   (D)   Prior to being included on the rotation list, all wrecker
companies shall be subject to an inspection by the Code Enforcement Officer
or designee. Upon approval, the wrecker company shall be subject to future
inspections by the Code Enforcement Officer or his or her designee to ensure
compliance with all regulations contained in this order, laws and policies
governed by the state.



   (E)   A signed acknowledgment of this chapter must be on file with
the Code Enforcement Officer prior to any company being listed.



(Ord. 010-780, passed 6-28-2010)



§ 35.17  PARTICIPATION.



   To participate in the city’s on-call wrecker service rotation, the
business must comply with the following conditions.



   (A)   The wrecker service must have its primary business operations
within the corporate city limits.



   (B)   The storage of towed vehicles must be within the corporate
city limits.



   (C)   The office must be located with the storage lot within the
corporate city limits.



   (D)   The wrecker service must have a current business permit,
and/or any additional documents issued by the city, state or other governing
body that is required to operate a wrecker service within the state.



   (E)   Each wrecker must be clearly marked with company name, phone
number and DOT number on each side of the vehicle.



   (F)   At no time will a wrecker be used for the recovery of any
vehicle that will violate any state regulations and procedures concerning
wrecker limitations, weight, size, equipment specifications and the like.



   (G)   Towing operators that respond to the city’s Police
Department calls shall not have a felony conviction; or a misdemeanor
conviction within the past five years.



   (H)   Each wrecker service which stores a vehicle towed by request
of the city’s Police Department shall continue to store the vehicle on a
storage site within the corporate limits of the city until the owner of the
vehicle retrieves the vehicle from the wrecker service or until the wrecker
service acquires title to the vehicle or disposes of the vehicle according to
the rules of KRS 376.275.



   (I)   The storage lot must be able to store at least seven vehicles.
Such storage area must be well-lighted, enclosed by a six-foot chain link
fence or more with three strands of barbed wire at the top of the fence and a
locked gate. This storage area must be suitable for properly accommodating
and protecting all motor vehicles and their contents against damage or theft.



   (J)   All operators of wrecker services on the rotation list shall
reasonably permit, during normal business hours, without charge, the owner or
owner’s designated representative of any vehicle stored upon or within the
operator’s facilities, to inspect the same, remove items of personal
belongings there from. In addition, the operator shall also reasonably permit
and allow, during normal business hours, without charge, insurance agents,
adjustors and/or law enforcement officers to enter, inspect and photograph
any such vehicle.



   (K)   No operator shall solicit business at the scene of an accident.



   (L)   All operators and drivers shall at all times conduct
themselves and wrecker services in a reasonable and safe manner.



   (M)   Each wrecker driver shall at all times obey all traffic laws
when responding to a dispatch for wrecker service.



   (N)   All wrecker services must be a 24-hour service, seven days a
week.



   (O)   Participation in the rotation list system shall be considered
personal to the operator thereof and shall constitute authorization only to
that definite entity operating a bona fide wrecker service and shall not be
subject to transfer, nor shall the operator sublet, assign or permit the
participation by another in any manner of operator’s equipment, wreckers or
name on the rotation list. Participation on the rotation list shall not
constitute a property interest, but rather is a mere license.



   (P)   Upon written request, the Code Enforcement Officer will
furnish an operator with a monthly report of the Department’s rotation call
list.



   (Q)   The wrecker service shall maintain garage keeper’s liability
insurance. Minimum amount of coverage will be $50,000 or as mandated by state
law, whichever is greater.



   (R)   The wrecker service shall maintain worker’s compensation
insurance for all drivers, and other employees engaged in the performance of
their duties.



   (S)   The wrecker service shall maintain a policy of liability
insurance covering the operation of the business, equipment and vehicles,
protecting against bodily injury and property damage, including property that
comes under the control of the wrecker service by reason of towing operation.
The minimum amount of liability insurance shall be as mandated by state law.
On-hook and cargo insurance shall be sufficient to cover towed vehicle.



   (T)   The wrecker service shall furnish the Chief of Police with
insurance certificates upon renewal, change of coverage or at the request of
the Chief of Police.



   (U)   Signs must be highly visible at the entrance to the wrecker
lot showing phone numbers, hours of operations and after hour’s phone
numbers.



   (V)   The wrecker service must post conspicuously in its office a
sign no smaller than two feet by three feet, indicating the charges set out
herein and containing the words “(Wrecker Service’s Name) is a contract
wrecker service for the city’s Police Department. If any problems arise or
if any person is charged rates in excess of these posted, please call the
Shepherdsville Police Department at 502-921-1000”. Letters shall be no
smaller than one inch in height.



   (W)   For vehicles with “holds”, the wrecker service must
receive written permission from the police officer who placed the hold on the
vehicle or from his or her supervisor. This permission can be in person, by
mail or by fax.



   (X)   All tow slips on released vehicles will be delivered to the
Police Department no later than the fifth of each month.



(Ord. 010-780, passed 6-28-2010)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 35.18  RECOMMEND FEES.



   (A)   Any fees charged by a wrecker service currently on the
city’s Police Department wrecker service rotation list which exceed the
recommended fees listed below shall cause the use of the wrecker service on
the rotation list to be reevaluated by the Code Enforcement Officer.



   (B)   The stated fees do not include special services including, but
not limited to: winch charges; rollovers; the use of fire extinguishers; and
cleanup (other than general debris), which may be charged on non-standard
tows.



   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



      NON-STANDARD TOW. Any tow that requires additional services above
those performed on a standard tow.



      STANDARD TOW. Any tow of a vehicle that does not require any
special services other than towing.



   (D)   (1)   All standard tows (non-accident), Monday through
Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.: $65;



      (2)   All standard tows (non-accident), nights and weekends:
$75;



      (3)   Accident related tows (non-standard) may be charged
additional fees according to the work performed. The additional fees must be
clearly documented and explained on the tow ticket. Fees must not be
excessive for the work performed:



         (a)   Dollies: $30; and



         (b)   Storage of all vehicles outside per day: $15:



            1.   Inside storage per day: $20;



            2.   No keys: $20; and



            3.   Labor rate per hour: $60.



      (4)   An additional one-time fee of $10 may be charged for
those vehicles that require the need of inclement weather covering (tarp);



      (5)   Large wrecker: $350;



      (6)   Large wrecker tows may be charged additional fees. The
additional fees must be clearly documented and explained on the tow ticket.
Fees must not be excessive for the work performed;



      (7)   Stand-by time: occasionally wreckers are called to scene
and are required to sit idle until utilized. Wrecker services are here by
authorized to charge an hourly fee for such stand-by time. This hourly rate
may not exceed the standard tow charge (non-accident) rate of $65; and



      (8)   After hour release of stored vehicles: after a vehicle
is placed in the company’s storage area and a request is made for its
release, the wrecker service may charge a maximum of $50 to reopen the
business and release the vehicle, only if the request occurs between the
hours of 6:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. and there was no employee at/on the premises
to release the vehicle at the time of the request.



   (E)   The rates and charges as established herein do not relate to
or regulate consensual wrecker services, being those situations where the
vehicle’s owner expressly requests towing or wrecker services by a specific
towing company and enters into a private contract with the towing or wrecker
company for services.



   (F)   There will be no winching charges for normal loading of a
vehicle onto a rollback.



   (G)   The above rates shall automatically increase 3% each year from
the prior years’ rates effective January 1 of each year. Such automatic
increase shall begin 1-1-2011.



(Ord. 010-780, passed 6-28-2010)



§ 35.19  VIOLATIONS; INDEMNIFICATION.



   (A)   A violation of any rule, regulation or provision of this
subchapter as it relates to wrecker services for the rotation list dispatches
may be cause for suspension or removal of the wrecker company from the
rotation list. The Chief of Police must notify the wrecker company in writing
of the violation and the applicable penalty.



   (B)   Having read the requirements of this subchapter, the wrecker
service further agrees that it will indemnify and defend the city, its
agents, employees and attorneys from any and all claims and costs, including,
but not limited to, attorneys fees, arising from any claim asserted by any
person or entity arising from or related to the negligence, wantonness,
willfulness or intentional wrongful conduct of a wrecker company, such
company’s agent, servants and/or employees, or the use of any such
company’s vehicles or equipment while participating in the city’s
rotation list or otherwise operating within the city limits.



(Ord. 010-780, passed 6-28-2010)



CHAPTER 36:  FINANCE AND REVENUE



Section



General Provisions



   36.01   Municipal audits



   36.02   Collection of ad valorem taxes



Fire Department Fees



   36.15   Passenger vehicle fires



   36.16   Fluid and debris cleanup



   36.17   Apparatus stationed at a scene



   36.18   Personnel at scene



   36.19   Materials used for cleanup



   36.20   Billing; responsible party; payment



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 36.01  MUNICIPAL AUDITS.



   (A)   In order to comply with KRS 91A.040 (annual city audits), the
City Clerk is directed and authorized to place on the agenda of the first
regular scheduled meeting of the City Council in November of each calendar
year the presentation and report by the auditors of the completed audit of
the prior fiscal year.



   (B)   The City Council directs the Mayor and the City Clerk are to
execute any and all documents to ensure the compliance of all provisions of
KRS 91A.040 and publication of the preceding annual fiscal audit before
December 31 of each year.



(Ord. 011-795, passed 5-2-2011)



§ 36.02  COLLECTION OF AD VALOREM TAXES.



   (A)   Pursuant to KRS 91A.070, the city engages the services of the
County Sheriff to collect ad valorem taxes for calendar year 2011 and all
subsequent years until amended. The City Clerk is directed to deliver a copy
of this chapter upon passage as soon as practicable after publication to the
Sheriff of the county.



   (B)   The City Council authorizes the collection of ad valorem taxes
by the Sheriff of the county, pursuant to the provisions of KRS Ch. 134 and
in the same manner as collection of county ad valorem taxes.



   (C)   The City Council shall compensate the Sheriff in an amount to
defray the Sheriff’s costs of collection, but shall not exceed the rates
provided by KRS Ch. 134.



(Ord. 011-077, passed 5-9-2011)



FIRE DEPARTMENT FEES



§ 36.15  PASSENGER VEHICLE FIRES.



   There shall be a flat fee of $500 for the response to and
extinguishment of passenger vehicle fires. For purposes of this subchapter, a
PASSENGER VEHICLE is described as a standard vehicle used for the purpose of
transporting passengers totaling not more than 16 persons. A vehicle used for
the transportation of cargo is not a passenger vehicle.



(Ord. 013-127, passed 2-25-2013)



§ 36.16  FLUID AND DEBRIS CLEANUP.



   There shall be a first hour charge of $350 for the response to and
mitigation of fluids and debris at the scenes of auto accidents, rescues,
hazardous materials cleanups, vehicle fires or any other incidents which
require cleanup by the city’s Fire Department.



(Ord. 013-127, passed 2-25-2013)



§ 36.17  APPARATUS STATIONED AT A SCENE.



   (A)   After one hour, there shall be a charge for apparatus
stationed at the scene.



   (B)   The following charges shall apply.



 

Command cars
 
$66.67 per hour


Engine companies
 
$428 per hour


Ladder companies
 
$470 per hour


Rescue companies
 
$388 per hour



 



(Ord. 013-127, passed 2-25-2013)



§ 36.18  PERSONNEL AT SCENE.



   In addition to the rates set out in § 36.17 of this chapter, there
shall also be a charge for personnel used at these scenes at the following
rates.



 

Deputy Fire Chief
 
$64 per hour


Fire Chief
 
$80 per hour


Firefighters
 
$40 per hour (per fire fighter)


Major
 
$49.33 per hour



 



(Ord. 013-127, passed 2-25-2013)



§ 36.19  MATERIALS USED FOR CLEANUP.



   The city’s Fire Department uses certain materials as part of its
duties when responding to auto accidents, rescues, mitigations, hazardous
materials cleanups, vehicle fires or other incidents which require cleanup by
the city’s Fire Department. The charges for the materials shall be at the
rates accepted annually by resolution of the City Council upon advice of the
Chief of the city’s Fire Department.



(Ord. 013-127, passed 2-25-2013)



§ 36.20  BILLING; RESPONSIBLE PARTY; PAYMENT.



   (A)   The city’s Fire Department shall bill the responsible party,
if the responsibility can be determined or all parties associated with the
cause of the incident, for the above charges using a form created by the Fire
Department.



   (B)   A resident of the city that pays property taxes to the city
and maintains residency as evidenced by having his or her address as such on
his or her state driver’s license shall not receive a bill from the
city’s Fire Department. His or her tax dollars have paid for any service
they receive from the city’s Fire Department unless such service is due to
a criminal act perpetrated by the resident.



   (C)   The responsible party shall remit payment to the city’s Fire
Department Mitigation Fund within 30 days of the date the billing statement
was issued. Failure to pay the city’s Fire Department for its services
within 30 days shall result in 10% penalty monthly not to exceed 60% and
interest at the rate of 1% per month.



(Ord. 013-127, passed 2-25-2013)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



   Chapter



      50.   GENERAL UTILITIES



      51.   GARBAGE



      52.   SEWERS



CHAPTER 50:  GENERAL UTILITIES



Section



   50.01   Tree trimming



   50.02   Building permit required to connect or alter utility service



 



   50.99   Penalty



§ 50.01  TREE TRIMMING.



   (A)   The public utilities operating within the city limits are
hereby authorized to trim trees and undergrowth for sufficient distance so as
to clear utility wires, power and telephone, for a distance of not less than
18 inches from the wires, such trees to be those located outside of private
property lines along and over the streets and alleys in the city which are
subjected to control of the City Council.



   (B)   Such trimming and cutting of trees shall be done in a
workmanlike manner and during such seasons of the year as will not destroy
the trees or shrubbery and all brush, limbs and debris shall be immediately
removed from the streets.



   (C)   This work shall be done under the supervision and direction of
a city official designated by the City Council.



(1991 Code, § 13-1)  (Ord. 610.2, passed --)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.02  BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED TO CONNECT OR ALTER UTILITY SERVICE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to connect or alter any public utility
connection to any building or structure within the city without having first
obtained a building permit as required by § 151.21(A) of this code of
ordinances. Building permits shall he obtained from the City Clerk prior to
construction or alteration beginning on any building or structure within the
city pursuant to § 151.21(A) of this code of ordinances.



   (B)   Any building permit required to be obtained by the city shall
be posted conspicuously upon the property where the improvements are being
constructed or altered during the entire term of construction or alteration.
Any public utility company which connects public utility service to any
building or structure without a valid building permit being posted shall be
considered to be in violation of this section and shall be subject to fine as
provided for in § 50.99 of this chapter.



(1991 Code, § 13-2)  (Ord. 985-130, passed 9-23-1985)  Penalty, see §
50.99



§ 50.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   Failure of any party to abide by the provisions of § 50.02 of
this chapter shall be punishable by a fine in the amount of $50. Each day a
violation occurs shall be construed to be a separate offense.



(1991 Code, § 13-2)  (Ord. 985-130, passed 9-23-1985)



CHAPTER 51:  GARBAGE



Section



   51.01   Mandatory pickup of garbage



   51.02   Billing and payment



   51.03   Erecting fences around garbage containers



 



   51.99   Penalty



§ 51.01  MANDATORY PICKUP OF GARBAGE.



   (A)   Pursuant to the franchise heretofore granted as advertised,
bid and awarded, the exclusive trash and garbage hauler within the city
limits of the City of Shepherdsville, Kentucky shall be that person, or legal
entity awarded the franchise for the term of the franchise as set forth by
the ordinance awarding such.



   (B)   Except as provided in the original ordinance, franchise, and
contract entered into therefrom, it shall be a violation for any other waste
hauler to operate within the city limits of the City of Shepherdsville and
each day shall constitute a violation subject to penalties.



   (C)   Each residential property which is occupied by the owner or
anyone with the owner’s consent for a total of seven days during any
monthly period shall be responsible for and indebted to the franchisee for
the negotiated and agreed monthly charge as set forth in the franchise
agreement.



   (D)   (1)   Each commercial property which is occupied by the
owner or anyone with the owner’s consent for a total of seven days during
any month shall be responsible for and indebted to the franchisee for the
negotiated and agreed monthly charge as set forth in the franchise agreement.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any individual to occupy a
dwelling within the corporate boundary of the City of Shepherdsville who has
failed to secure garbage (solid waste refuse) service to the dwelling as
required by this chapter.



(Ord. 2017-237, passed 6-26-2017)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.02  BILLING AND PAYMENT.



   (A)   (1)   The franchisee shall bill those owners as set forth
in § 51.01(C) and (D) of this chapter  and payment shall be due and payable
to the franchisee on or before the due date printed on the bill.



      (2)   If said billing is not paid by the due date, the
franchisee may add a penalty or a handling fee, whichever is greater to said
billing.



      (3)   Said billing together with any and all additional fees
shall be paid no later than 30 days from the date of the billing.



   (B)   If owner/possessor of the property fails to pay the bill, the
franchisee shall be responsible for collecting delinquent debt.



   (C)   Should a tenant fail to pay for service it shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the residential or commercial property to make
payment and it shall be the owner who shall be liable for the penalties
provided for by the franchisee. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit an
owner from requiring a tenant to pay or reimburse the owner for payment.



(2017-237, passed 6-26-2017)



§ 51.03  ERECTING FENCES AROUND GARBAGE CONTAINERS.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      GARBAGE.  Every refuse accumulation of animals, fruit or
vegetable matter, liquid or otherwise, that attends the preparation, use,
cooking, dealing in, or storing of meat, fish, fruit or vegetables.



      RUBBISH.  Waste material and refuse of every character collected
or accumulated within the city, except garbage, and shall include, but not be
limited to, grass, leaves, sticks, tree branches, stone, concrete, boards,
glass, used furniture or household appliances, cans, paper, cardboard and
packing material.



   (B)   Disposal.  No person shall dispose of or dump garbage or
rubbish upon the streets of the city or upon any public or private premises
other than those duly designated for such purpose unless by special
permission of the City Council.



   (C)   Containers.  No person shall fail to place garbage and
rubbish in plastic garbage bags to assist in the reduction of odors and
unwanted pests before such garbage and rubbish is placed in containers of the
type and size as may be necessary to ensure that such garbage and/or rubbish
cannot be blown by the wind so as to be scattered or cause clouds of dust or
particles. No person shall permit the escape of soot, ashes, or other solid
products or results of combustion so as to allow such to be wind- blown or
scattered.



   (D)   Dumpsters.  No person or business that on a weekly basis
disposes of garbage and/or rubbish in quantities of greater than four
96-gallon carts shall fail to use a dumpster of appropriate size.



   (E)   Fences.  No person shall fail to enclose a dumpster within a
fence which completely obstructs it from public view except when a gate in
the fence is open during normal dumping into or collection from the dumpster.
Such fence must be:



      (1)   An evergreen hedge with a chain link fence not less than
six feet in height;



      (2)   A fence of non-deteriorating material not less than six
feet;



      (3)   A masonry wall not less than six feet in height; or



      (4)   A treated wood privacy fence not less than six feet in
height that is well maintained.



   (F)   Violation. Violation of this section shall constitute a civil
offense.



   (G)   Effective date. This section shall take effect upon
publication. A person with a dumpster upon the effective date of this section
which is not enclosed so as to meet the requirements of division (E) shall be
allowed up to six months from the effective date of this section to comply
with those requirements.



(Ord. 018-264, passed 7-9-2018) Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any waste hauler who violates § 51.01(B) of this chapter
shall be guilty of a violation and subject to a fine of $250. Each day shall
constitute a separate offense.



   (B)   (1)   Any person violating any provision of § 51.03 shall
incur a civil penalty if the citation is uncontested of $75 for a first
offense, $150 for a second offense, and $300 for a third or greater offense.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day on which a violation
occurs or continues.



      (2)   If the citation is contested, the maximum civil penalty
for a first offense is $150, for a second offense $300, and $600 for a third
or greater offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day on
which a violation occurs or continues.



(Ord. 012-117, passed 9-10-2012; Ord. 017-237, passed 6-26-2017; Ord.
018-264, passed 7-9-2018)



CHAPTER 52:  SEWERS



Section



General Provisions



   52.001   Purpose and policy



   52.002   Definitions



   52.003   Abbreviations



Use of Public Sewers



   52.015   Mandatory sewer connections



   52.016   Previously developed areas and undeveloped areas



   52.017   Unlawful discharge to storm sewers and natural outlets



   52.018   Compliance with local, state and federal laws



   52.019   Discharge of unpolluted waters into sewer



   52.020   Surface water infiltration



Private Wastewater Disposal



   52.035   Public sewer not available



   52.036   Requirements for installation



Building Sewers and Connections



   52.050   Permits



   52.051   Prohibited connections



   52.052   Design and installations



   52.053   Inspection



   52.054   Performance/warranty surety



Pollutant Discharge Limits



   52.065   General conditions



   52.066   Prohibited discharges



   52.067   Restricted discharges



   52.068   Dilution of wastewater discharge



   52.069   Grease, oil and sand interceptors



   52.070   Special industrial pretreatment requirements



   52.071   Protection from accidental and slug discharge



   52.072   State requirements



   52.073   City’s right of revision



   52.074   Federal categorical pretreatment standards



Pretreatment Program Administration



   52.085   Wastewater discharges



   52.086   Industrial user permits



   52.087   Permit modifications



   52.088   Permit conditions



   52.089   Alternative discharge limits



   52.090   Permit duration



   52.091   Permit transfer



   52.092   Compliance data reporting



   52.093   Periodic compliance reports



   52.094   Permit violations



   52.095   Monitoring



   52.096   Inspection and sampling



   52.097   Pretreatment



   52.098   Annual publication



   52.099   Significant non-compliance



   52.100   Confidential information



   52.101   Signatory requirements



Fees and Charges



   52.115   Purpose



   52.116   Charges and fees



   52.117   Consumer price index



   52.118   Wastewater haulers; charges



   52.119   Jim Beam sanitary sewer; charges



Powers and Authority of Inspectors



   52.130   Right to enter premises



   52.131   Right to obtain information regarding discharge



   52.132   Access to easements



   52.133   Safety



Enforcement



   52.145   General



   52.146   Notice of violation



   52.147   Administrative orders



   52.148   Show cause hearing



   52.149   Additional enforcement remedies



   52.150   Written notice



   52.151   Revocation of permit



   52.152   Destruction of POTW



   52.153   Legal action



   52.154   Injunctive relief



   52.155   Liability



   52.156   Misrepresentation and/or falsifying of documents



 



   52.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 52.001  PURPOSE AND POLICY.



   (A)   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for direct and
indirect contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system for
the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal
laws required by the Clean Water Act of 1977 and the general pretreatment
regulations (40 C.F.R. part 403).



   (B)   The objectives of this chapter are:



      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
municipal sanitary sewer system which will interfere with the operation of
the system or contaminate the resulting biosolids;



      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
municipal sanitary sewer system which will pass through the system
inadequately treated into receiving waters so as to cause violations of the
city’s KPDES permit or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the
system;



      (3)   To promote the reuse, recycling and reclamation of
wastewaters and sludges from the treatment system;



      (4)   To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of
operation, maintenance and replacement of the municipal sanitary sewer system;



      (5)   To protect municipal personnel who may be affected by
sewage, sludge and/or effluent in the course of their employment as well as
protecting the general public; and



      (6)   To ensure that the municipality complies with its KPDES
permit or non-discharging permit conditions, biosolids permit conditions,
including use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state
environmental laws to which the municipal sanitary sewer system is subject.



   (C)   This chapter provides for the regulation of direct and
indirect contribution to the municipal sanitary sewer system through the
issuance of permits to certain non-domestic users and through enforcement of
general requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and
enforcement activities, requires user reporting and provides for the setting
of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program
established herein. This chapter also provides for the regulation of sanitary
sewer extensions, lateral lines, manholes and connections.



   (D)   This chapter shall apply to all users of the city’s
municipal wastewater system, including those users located outside the city
who are, by permit, contract or agreement with the city, users of the
sanitary sewer system. Except as otherwise provided herein, the Pretreatment
Coordinator shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this
chapter. Any powers granted to or imposed upon the Pretreatment Coordinator
may be delegated by the Pretreatment Coordinator to other qualified city
personnel. By discharging wastewater into the municipal wastewater system,
all users located outside the city limits agree to comply with the terms and
conditions established in this chapter, as well as any permits, enforcement
actions or orders issued hereunder.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)



§ 52.002  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACT or THE ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as
the Clean Water Act, as amended (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.).



   AGENCY. Any governmental or quasi-governmental entity.



   APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The Secretary of the state’s Natural Resources
and Environmental Protection Cabinet or an authorized representative thereof.



   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE.



      (1)   An AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE of a user may be:



         (a)   A principal executive officer of at least the
level of vice-president, if the user is a corporation;



         (b)   A general partner or proprietor if the user is a
partnership or proprietorship, respectively; and



         (c)   A duly authorized representative of the individual
designated above if such representative is responsible for the overall
operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge originates.



      (2)   An AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE of the city may be any
person designated by the city to act on its behalf.



   BASELINE MONITORING REPORT (BMR). A report submitted by categorical
industrial users within 180 days after the effective date of a categorical
standard which indicates the compliance status of the user with the
applicable categorical standard (40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b)).



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMPS. Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures and other management
practices to implement the prohibitions listed in 40 C.F.R. § 403.5. BMPs
include, but are not limited to, treatment requirements, operating procedures
and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
waste disposal or drainage from raw materials storage.



   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure,
five days at 20°C expressed in terms of weight and concentration in
milligrams per liter (mg/l).



   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from inside the building and conveys it
to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the
building wall.



   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal. Also called HOUSE CONNECTION and/or LATERAL
LINE.



   BUILDING SEWER PERMIT. As set forth in §§ 52.050 through 52.054 of
this chapter.



   BYPASS. The intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a
user’s treatment facility.



   CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER. An industrial user subject to categorical
pretreatment standards which have been promulgated by EPA.



   CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. National categorical pretreatment
standards or pretreatment standards or pretreatment standard. Any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance
with § 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1347) which applies to a
specific category of industrial users.



   CITY. The City of Shepherdsville, Bullitt County, Kentucky, its City
Council or Sewer Department, and/or their designee.



   CLEAN WATER ACT (CWA). (Also known as the FEDERAL WATER POLLUTION
CONTROL ACT.) Enacted by Pub. Law No. 92-500, 10-18-1972, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251
et seq., as amended by: Pub. Law No. 95-217, 12-28-1977; Pub. Law No. 97-117,
12-29-1981; Pub. Law No. 97-440, 1-8-1983; and Pub. Law No. 100-04, 2-4-1987.



   COMBINED SEWER. Any conduit designed to carry both sanitary sewage and
storm water or surface water.



   COMBINED WASTESTREAM FORMULA (CWF). Procedure for calculating
alternative discharge limits at industrial facilities where a regulated
wastestream is combined with other non-regulated wastestreams prior to
treatment (40 C.F.R. § 403.7).



   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids and
fecal coliform bacteria; plus any additional pollutants identified in the
POTW’s NPDES/KPDES permit, where the POTW is designed to treat such
pollutants and, in fact, does treat such pollutants so as to ensure
compliance with the POTW’s NPDES/KPDES permit.



   CONCENTRATION-BASED LIMIT. A limit based on the relative strength of a
pollutant in a wastestream, usually expressed in mg/l.



   CONTROL AUTHORITY. The city, acting through the Pretreatment
Coordinator, and/or his or her designee, when there exists an approved
pretreatment program.



   COOLING WATER. The water discharge from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added
is heat.



   DAILY MAXIMUM. The maximum allowable value for any single sampling
observation in a given day.



   DILUTE WASTESTREAM. Boiler blowdown, sanitary wastewater, non-contact
cooling water and certain process wastestreams that have been excluded from
regulation in categorical pretreatment standards because they contain none or
only trace amounts of the regulated pollutant.



   DIRECT DISCHARGE. The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater
directly to the waters of the commonwealth.



   DISCHARGER. Any person that discharges or causes a discharge to a
public sewer.



   DOMESTIC WASTEWATER. The water-carried wastes produced from
non-commercial or non-industrial activities and which result from normal
human living processes. Normal DOMESTIC WASTEWATER shall be defined as
wastewater having a BOD concentration of not more than 300 mg/l, a TSS
concentration of not more than 300 mg/l and an ammonia-nitrogen concentration
of not more than 30 mg/l.



   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.



   EFFLUENT. The liquid overflow of any facility designed to treat, convey
or retain wastewater.



   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA. The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, or where appropriate the term may also be used as a
designation for the Administrator or other duly authorized official of said
agency.



   EQUIPMENT. All movable, non-fixed items necessary to the wastewater
treatment process.



   FLOW PROPORTIONAL COMPOSITE SAMPLE. Combination of individual samples
proportional to the flow of the wastestream at the time of sampling.



   FLOW WEIGHTED AVERAGING FORMULA (FWA). A procedure used to calculate
alternative limits for a categorical pretreatment standard where regulated
and non-regulated wastestreams combine after treatment, but prior to the
monitoring point as defined in 40 C.F.R. part 403.



   GARBAGE. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and serving of foods.



   GRAB SAMPLE. A sample which is taken from a wastestream on a one-time
basis with no regard to the flow of the wastestream and without consideration
of time.



   HOLDING TANK WASTE. Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum-pump tank trucks.



   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. All pollutants other than compatible
pollutants, as defined herein.



   INDIRECT DISCHARGE. The discharge or the introduction of non-domestic
pollutants from any source regulated under § 307(b) or (c) of the Act (33
U.S.C. § 1317), into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged into
the system).



   INDUSTRIAL USER (IU). A source of indirect discharge which does not
constitute a “discharge of pollutants” under regulations issued pursuant
to § 402 of the Clean Water Act.



   INDUSTRIAL USER PERMIT (IUP). A permit issued to industrial users which
authorizes discharges to the public sewer as set forth in the administration
section of this chapter.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The wastewater from industrial or commercial
processes as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes.



   INTERCEPTOR. A device designed and installed so as to separate and
retain deleterious, hazardous or undesirable matter from normal wastes which
permits normal sewage or liquid wastes to discharge into the sewer or
drainage system by gravity. INTERCEPTOR, as defined herein, is commonly
referred to as a GREASE, OIL OR SAND TRAP.



   INTERFERENCE. A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources:



      (1)   Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes
or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and/or



      (2)   Is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the
POTW’s NPDES/KPDES permit including an increase in the magnitude or
duration of a violation or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal
in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or
permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): §
405 of the Clean Water Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including
Title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act (RCRA); and including state regulations contained in any state sludge
management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA; the Clean Air
Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research
and Sanctuaries Act (40 C.F.R. § 403.3).



   MAY. The act referred to is permissive. (See SHALL.)



   MEDICAL WASTE. Isolation waste, infectious agents, human blood
products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding,
surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and dialysis
wastes.



   MONTHLY AVERAGE. The maximum allowable value for the average of all
observations obtained during one month.



   MULTI-UNIT SEWER CUSTOMER. A location served where there are two or
more residential units or apartments, two or more businesses in the same
building or complex or where there is any combination of business and
residence in the same building or complex.



   NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or PRETREATMENT STANDARD.
Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA
in accordance with § 307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act which applies to
a specific category of industrial users. This term includes the prohibitive
discharge limits established pursuant to 40 C.F.R. § 403.5.



   NATIONAL (OR KENTUCKY) POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM OR
NPDES/KPDES PERMIT. A permit issued pursuant to § 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1332), or a permit issued by the commonwealth under this authority and
referred to as KPDES.



   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet, including storm sewers, into a watercourse,
pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water.



   NEW SOURCE.



      (1)   Any building, structure, facility or installation from
which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under §
307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to the source if the standards are
thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section; provided that:



         (a)   The building, structure, facility or installation
is constructed at a site at which no other source is located;



         (b)   The building, structure, facility or installation
totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the
discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or



         (c)   The production or wastewater generating processes
of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether
these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the
new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which
the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the
existing source shall be considered.



      (2)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is
located results in a modification rather than a NEW SOURCE if the
construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or
installation meeting the criteria of divisions (1)(b) or (1)(c) above, but
otherwise alters, replaces or adds to existing process or production
equipment.



   NINETY-DAY COMPLIANCE REPORT. A report submitted by a categorical
industrial user, within 90 days following the date for final compliance with
applicable categorical standards that documents and certifies the compliance
status of the user (40 C.F.R. § 403.12(d)).



   ORDINANCE. This chapter, unless otherwise specified.



   PASS THROUGH. A discharge of pollutant which cannot be treated
adequately by the POTW and, therefore, exits into waters of the United States
in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any
requirement of the POTW’s NPDES/KPDES permit (including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation) (40 C.F.R. § 403.3).



   PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORT. A report on compliance status submitted by
significant industrial users to the control authority at least semi-annually
(40 C.F.R. § 403.12(e)).



   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estates, governmental
entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agent or
assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall
include the plural where indicated by the context.



   pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed in
standard units, and calculated as the logarithm of the reciprocal of the
hydrogen ion concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions,
in grams, per liter of solution.



   pH VIOLATION. For users that utilize a continuous pH monitoring system
to determine compliance with the pH limitations established under this
chapter and/or an Industrial User Permit, a violation of the pH limitations
will be deemed to have occurred when a continuous individual reading is
outside the pH limitation range established under this chapter and/or by an
Industrial User Permit. For users that do not utilize a continuous pH
monitoring system to determine compliance with the pH limitations established
under this chapter and/or by an Industrial User Permit, a violation of the pH
limitations will be deemed to have occurred where a grab sample of the final
effluent stream indicates that the pH of the wastewater sample was outside
the pH limitation range established under this chapter and/or by an
Industrial User Permit.



   POLLUTANT. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, medical waste, munitions, chemical, biological
material, radioactive material,  heat, wrecked or discharged equipment,
rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste
discharged into water.



   POLLUTION. The human-made or human-induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological and radiological integrity of water.



   POTW TREATMENT PLANT. The portion of the POTW designed to provide
treatment to wastewater.



   PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants,
the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The
reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological
processes, or process changes by other means, except as prohibited by 40
C.F.R. § 403.6(d).



   PRETREATMENT COORDINATOR. City personnel designated by the city to
implement and enforce the city’s approved pretreatment program, or his or
her designee.



   PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Prohibited discharge standards, categorical
standards and local limits.



   PROCESS WASTEWATER. Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production of
or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product,
by-product or waste product.



   PRODUCTION-BASED STANDARD. A discharge limitation expressed in terms of
allowable pollutant mass discharge rate per unit of production and is applied
directly to an industrial user’s manufacturing process.



   PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD. Any regulation developed under the
authority of § 307(b) of the Act and 40 C.F.R. § 403.5.



   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in
public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.



   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW). A treatment works as defined by
§ 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292), which is owned in this instance by the
city. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW
treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not
connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purpose of this chapter,
POTW shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from
persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city,
users of the city’s POTW.



   PUBLIC SEWER. A common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or
public utility. In general, the PUBLIC SEWER shall include the main sewer in
the street and the service branch to the curb or property line, or a main
sewer on private property and the service branch to the extent of ownership
by public authority. Nothing in this definition shall expand the city’s
current policy of maintenance of service branches.



   REGULATED WASTESTREAM. An industrial process wastestream regulated by a
national categorical pretreatment standard.



   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes
from residences, commercial buildings industrial plants and institutions.



   SEWAGE. The spent water of a community. DOMESTIC OR SANITARY WASTE
shall mean the liquid or water-carried wastes from residences, commercial
buildings and institutions as distinct from industrial sewage. The terms
SEWAGE and WASTEWATER are used interchangeably.



   SEWER. A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.



   SEWER USER CHARGES. A system of charges levied on users of a POTW for
the cost of operation and maintenance, including replacement, of such works.



   SEWER SYSTEM OR WORKS. All facilities for collecting, transporting,
pumping, treating and disposing of sewage and sludge, namely the sewerage
system and POTW.



   SEWERAGE. Any and all facilities used for collecting, conveying,
pumping, treating and disposing of wastewater.



   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory. (See MAY.)



   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (SIU).



      (1)   (a)   All industrial users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards under 40 C.F.R. § 403.6 and 40 C.F.R. Ch. I, Subch.
N; and



         (b)   Any non-categorical user that:



            1.   Discharges 25,000 gallons per day or more of
process wastewater (“process wastewater” excludes sanitary non-contact
cooling and boiler blowdown wastewaters);



            2.   Contributes a process wastestream which makes
up 5% or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic (BOD, TSS and
the like) capacity of the treatment plant; or



            3.   Has a reasonable potential, in the opinion of
the control or approval authority, to adversely affect the POTW treatment
plant (inhibition, pass through of pollutants, sludge contamination or
endangerment of POTW workers) or violate any requirements of this chapter.



      (2)   The city may determine that an industrial user subject
to categorical pretreatment standards is a non-significant categorical
industrial user rather than a significant industrial user on a finding that
the industrial user never discharges more than 100 gallons per day (gpd) of
total categorical wastewater (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and
boiler blowdown wastewater, unless specifically included in the pretreatment
standard) and the following conditions are met:



         (a)   The industrial user, prior to the city’s
finding, has consistently complied with all applicable categorical
pretreatment standards and requirements;



         (b)   The industrial user annually submits the
certification statement required in 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(q) together with any
additional information necessary to support the certification statement; and



         (c)   The industrial user never discharges any untreated
concentrated process wastewater.



      (3)   Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in this
section has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city
may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received
from an industrial user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 C.F.R. §
403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a SIGNIFICANT
INDUSTRIAL USER.



   SLUG DISCHARGE. Any discharge of a non-routine episodic nature
including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or non-customary batch
discharge or any discharge of water or wastewater in which the concentration
of any given constituent or quantity of flow exceeds, for any period of
duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average 24-hour
concentration or flow rate during normal operation which adversely affects
the POTW.



   SLUG LOAD. Any pollutant (including biochemical oxygen demand) released
in a discharge at a flow rate or concentration which will cause interference
with the operation of the treatment works or which exceeds limits set forth
in the industry’s discharge permit and which include accidental spills.



   SPILL PREVENTION AND CONTROL PLAN. A plan prepared by an industrial
user to minimize the likelihood of a spill and to expedite control and
cleanup activities should a spill occur.



   SPLIT SAMPLE. Portion of a collected sample given to the industry or to
another agency to verify or compare laboratory results.



   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC). Defined as set forth in
Standard Industrial Classification Manual, published by the Executive Office
of the President and the Office of Management and Budget.



   STANDARD METHODS. The examination and analytical procedures set forth
in the recent editions of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the
American Water Works Association, and the Water Environment Federation and as
set forth in 40 C.F.R. part 136.



   STATE. Commonwealth of Kentucky.



   STORM DRAIN. (Also termed STORM SEWER.) A drain or sewer for conveying
water, ground water, surface water or unpolluted water from any source.



   STORM WATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation and resulting therefrom.



   SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of the Sewer Department of the city,
or his or her duly authorized deputy, agent or representative.



   SURCHARGE. A charge for services in addition to the basic sewer user
and debt service charges, for those users whose contributions contain
biochemical oxygen demand (BOD5), chemical oxygen demand (COD), total
suspended solids (TSS), oil and grease or ammonia-nitrogen (NH3-N) in
concentrations which exceed limits specified herein for such pollutants.
Where authorized by the city, payment of a SURCHARGE will authorize the
discharge of the referenced pollutants so long as the discharge does not
cause pass through or interference.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS). Total suspended matter that either floats on
the surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater or other liquids
and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater.



   TEMPERATURE VIOLATION.  For users that utilize a continuous
temperature monitoring system to determine compliance with the temperature
limitations established under this chapter and/or an Industrial User Permit,
a violation of the temperature limitations will be deemed to have occurred
when a continuous individual excursion from the range of temperature
limitations exceeds 60 minutes, provided that the total time during which the
temperature value was outside the required range of temperature limitations
does not exceed seven hours and 26 minutes in any calendar month. For users
that do not utilize a continuous temperature monitoring system to determine
compliance with the temperature limitations established under this chapter
and/or an Industrial User Permit, a violation of the temperature limitations
will be deemed to have occurred where a grab sample of the final effluent
stream indicates that the temperature of the wastewater sample was outside
the temperature limitation range established under this chapter and/or an
Industrial User Permit.



   TIME PROPORTIONAL COMPOSITE SAMPLE. Combination of individual samples
with fixed volumes taken at specific time intervals.



   TOXIC ORGANIC MANAGEMENT PLAN. Written plan submitted by industrial
users as an alternative to TTO monitoring, which specifies the toxic organic
compounds used, the method of disposal used and procedures for assuring that
toxic organics do not routinely spill or leak into wastewater discharged to
the POTW.



   TOXIC POLLUTANT. Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as
toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of EPA under the
provisions of the Clean Water Act § 307(a) or any amendments thereto.



   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the
treatment works effluent criteria in effect, or water that would not cause
violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefitted by
discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities.



   UNREGULATED WASTESTREAM. A wastestream that is not regulated by
national categorical pretreatment standards.



   USER. Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of
wastewater into the POTW.



   WASTEWATER. The liquid and water-carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial facilities, mobile sources, treatment
facilities and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are
contributed into the POTW.



   WASTEWATER FACILITIES. The structures, equipment and processes required
to collect, carry away, treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of
the effluent.



   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS. An arrangement of devices and structures
for treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. Sometimes used as
synonymous with WASTE TREATMENT PLANT, WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT, WATER
POLLUTION CONTROL PLANT or SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT.



   WATERCOURSE. A natural or artificial channel for the passage or water
either continuously or intermittently.



   WATERS OF THE STATE. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses,
waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage
systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or
underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained
within, flow through or border upon the state or any portion thereof.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013; Ord. 017-251, passed 12-11-2017)



§ 52.003  ABBREVIATIONS.



   The following abbreviations shall have the designated meaning.



   ADMI. American Dye Manufacturers Institute.



   ASTM. American Society for Testing and Materials.



   BMP. Best management practices.



   BOD. Biochemical oxygen demand.



   BPJ. Best professional judgment.



   C.F.R. Code of Federal Regulations.



   CIU. Categorical industrial user.



   COD. Chemical oxygen demand.



   CWA. Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.).



   CWF. Combined wastestream formula.



   EPA. Environmental Protection Agency.



   FWA. Flow weighted average.



   FR. Federal Register.



   GC. Gas chromatography.



   GC/MS. Gas chromatography/mass spectroscopy.



   gpd. Gallons per day.



   IU. Industrial user.



   IUP. Industrial user permit.



   l. Liter.



   mg. Milligrams.



   mg/l. Milligrams per liter.



   NPDES. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.



   KPDES. Kentucky Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.



   O&M. Operations and maintenance.



   POTW. Publicly owned treatment works.



   QA. Quality assurance.



   QC. Quality control.



   RCRA. Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.



   SIC. Standard industrial classification.



   SIU. Significant industrial user.



   S.U. Standard units.



   SWDA. Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.



   TSS. Total suspended solids.



   TOMP. Toxic organics management plan.



   TTO. Total toxic organics.



   U.S.C. United States Code.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)



USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS



§ 52.015  MANDATORY SEWER CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   The owner(s) of all houses, buildings or properties used for
human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within
the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is
now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the
city, is (are) hereby required at the owner’s expense to install suitable
toilet facilities therein, and to connect such faculties directly with the
proper sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 90
days after date of official notice to do so; provided that, said public sewer
is within 100 feet of the property line.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy
vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the
disposal of wastewater where public sanitary sewer service is available, as
defined in division (A) above, except as provided for in §§ 52.035 and
52.036 of this chapter.



   (C)   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property
served by a private wastewater disposal system, a direct connection shall be
made to the public sewer system within 60 days in compliance with this
chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private wastewater
disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable
material or salvaged and removed.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.016  PREVIOUSLY DEVELOPED AREAS AND UNDEVELOPED AREAS.



   (A)   Properties located inside the 201 Planning Area are not
required to be annexed into the city in order to receive sewer service.



   (B)   However, the city’s WWTP Superintendent and the city’s
Engineer shall review plans submitted by the applicant to determine potential
impacts to the city’s existing collection system as well as the most
appropriate appurtenances needed to convey the discharge to the city’s
system before granting approval to accept the discharge. In addition, plans
for sewer lines and other appurtenances necessary to convey the discharge to
the point of connection to city service shall be made in accordance with §§
52.050 through 52.054 of this chapter and other appropriate written
specifications, and approved by the WWTP Superintendent and City Engineer
prior to construction. Installations shall be inspected in accordance with
§§ 52.050 through 52.054 of this chapter. All construction and maintenance
costs associated with conveying the discharge to the point of connection with
city service shall be borne by the property owner. Properties located outside
the city limits which receive sewer service shall enter into an
inter-jurisdictional agreement with the city before the service is connected.
All properties considered for annexation shall have approved sewer lines in
place or an enforceable commitment from the property owner to install such
sewer lines on a schedule acceptable to the city.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)



§ 52.017  UNLAWFUL DISCHARGE TO STORM SEWERS OR NATURAL OUTLETS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or
permit to be deposited any pollutant in any unsanitary manner on public or
private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of
said city, except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within
the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any wastewater
or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment or management has
been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter. No
provision of this chapter shall be construed to relieve the owner of a
discharge to any natural outlet of the responsibility for complying with
applicable state and federal regulations governing such discharge.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.018  COMPLIANCE WITH LOCAL, STATE AND FEDERAL LAWS.



   The discharge of any wastewater into the public sewer system by any
person is unlawful, except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter,
and any more stringent state or federal standards promulgated pursuant to the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, the Clean Water Act
of 1977 and subsequent amendments, and 40 C.F.R. part 403.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.019  DISCHARGE OF UNPOLLUTED WATERS INTO SEWER.



   (A)   No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged,
through any leak, defect or connection any unpolluted waters such as storm
water, ground water roof runoff or subsurface drainage to any sanitary sewer,
building sewer, building drain or building plumbing. The WWTP Superintendent,
or his or her representative, shall have the right, at any time, to inspect
the inside or outside of buildings or smoke test for connections, leaks or
defects to building sewers and require disconnection or repair of any such
pipes carrying such water to the building sewer. No sanitary drain sump or
sump pump discharge by manual switchover of discharge connection shall have a
dual use for removal of such water.



   (B)   The owners of any building sewers having such connections,
leaks or defects shall bear all costs incidental to removal of such sources.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.020  SURFACE WATER INFILTRATION.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



      EXCESS SURFACE WATER. An amount of water in excess 10,000 gallons
per rain/snow event/occurrence or an amount in excess 100,000 gallons per
month.



      SURFACE WATER. Water not provided by a water public utility to
the property owners within the corporate boundaries within the city and shall
include, and not be limited to, precipitation as rain or snow or contents of
bodies of water such as ponds, lakes, creeks or rivers.



   (B)   The City Council authorizes and directs the waste water
treatment plant operator to investigate the cause of any excess infiltration
of surface water into the waste water collection system of the city. The
operator shall determined by use of measuring devices such as “flow
meters” the existence and amount of excess surface water entering into the
city’s waste water collection system.



   (C)   The Council directs the waste water plant operator to prepare
a written report of the infiltration, amount and cause, to the Mayor. The
Mayor shall cause a copy of the report to be delivered to each Council member
and to the property owner and/or installer of any connecting device to the
city’s waste water treatment system.



   (D)   After review of the report, the City Council, at a regular
scheduled Council meeting, may determine by motion and approval that an
excess infiltration of surface water into the city’s waste water treatment
system has occurred. The Council may schedule a hearing with notice to the
property owner and/or installer to examine the findings of the waste water
treatment plant operator.



   (E)   (1)   The City Clerk shall give written notice of any
intended subsequent meeting concerning the infiltration of surface water in
the city’s waste water collection system to the property owner and/or the
installer of the connection to the city sewer collection system.



      (2)   Said property owner and/or installer shall have the
opportunity to present any information, under oath, concerning the
infiltration and any deficiency of the waste water plant operator’s written
report.



   (F)   Upon the finding of infiltration of excess surface water in
the city’s sewer water collection system upon the owner’s property or
through any connection device by the City Council, the property owner and/or
installer shall have the exclusive election to pay for the treatment of the
excess surface water’s treatment according to existing sewer water
treatment rate or to cause the immediate disconnection of the property or
connection device. The election is solely within the discretion of the
property owner and/or installer of the connecting device. Said election shall
be made immediately upon notice of the City Council’s finding of the
infiltration of excess surface water infiltrating the city’s waste water
treatment system.



   (G)   Appeals of any decision of the City Council may be filed in
the county’s Circuit Court. Said appeal must be made within seven days of
the final decision of the City Council or within 30 days if a surety bond has
been provided to the city to ensure payment of the expense of surface water
treatment for a period of one year.



   (H)   Upon the failure of the property owner and/or installer to
make an election as described in division (E) above, the Mayor shall
authorize the disconnection of the connection from the city’s waste water
collection system.



(Ord. 013-142, passed 8-26-2013)



PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL



§ 52.035  PUBLIC SEWER NOT AVAILABLE.



   (A)   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the
provisions of §§ 52.015 through 52.020 of this chapter, the building sewer
shall be connected, until the public sewer is available, to a private
wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of the Bullitt
County Health Department and all applicable local and state regulations.



   (B)   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage
disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the
city.



   (C)   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed
to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by
applicable local or state regulations.



   (D)   Holders of NPDES/KPDES permits may be excepted. Industries
with current NPDES/KPDES permits may discharge at permitted discharge points
provided they are in compliance of the issuing authority.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.036  REQUIREMENTS FOR INSTALLATION.



   (A)   The type, capacity, location and layout of a private sewage
disposal system shall comply with all local and state regulations.



   (B)   A permit for private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of local
and state authorities.



   (C)   Design and installation for private sewage disposal system(s)
and sanitary sewer lines shall be in accordance with the city’s Design
Manual.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)  Penalty, see § 52.999



BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS



§ 52.050  PERMITS.



   (A)   (1)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits
required:



         (a)   For residential; and



         (b)   For service to commercial and industrial
establishments.



      (2)   In either case, the owner(s), or his or her agent, shall
make application on a special form furnished by the city.



      (3)   Applicants for service to commercial and industrial
establishments shall be required to furnish information about all waste
producing activities, wastewater characteristics and constituents. The permit
application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other
information considered pertinent in the judgment of the Pretreatment
Coordinator. Details regarding commercial and industrial permits include, but
are not limited to, those required by this chapter. Permit and inspection
fees shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed.



   (B)   Users shall promptly notify the city in advance of any
introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the
volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the
POTW. The Pretreatment Coordinator may deny or place conditions on the new
introduction or change in discharge based on the information submitted in the
notification or additional information as may be requested.



   (C)   No person(s) shall uncover, plug or make any connection with
or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining permission from the WWTP Superintendent.



   (D)   A permit and inspection fee for residential, commercial and
industrial buildings shall be assessed by the city at the time the
application is filed.



   (E)   No building permit shall be issued by the city until all
building sewer lines and connections have met all requirements of this
chapter and the Superintendent has been provided with as-built plans and
specifications. The city shall not accept any sewer lines and/or connections
that fail smoke or other leak testing. The property owner and/or installer of
any building sewers shall be responsible for repairing all leaks. A two-year
warranty will be required on all sewer installation, repair and/or
maintenance. This warranty must be submitted to the WWTP Superintendent in
writing within 15 days of completion of the work.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.051  PROHIBITED CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, basement
wall seepage or floor seepage, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or
other surface runoff or ground water to a building sewer or building drain
which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
Any such connections which already exist on the effective date of this
chapter shall be completely and permanently disconnected within 60 days of
the effective date of this chapter. The owner(s) of any building sewers
having such connections, leaks or defects shall bear all costs incidental to
removal of such sources. Pipes, sumps and pumps for such sources of ground
and surface water shall be separate from wastewater facilities. Removal of
such sources of water without presence of separate facilities shall be
evidence of drainage to public sanitary sewer. Connections shall be subject
to inspection by the WWTP Superintendent, and/or his or her designee, to
verify compliance. Inspections may be performed periodically at the
discretion of the WWTP Superintendent or at the time of
connection/reconnection.



   (B)   Floor, basement or crawl space drains which are lower than
ground surfaces surrounding the building shall not be connected to the
building sanitary sewer. No sanitary inlet which is lower than six inches
above the top of the lowest of the two adjacent public sanitary sewer
manholes shall be connected by direct drainage to the building sanitary
sewer. Building sanitary sewer connections in structures not meeting the
criteria of this section will be permitted only if the property owner has:



      (1)   Installed an individual pumping facility at the
structure to receive the building sewage. The pumping facility shall include
a discharge pipe with a high point which meets the criteria above; or



      (2)   Installed a minimum of two sewer backflow stops or flaps
at least 12 inches apart of such nature and design to provide gravity flow to
the sanitary sewer system and to prevent sewage backflow into the property
improvement.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.052  DESIGN AND INSTALLATIONS.



   (A)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided
for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another
on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to
the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway. The
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer, but the city does not and will not
assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting
from any such single connection aforementioned.



   (B)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new
buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the
Superintendent, to meet all requirements of this chapter. Permit and
inspection fees for new buildings using existing building sewers shall be the
same as for new building sewers. If additional sewer customers are added to
the old building sewers, additional sewer tap fees shall be charged
accordingly even though no new sewer tap is actually made into the city
system.



   (C)   Extension of customer service lines from any point on the
customer’s side of the tap for delivery of waste from any location other
than that of the customer in whose name the tap is registered shall not be
permitted.



   (D)   The building sewer shall be cast iron soil pipe, ASTM A-74,
latest revision, PVC (polyvinyl-chloride) sewer pipe, ASTM C-700, latest
revision, or ductile iron pipe, AWWA specification C-151 cement lined, and
shall meet all requirements of the state’s Plumbing Code. Joints shall be
as set out hereinafter. Any part of the building sewer that is located within
five feet of a water service pipe shall be constructed with cast iron soil
pipe or ductile iron pipe, unless the building sewer is at least one foot
deeper in the ground than the water service line. Cast iron soil pipe or
ductile iron pipe may be required by the city where the building sewer is
exposed to damage or stoppage by tree roots. Cast iron soil pipe or ductile
iron pipe shall be used in filled or unstable ground, in areas where the
cover over the building sewer is less than three feet, or in areas where the
sewer is subject to vehicular or other external loads.



   (E)   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a
building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the
pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the
requirements of the local and state Building and Plumbing Codes and other
applicable rules and regulations of the city. Manholes may be required at all
commercial and industrial connections to the city’s municipal sewer system.
The owner of the facility shall be responsible for all costs associated with
installation of the manhole(s). Specifications for manholes may be obtained
by contacting the WWTP Superintendent.



   (F)   All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and
connection of the building sewer(s) shall be borne by the owner(s). The
owner(s) shall indemnify the city for any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. Fees for
connection shall be as established by the city.



   (G)   The owner shall ensure that all excavations for building sewer
installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to
protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public
property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the city.



   (H)   In all buildings in which any sanitary facility drain is too
low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by
such drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the same
building sewer. Drain pipe and sump for collection of such sanitary drainage
shall be above basement floor or in separately water-tight or drained sump or
channel and must be inspected and approved by the WWTP Superintendent prior
to connection to the system.



   (I)   The building sewer shall be connected into the public sewer at
the easement or property line. Where no property located service branch is
available, an authorized agent of the city shall cut a neat hole into the
main line of the public sewer and a suitable wye or tee saddle installed to
receive the building sewer. The invert of the building sewer at such point of
connection with a saddle shall be in the upper quadrant of the main line of
the public sewer. A neat, workmanlike connection, not extending past the
inner surface of the public sewer, shall be made and the saddle made secure
and watertight by encasement in epoxy cement specially prepared for this
purpose. A wye and H bend fitting shall be installed at the property line
between the public sewer and the building sewer. This fitting shall serve the
purpose of a cleanout and for applying the smoke test during inspection of
the line. After testing, a cast iron or ductile iron riser will be inserted
in this fitting and brought flush with the ground surface. A stopper or plug,
outfitted with a type joint applicable to the pipe used, shall seal this
riser against the intrusion of ground or surface water.



   (J)   All building sanitary sewer lines will be installed so as to
meet or exceed the most current revision of the state’s Plumbing Code. All
design and installation of building sanitary sewer lines and faculties shall
be in accordance with the city’s Design Manual.



   (K)   All persons working on city sewers with a cleaning rod must
use an approved type rod in cleaning sewer connections to city sewers.



   (L)   This section shall not affect sewers installed or approved in
accordance with the provisions of the prior version of the city’s sewer use
ordinance, which was originally adopted on 9-14-1992.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.053  INSPECTION.



   (A)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the
WWTP Superintendent when the building sewer is ready for connection to the
public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the WWTP
Superintendent, or his or her representative. The connections shall be made
gas-tight and water-tight and verified by proper testing.



   (B)   All building sewers shall be air tested through the wye branch
at the public sewer connection, with public sewer tightly plugged off, after
connections at both ends are made and after all pipe is properly bedded and
backfilled at least to top of pipe and if backfill is completed, within two
weeks after completion of backfill. CCTV shall also be conducted in order to
determine the presence of leaks. At time of test, any openings into the
building drain inside the building shall be water trapped or plugged. Any
leakage from building sewer or building drain and plumbing shall be located
at test by CCTV and repaired to stand repetition of air testing without
leakage. Tests shall be performed at the expense of the property owner in the
presence of an independent inspector provided by the owner or developer. When
testing is completed, the temporary flow line plug shall be removed and a
permanent water-tight plug shall be placed in branch of test wye-branch and
carefully backfilled by hand and tamped to at least six inches above the top
of the branch. All results of air testing and CCTV shall be submitted to the
city prior to completion of sewer connection.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)



§ 52.054  PERFORMANCE/WARRANTY SURETY.



   (A)   General. A performance warranty surety shall be sufficient to
complete all construction items identified by the City Engineer, or his or
her designee, on the punch list submitted with the certificate of substantial
completion, and to repair infrastructure due to improper workmanship or
defective materials during the warranty periods. The warranty period is the
time period during which the developer guarantees the work to be free from
defective materials or improper workmanship. The warranty periods for roads
dedicated to the city shall be as follows.



      (1)   For the base courses, the warranty period shall begin at
the time of the substantial completion of the work and shall extend until the
application of the final asphalt course. In no case shall the warranty period
be less than one year from completion of work.



      (2)   For the final course of asphalt, the warranty period
shall be one year from the time of completion of the application of the final
surface course.



      (3)   For development projects that involve recording of a
plat, the warranty period for sanitary sewer facilities shall be not less
than three years from the date of the plat recording. The warranty period for
storm water facilities shall be one year from the date of plat recording.



      (4)   For development projects that do not involve recording
of a plat, the warranty period for sanitary sewer facilities shall be no less
than three years from the date of substantial completion. The warranty period
for storm water facilities shall be one year from the date of substantial
completion of work.



   (B)   Computation.



      (1)   The surety shall be computed as follows:



         (a)   One hundred percent of the punch list items; plus



         (b)   Ten percent of the cost estimate of the completed
project infrastructure, including roads, sanitary sewer facilities and storm
water facilities; plus



         (c)   Twenty percent of the sum of the above items to
cover contingencies



      (2)   The City Engineer shall compute the surety based on the
quantities of materials and the unit costs determined.



   (C)   Total project cost estimate.



      (1)   The cost estimate of the total project infrastructure
shall show the unit cost items and the actual quantities of construction for
roads, sanitary sewer facilities and storm water facilities.



      (b)   For the purpose of establishing the amount of the
surety, the total project cost shall not include such items as site
excavation, rock removal, trench rock for the sanitary sewer, testing of the
sanitary sewers, turn lanes constructed on state right-of-way or other
similar items.



   (D)   Reduction in surety for projects that require plat recording.
The surety may be reduced in accordance with the following.



      (1)   First reduction. The city will conduct an inspection 30
days after the plat is recorded. At that time, the surety may be reduced by
an amount equal to the punch list items that have been completed.



      (2)   Second reduction. One year after the plat is recorded,
the surety may be reduced by an amount equal to the punch list items that
have been completed and reduced by 10% of the total cost of the storm water
facilities.



      (3)   Third reduction. Two years after the plat is recorded,
the surety may be reduced by an amount equal to the punch list items that
have been completed. If the final surface course has been applied for at
least one year, then the surety may also be reduced by an amount equal to 10%
of the total cost of the final course of asphalt.



      (4)   Fourth reduction.



         (a)   Three years after the plat is recorded, the surety
may be reduced by an amount equal to the punch list items that have been
completed and reduced by 10% of the total cost of the sanitary sewer
facilities.



         (b)   If the final surface course has been applied for
at least one year, then the surety may also be reduced by an amount equal to
10% of the total cost of the final course of asphalt (if it has not been
previously reduced).



   (E)   Reduction in surety for projects that do not involve plat
recording. The surety may be reduced in accordance with the following.



      (1)   First reduction. The city will conduct an inspection 30
days after the date of substantial completion. At that time, the surety may
be reduced by an amount equal to the punch list items that have been
completed.



      (2)   Second reduction. One year after the date of substantial
completion, the surety may be reduced by an amount equal to the punch list
items that have been completed and reduced by 10% of the total cost of the
storm water facilities.



      (3)   Third reduction. Two years after the date of substantial
completion, the surety may be reduced by an amount equal to the punch list
items that have been completed. If the final surface course has been applied
for at least one year, then the surety may also be reduced by an amount equal
to 10% of the total cost of the final course of asphalt.



      (4)   Fourth reduction.



         (a)   Three years after the date of substantial
completion, the surety may be reduced by an amount equal to the punch list
items that have been completed and reduced by 10% of the total cost of the
sanitary sewer facilities.



         (b)   If the final surface course has been applied for
at least one year, then the surety may also be reduced by an amount equal to
10% of the total cost of the final course of asphalt (if it has not been
previously reduced).



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)



POLLUTANT DISCHARGE LIMITS



§ 52.065  GENERAL CONDITIONS.



   The following described substances, materials, waters or wastes shall
be limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentration or quantities
which: will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process or
equipment; will maintain and protect water quality in the receiving stream;
and will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property or constitute a
nuisance. The Pretreatment Coordinator may set additional limitations or
limitations more stringent than those established in the provisions below if,
in his or her opinion, more severe limitations are necessary to meet the
above objectives. In forming his or her opinion as to the acceptability of a
discharge, the Pretreatment Coordinator shall give consideration to such
factors as the quantity of subject waste in relation to flows and velocities
in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, the wastewater
treatment process employed, capacity of the wastewater treatment plant and
other pertinent factors.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)



§ 52.066  PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.



   (A)   No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly
or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with
performance of the POTW or cause pass through to the receiving stream. These
general prohibitions apply to all such users of the POTW whether or not the
user is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or any other
national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements.



   (B)   A user shall not contribute the following substances to the
POTW:



      (1)   Any liquids, solids or gases which, by reason of their
nature or quantity, are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction
with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other
way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. At no time shall the
wastewater exhibit a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140°F or 60°C using
the test methods specified in 40 C.F.R. § 261.21;



      (2)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.0 or
higher than 10.0 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the POTW;



      (3)   Any slug load of pollutants, including oxygen-demanding
pollutants (BOD and the like), released at a flow rate and/or concentration,
either individually or by interaction with other pollutants, that will cause
interference with the normal operation of the POTW;



      (4)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such
size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other
interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities, (i.e.,
wood, glass, ashes, unshredded garbage, cinders, paper products such as cups,
dishes, napkins and milk containers and the like);



      (5)   Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit
biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference,
but in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the
POTW that will result in a treatment plant influent temperature which exceeds
40°C (104°F);



      (6)   Any pollutant(s) which result in the presence of toxic
gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute
worker health and safety problems;



      (7)   Any substance which may cause the POTW’s effluent or
any other product of the POTW such as residues, sludges or scum, to be
unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation
process where the POTW is pursuing a reuse and reclamation program. In no
case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in
non-compliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or
regulations developed under § 405 of the Act; any criteria, guidelines, or
regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid
Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or
state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used;



      (8)   Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its
NPDES/KPDES permit and/or sludge disposal system permit;



      (9)   Any trucked or hauled pollutants except at discharge
points designated by the Pretreatment Coordinator; and



      (10)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or
isotopes, except as specifically approved by the Pretreatment Coordinator in
compliance with applicable state and federal regulations.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.067  RESTRICTED DISCHARGES.



   (A)   A user shall not contribute the following substances to the
POTW:



      (1)   Wastewater containing more than 100 mg/l of petroleum
oil, non-biodegradable cutting oils or products of mineral oil origin;



      (2)   Wastewater containing floatable oils, fat or grease,
whether emulsified or not, in excess of 200 mg/l or containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures 32°-150° (0°-65°C);



      (3)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage
grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, motels,
institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments or similar
places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for
the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers. Paper
and Styrofoam products are prohibited from being discharged into the sanitary
sewer system;



      (4)   Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient
quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants which: injure
or interfere with any wastewater treatment process; constitute a hazard to
humans or animals; causes the city to violate the terms of its KPDES permit;
prevents the use of acceptable sludge disposal methods; or exceed a
limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard;



      (5)   Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well
water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, condensate, deionized water,
non-contact cooling water and unpolluted industrial wastewater, unless
specifically authorized by the Pretreatment Coordinator;



      (6)   Any water or wastes which by interaction with other
water or wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form
suspended solids which interfere with the collection system or create a
condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes;



      (7)   Any wastewater with objectionable color which cannot be
removed to an acceptable level within the operation of the wastewater
treatment process unless otherwise specifically noted in an industrial user
permit;



      (8)   Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by
the Pretreatment Coordinator in an industrial user permit, and an
recognizable portions of human or animal anatomy;



      (9)   Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents
or other substances which will cause excessive foaming in the municipal
wastewater system;



      (10)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the city in compliance with
applicable state and/or federal regulations;



      (11)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not
amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes
employed to the extent required by the city’s NPDES/KPDES permit;



      (12)   Any waste(s) or wastewater(s) classified as a hazardous
waste by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) without a 60-day
prior notification of such discharge to the Pretreatment Coordinator. This
notification must include the name of the hazardous waste, the EPA hazardous
waste number, type of discharge, volume/mass of discharge and time of
occurrence(s). The Pretreatment Coordinator may prohibit or place conditions
on the discharge(s) at any time;



      (13)   (a)   Any water or wastes which have characteristics
based on a 24-hour composite sample, grab or a shorter period composite
sample, if more representative, that exceed the following normal maximum
domestic wastewater parameter concentrations:



 

Parameter
 
Maximum Allowable Concentration Without Surcharges


BOD
 
300 mg/l


COD
 
1,000 mg/l


NH3-N
 
30 mg/l


Oil and grease (total)
 
200 mg/l


TSS
 
300 mg/l



 



         (b)   Any person discharging wastewater exceeding the
maximum allowable concentration as noted above will be subject to a surcharge
fee for each pound loading over and above the surcharge limit. Any other
amenable constituents requiring the addition of specific chemicals for proper
treatment will also be subject to surcharge as noted on the industrial user
permit. Exceedance of the effluent limits specified above shall not be deemed
to constitute a violation of a permit condition or this chapter if the
appropriated surcharge fee is paid and the discharge does not cause
interference or pass through of the POTW.



      (14)   The following discharge limitations are established for
characteristics of any wastewaters to be discharged into the municipal sewer
system subject to any compliance schedule as established by the Pretreatment
Coordinator. All significant industrial users must comply with these
limitations where they are more stringent than applicable state and/or
federal regulations. In accordance with 40 C.F.R. part 403, these limitations
are considered pretreatment standards equivalent to the federal limitations
established in 40 C.F.R. Subch. N.



 

Parameter (mg/l)
 
Maximum Daily Concentration




Arsenic
 
2.40


Cadmium
 
0.05


Chromium, Hexavalent
 
0.86


Chromium, Total
 
2.77


Copper
 
3.38


Cyanide, Amenable
 
0.60


Lead
 
0.69


Mercury
 
0.13


Molybdenum
 
0.92


Nickel
 
1.43


Selenium
 
0.51


Silver
 
0.93


Zinc
 
2.61




 



      (15)   Any water or wastewater identified as causing, alone or
in conjunction with other wastewater, the treatment plant’s effluent to
fail a whole effluent toxicity (WET) test.



   (B)   The city reserves the right to establish limitations and
requirements which are more stringent than those required above or by state
or federal regulations if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives
presented in §§ 52.001 through 52.003 of this chapter or the general and
specific prohibitions in §§ 52.066 and 52.067 of this chapter.



   (C)   The city has received authority through the U.S. EPA and state
statutes to enforce the requirements of 40 C.F.R. Ch. I, Subch. N, parts 405
through 471, 40 C.F.R. part 403 and 40 C.F.R. part 35. All users shall comply
with the requirements of those regulations where applicable.



   (D)   The Pretreatment Coordinator, and/or his or her designee, is
authorized to establish local limits pursuant to 40 C.F.R. § 403.5(c). In
addition, the Pretreatment Coordinator may require the development of best
management practices (BMPs), by ordinance or in individual wastewater
discharge permits, to implement local limits and the requirements of this
chapter. Such BMPs shall be considered local limits and pretreatment
standards.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.068  DILUTION OF WASTEWATER DISCHARGE.



   No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way,
attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in
the federal categorical pretreatment standards, or in any pollutant specific
limitation developed by the city or state.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.069  GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.



   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the WWTP Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts,
or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that, such
interceptor shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of type and capacity approved by the
Pretreatment Coordinator and shall be located as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these
interceptors, the owner(s) shall be responsible for the proper removal and
disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain
records of the dates and means of disposal. The city may require reporting of
such information for their review. Any removal and hauling of the collected
materials not performed by the owner’s personnel must be performed by a
currently licensed waste disposal firm. Interceptors shall also comply with
applicable regulations of the county’s Health Department.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.070  SPECIAL INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Pursuant to the requirements imposed on publicly owned
wastewater treatment works by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972 and later amendments, all pretreatment standards
promulgated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency for new and existing
industrial dischargers to public sewer systems are hereby made a part of this
chapter. Any industrial waste discharge which violates these EPA pretreatment
standards shall be in violation of this chapter.



   (B)   Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided
or required for any waters or wastes, the industry shall be solely
responsible for the continued maintenance in satisfactory and effective
operation of such faculties and at their expense.



   (C)   Any person who transports septic tank, seepage pit or cesspool
contents, liquid industrial waste or other batch liquid waste and wishes to
discharge such waste to the public sewer system shall first have a valid
special waste hauler’s permit. Applications for permits shall be obtained
from the Pretreatment Coordinator. All applicants for a special waste
hauler’s permit shall complete the application form, pay the appropriate
fee, and receive a copy of the city’s regulations governing discharge to
sewers of liquid wastes from trucks. All persons receiving such permits shall
agree, by acceptance of the permit, to abide by all applicable provisions of
this chapter and any other special provisions that may be established by the
city as necessary for the proper operation and maintenance of the sewerage
system.



   (D)   In addition, any person holding a valid permit and wishing to
discharge to the wastewater treatment plant must submit to the WWTP
Superintendent a sample of each load prior to discharge. A fee and payment
schedule shall be established in the permit to cover cost of the required
analysis. The Pretreatment Coordinator may require proof of origin of the
hauled waste and analysis of the sample prior to discharge.



   (E)   It shall be illegal to discharge any batch liquid waste into
any manhole or other part of the public sewer system or any building sewer or
other facility that discharges to the public sewer system, except at
designated points of discharge specified by the city for such purpose.



   (F)   Any liquid waste hauler illegally discharging to the public
sewer system or discharging wastewater not authorized in the permit shall be
subject to immediate revocation of discharge privileges and further subject
to the penalties and enforcement actions prescribed in §§ 52.150 through
52.156 and 52.999 of this chapter including fines and imprisonment.



   (G)   Waste haulers who have been granted permission to discharge to
the public sewer system shall pay fees for such discharge in accordance with
a fee schedule established by the WWTP Superintendent and approved by the
city.



   (H)   Nothing in this chapter shall relieve waste haulers of the
responsibility for compliance with the county’s Health Department, state or
federal regulations.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.071  PROTECTION FROM ACCIDENTAL AND SLUG DISCHARGES.



   (A)   General.



      (1)   Each significant user shall provide protection from
accidental and/or slug discharges of prohibited materials or other substances
regulated by this chapter which adversely affects the POTW. Facilities to
prevent accidental and/or slug discharges of prohibited materials shall be
provided and maintained at the owner’s or user’s own cost and expense.
All significant industrial users are required to notify the WWTP
Superintendent immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the
potential for a slug discharge. Once every two years, the Pretreatment
Coordinator will determine whether each industrial user needs to develop or
update a plan to control slug discharges. If the Pretreatment Coordinator
determines that a slug control plan or revision is necessary, the plan shall
contain the following:



         (a)   Description of discharge practices;



         (b)   Description of stored chemicals;



         (c)   Procedures for notifying POTW; and



         (d)   Prevention procedures for spills.



      (2)   In the case of all possible or actual accidental and/or
slug discharges, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately
telephone and notify the POTW of the incident. The notification shall include
location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume and corrective
actions.



   (B)   Written notice. Within five days following an accidental
discharge, the user shall submit to the Pretreatment Coordinator a detailed
written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be
taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification
shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability
which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills or any
other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the
user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability which may be imposed by
this subchapter, the enforcement response plan or other applicable law.



   (C)   Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on
the user’s bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom
to call in the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that
all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are
advised of the emergency notification procedure.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.072  STATE REQUIREMENTS.



   State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any
case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations
or those in this chapter.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)



§ 52.073  CITY’S RIGHT OF REVISION.



   The city reserves the right, at the recommendation of the Pretreatment
Coordinator, to establish by majority vote of its Council, more stringent
limitations or requirements on discharges to the POTW if deemed necessary to
comply with the objectives presented in this chapter.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)



§ 52.074  FEDERAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.



   Upon the promulgation of the federal categorical pretreatment standards
for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if more
stringent than limitations imposed under this chapter for sources in that
subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this
chapter.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)



PRETREATMENT PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION



§ 52.085  WASTEWATER DISCHARGES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to the POTW any wastewater,
except as authorized by the city in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.



   (B)   Any agency, non-domestic user and/or industry outside the
jurisdiction of the city that desires to contribute wastewater to the POTW
must execute (through an authorized representative) an inter- jurisdictional
agreement, whereby the agency and/or industry agrees to be regulated by all
provisions of this chapter and state and federal regulations. An industrial
user permit may then be issued by the Pretreatment Coordinator in accordance
with § 52.086 of this chapter.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.086  INDUSTRIAL USER PERMITS.



   (A)   General. All significant industrial users proposing to connect
to or to contribute to the POTW shall obtain an industrial user permit before
connecting to or contributing to the POTW. The WWTP Superintendent may
require users to obtain an industrial user permit as necessary to carry out
the purposes of this chapter. Any violation of the terms and conditions of an
industrial user permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and shall
subject the user to the sanctions set out in §§ 52.145 through 52.156 and
52.999 of this chapter.



   (B)   Permit application. Users required to obtain an industrial
user permit shall complete and file with the city, an application in the form
prescribed by the city, and accompanied by a permit fee. New users shall
apply at least 90 days prior to connecting to or contributing to the POTW.
Existing permit holders shall apply no later than 30 days prior to expiration
of permit. In support of the application, the user shall submit, in units and
terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information:



      (1)   Name, address and location if different from the address;



      (2)   Applicable SIC number(s) according to the Standard
Industrial Classification Manual, United States Bureau of the Budget, 1987,
as amended;



      (3)   Wastewater constituents and characteristics as
determined by an analytical laboratory acceptable to the city; sampling and
analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the
EPA pursuant to § 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 C.F.R. part 136, as
amended;



      (4)   Time and duration of contribution;



      (5)   Average daily and 30-minute peak wastewater flow rates,
including daily, monthly and seasonal variation if any;



      (6)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans
and details to show all sewers, sewer connections and appurtenances by the
size, location and elevation;



      (7)   Description of activities, facilities and plant
processes on the premises including all materials which are or could be
discharged;



      (8)   Where known, the nature and concentration of any
pollutants in the discharge which are limited by the city, state or federal
pretreatment standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and if not,
whether additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable
pretreatment standards;



      (9)   (a)   If additional pretreatment will be required to
meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will
provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule
shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable
pretreatment standard;



         (b)   The following conditions shall apply to this
schedule:



            1.   The schedule must be acceptable to the city;



            2.   The schedule shall contain increments of
progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major
events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment
required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards; and



            3.   Not later than 14 days following each date in
the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a
progress report to the Pretreatment Coordinator including, as a minimum,
whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such
date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment
of progress and the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user
to return the construction to the schedule established.



      (10)   Each product produced by type, amount, process or
processes and the rate of production;



      (11)   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day);



      (12)   Number of employees, and hours of operation of plant
and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system;



      (13)   Any other information as may be deemed by the
Pretreatment Coordinator to be necessary to evaluate the permit application;
and



      (14)   A copy of the industry’s written environmental
control program, comparable document or policy.



   (C)   Permit issuance. The city shall evaluate the data furnished by
the user and may require additional information. After evaluation and
acceptance of the data furnished, the Pretreatment Coordinator or his
designee may issue an industrial user permit subject to terms and conditions
provided herein. The WWTP Superintendent shall provide notice to each
significant industrial user of the issuance of the user’s industrial user
permit. Any person, including the user, may petition the WWTP Superintendent
to reconsider the terms of a permit within 15 days of notice of its issuance.
The following conditions apply:



      (1)   Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be
deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal;



      (2)   In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the
permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection and the
alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the permit;



      (3)   The effectiveness of the permit shall not be stayed
during the appeal;



      (4)   The WWTP Superintendent may forward the appeal to the
Mayor. If the Mayor fails to act within 30 days of receipt of the appeal, a
request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to
reconsider a permit, not to issue a permit or not to modify a permit shall be
considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review; and



      (5)   Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final
administrative action and/or the permit must do so by filing a complaint with
the county’s Circuit Court in accordance with the appropriate procedures of
that court and any statute of limitations.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)



§ 52.087  PERMIT MODIFICATIONS.



   The WWTP Superintendent may modify an industrial user permit for good
cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:



   (A)   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local
pretreatment standards or requirements;



   (B)   To address significant alterations or additions to the
user’s operation, processes or wastewater volume or character since the
time of the individual wastewater discharge permit issuance;



   (C)   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or
permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;



   (D)   Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a
threat to the city’s POTW, personnel, biosolids disposal and/or the
receiving stream;



   (E)   Violation of any terms or conditions of the industrial user
permit;



   (F)   Misrepresentations of failure to fully disclose all relevant
facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required
reporting;



   (G)   Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical
pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 C.F.R. § 403.13; or



   (H)   To correct typographical or other errors in the discharge
permit.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)



§ 52.088  PERMIT CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Industrial user permits shall be expressly subject to all
provisions of this chapter and all other applicable regulations, user charges
and fees established by the city.



   (B)   Permits may contain the following:



      (1)   The unit surcharges or schedule of other charges and
fees for the wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer;



      (2)   Effluent limits, including best management practices, on
the average and/or maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics;



      (3)   Limits on average and/or maximum rate and time of
discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization;



      (4)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of
inspection and sampling facilities;



      (5)   Specifications for monitoring programs which may include
sampling location; frequency of sampling; number, type and standards for
tests and reporting schedule;



      (6)   Compliance schedules;



      (7)   Requirements for submission of technical reports or
discharge reports;



      (8)   Requirements for maintaining and retaining, for a
minimum of three years, all plant records relating to pretreatment and/or
wastewater discharge as specified by the city, and affording the city access
thereto as required by 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(o)(2);



      (9)   Requirements for notification of the city of any new
introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the
volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the
wastewater treatment system;



      (10)   Requirements for notification of slug discharges;



      (11)   The permit may require the user to reimburse the city
for all expenses related to monitoring, sampling and testing performed at the
direction of the Pretreatment Coordinator and deemed necessary by the city to
verify that the user is in compliance with said permit;



      (12)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to
ensure compliance with this chapter;



      (13)   A statement that indicates the industrial wastewater
discharge permit issuance date, expiration date and effective date;



      (14)   A statement that the industrial wastewater discharge
permit is non-transferable;



      (15)   Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined
by the Pretreatment Coordinator, to be necessary; and



      (16)   A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties
for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable
compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance
beyond that required by applicable federal, state or local law.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)



§ 52.089  ALTERNATIVE DISCHARGE LIMITS.



   (A)   Where an effluent from a categorical industrial process(es) is
mixed prior to treatment with wastewater other than that generated by the
regulated process, fixed alternative discharge limits may be derived for the
discharge permit by the Pretreatment Coordinator. These alternative limits
shall be applied to the mixed effluent and shall be calculated using the
Combined Wastestream Formula and/or Flow-Weighted Average Formula, as defined
in § 52.003 of this chapter.



   (B)   Where the effluent limits in a categorical pretreatment
standard are expressed only in terms of mass of pollutants per unit of
production (production-based standard), the Pretreatment Coordinator may
convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as mass of
pollutant discharged per day or of effluent concentration for purposes of
calculating effluent permit limitations applicable to the permittee. The
permittee shall be subject to all permit limits calculated in this manner
under 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(c) and must fully comply with these alternative
limits.



   (C)   All categorical users subject to production-based standards
must report production rates annually so that alternative permit limits can
be calculated if necessary. The categorical user must notify the Pretreatment
Coordinator 30 days in advance of any major change in production levels that
will affect the limits for the discharge permit.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)



§ 52.090  PERMIT DURATION.



   Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five
years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year or may be stated
to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply for permit reissuance a
minimum of 60 days prior to the expiration of the user’s existing permit.
The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the
city during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements as
identified in §§ 52.065 through 52.074 of this chapter are modified or
other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes
in their permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any
changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time
schedule for compliance.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)



§ 52.091  PERMIT TRANSFER.



   Industrial user permits are issued to a specific user for a specific
operation. An industrial user permit shall not be reassigned or transferred
or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises or a new or changed
operation without a 30-day prior notification to the Pretreatment Coordinator
and provision of a copy of the existing permit to the new owner. The
Pretreatment Coordinator may deny the transfer of the permit if it is deemed
necessary.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)



§ 52.092  COMPLIANCE DATA REPORTING.



   (A)   (1)   Within 90 days following the date for final
compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards or, in the case
of a new user, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into
the POTW, any user subject to federal categorical pretreatment standards and
requirements shall submit, to the Pretreatment Coordinator, a report
indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge
from the regulated process which are limited by categorical pretreatment
standards and requirements and the average and maximum daily flow for these
process units in the user’s facility which are limited by such categorical
pretreatment standards or requirements. The report shall state whether the
applicable categorical pretreatment standards or requirements are being met
on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional pretreatment and time
schedule is necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable
categorical pretreatment standards or requirements.



      (2)   This statement shall be signed by an authorized
representative of the user.



   (B)   Where compliance schedules are required, the following
conditions shall apply.



      (1)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the
form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to
the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the
user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but
are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final
plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing
construction and beginning and conducting routine operation).



      (2)   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months.



      (3)   The user shall submit a progress report to the
Pretreatment Coordinator no later than 14 days following each date in the
schedule and the final date of compliance including, at a minimum, whether or
not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay and,
if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the
established schedule.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)



§ 52.093  PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS.



   (A)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may require significant
industrial users to submit at least once every six months, unless required
more frequently by the industrial user permit (or on dates specified in the
industrial user permit), a report indicating, at a minimum, the nature and
concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such
pretreatment standards or the discharge permit. The report shall also include
the chain-of-custody (COC) forms, field data and any other information
required by the Superintendent. In addition, the Pretreatment Coordinator may
require the submittal on the report of a record of all daily flows. At the
discretion of the Pretreatment Coordinator and in consideration of such
factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles and the
like, the Pretreatment Coordinator may agree to alter the months during which
the above reports are to be submitted. All periodic compliance reports must
be signed and certified in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.12 and § 52.101
of this chapter.



   (B)   (1)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the
user’s discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities
shall be properly operated, kept clean and maintained in good working order
at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good
working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results
are unrepresentative of its discharge. All analyses shall be performed by a
laboratory acceptable to the city. Analytical procedures shall be in
accordance with procedures established by the U.S. EPA Administrator pursuant
to § 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 C.F.R. part 136 and amendments
thereto and 40 C.F.R. part 261 or with any other test procedures approved by
the U.S. EPA Administrator. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with
the techniques approved by the U.S. EPA Administrator. Except as indicated in
divisions (B)(2)(a) and (B)(2)(b) below, the user must collect wastewater
samples using 24-hour flow-proportional composite sampling techniques, unless
time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the
Superintendent. Where time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling
is authorized by the Superintendent, the samples must be representative of
the discharge. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified
in 40 C.F.R. part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples
collected during a 24-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as
follows: for cyanide, total phenols and sulfides the samples may be
composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil
and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite
samples for other parameters unaffected by the composting procedures as
documented in approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by the
Superintendent, as appropriate.



      (2)   In addition, grab samples may be required to show
compliance with instantaneous limits:



         (a)   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH,
cyanide, total phenols, sulfides and volatile organic compounds must be
obtained using grab collection techniques; and



         (b)   For sampling required in support of baseline
monitoring and 90-day compliance reports required in 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b)
and (d), a minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total
phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for
facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist; for facilities
for which historical sampling data are available, the Superintendent may
authorize a lower minimum.



      (3)   For the reports required by 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(e) and
(h), the industrial user is required to collect the number of grab samples
necessary to assess and assure compliance with applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements.



   (C)   Where 40 C.F.R. part 136 does not include a sampling or
analytical technique for the pollutant(s) in question, sampling and analysis
shall be performed in accordance with the procedures set forth in the EPA
publication, Sampling and Analysis Procedures for Screening of Industrial
Effluents for Priority Pollutants, April 1977, and amendments thereto, or
with any other sampling and analytical procedures approved by the U.S. EPA
Administrator.



   (D)   A baseline monitoring report (BMR) must be submitted to the
Pretreatment Coordinator by all categorical industrial users at least 90 days
prior to initiation of discharge to the sanitary sewer. Submittal of the
permit application required by the city shall also satisfy this requirement.
The BMR or permit application must contain, at a minimum, the following:



      (1)   Production data. A process description, SIC code number,
raw materials used, chemicals used, final product, pretreatment industrial
category (if applicable) and a schematic which indicates points of discharge
to the sewer system;



      (2)   Identifying information to include name, address of
facility, owner(s), contact person and any other permits held by the facility;



      (3)   Wastewater characteristics: total plant flow; types of
discharges; average and maximum flows from each process;



      (4)   Nature/concentration of pollutants: analytical results
for all pollutants regulated by this chapter and/or any applicable federal
pretreatment standard and sample type and location. All analyses must conform
with 40 C.F.R. part 136 and amendments thereto;



      (5)   Information concerning any pretreatment equipment used
to treat the facility’s discharge;



      (6)   Compliance certification. A statement, reviewed by the
user’s authorized representative as defined in § 52.002 of this chapter
and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment
standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether
additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is
required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements; and



      (7)   Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or
O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest
schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the
applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this
section must meet the requirements set out in this section.



   (E)   New sources shall give estimates of the information requested
in divisions (C) and (D) above, but at no time shall a new source commence
discharge(s) to the public sewer of substances that do not meet provisions of
this chapter. All new sources must be in compliance with all provisions of
this chapter, state and federal pretreatment regulations prior to
commencement of discharge to the public sewer.



   (F)   Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions
shall apply to all compliance schedules required by this chapter.



      (1)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the
form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to
the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the
user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards.



      (2)   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months.



      (3)   The user shall submit a progress report to the
Superintendent no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and
the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it
complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay and, if
appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established
schedule; and in no event shall more than nine months elapse between such
progress reports to the Superintendent.



   (G)   Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter
shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of
information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this
chapter, any additional records of information obtained pursuant to
monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements
and documentation associated with best management practices as may be
required. Records shall include the date, exact place, method and time of
sampling and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses
were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or
methods used and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain
available for a period of at least three years. This period shall
automatically be extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the
user or the city or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer
retention by the Superintendent.



   (H)   (1)   The Superintendent may reduce the requirement for
periodic compliance reports to a requirement to report no less frequently
than once a year, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment
standard or by the U.S. EPA or the state, where the industrial user’s total
categorical wastewater flow does not exceed any of the following:



         (a)   Five thousand gallons per day or 0.01% of the
WWTP’s dry-weather design hydraulic capacity, whichever is smaller, as
measured by a continuous flow monitoring device unless the user discharges in
batches;



         (b)   One-one hundredths percent of the design
dry-weather organic treatment capacity of the WWTP; and



         (c)   One-one hundredths percent of the maximum
allowable headworks loading for any pollutant regulated by the applicable
categorical pretreatment standard for which approved local limits were
developed in accordance with §§ 52.065 through 52.074 of this chapter.



      (2)   Reduced reporting is not available to industrial users
that have in the last two years been in significant non-compliance as defined
in § 52.099 of this chapter. In addition, reduced reporting is not available
to an industrial user with daily flow rates, production levels or pollutant
levels that vary so significantly that, in the opinion of the Superintendent,
decreasing the reporting requirement for this industrial user would result in
data that are not representative of conditions occurring during the reporting
period.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)



§ 52.094  PERMIT VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   All significant industrial users must notify the Pretreatment
Coordinator within 24 hours of first becoming aware of a permit violation.
This notification shall include the date of violation, the parameter violated
and the amount in exceedance.



   (B)   The user shall immediately repeat the sampling and analysis of
the parameter(s) in question and submit the results to the Pretreatment
Coordinator within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. Exception
to this regulation is only if the city performs the sampling within the same
time period for the same parameter(s) in question.



   (C)   Compliance with the terms of an industrial user permit shall
be deemed in compliance with the terms of this chapter.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)



§ 52.095  MONITORING.



   (A)   (1)   The city shall require significant industrial users
to provide and operate, at the user’s own expense, monitoring facilities to
allow inspection, sampling and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or
internal drainage system. The monitoring facility should normally be situated
on the user’s premises, but the city may, when such a location would be
impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be
constructed in a public right-of-way. The Pretreatment Coordinator shall
review and approve the location, plans and specifications for such monitoring
facilities and may require them to be constructed to provide for the separate
monitoring and sampling of industrial waste and sanitary sewage flows.



      (2)   There shall be ample room in or near such sampling
manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for
analysis. The facility shall be designed and maintained in a manner such that
the safety of city and industrial personnel shall be foremost. The facility,
sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a proper
operating condition at the expense of the user.



      (3)   Whether constructed on public or private property, the
sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the
city’s requirements and all applicable local construction standards and
specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following
approval of the location, plans and specifications.



   (B)   All sampling analyses done in accordance with approved federal
EPA procedures by the industrial user during a reporting period, as required
by the user’s industrial user permit or by the city, shall be submitted to
the Pretreatment Coordinator.



   (C)   The industrial user must receive the approval of the
Pretreatment Coordinator before changing the sampling point and/or monitoring
facilities to be used in all required sampling.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)



§ 52.096  INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.



   (A)   The Pretreatment Coordinator shall inspect the facilities of
any user to ascertain whether the purposes of this chapter are being met and
all requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises
where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the Pretreatment
Coordinator, or his or her representative, ready access at all reasonable
times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
copying records, records examination or in the performance of any of their
duties.



   (B)   The city, approval authority and EPA shall have the right to
set up on the user’s property such devices as are necessary to conduct
sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where
a user has security measures in force which would require proper
identification and clearance before entry into his or her premises, the user
shall make necessary arrangements with his or her security guards so that
upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city,
approval authority and EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the
purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)



§ 52.097  PRETREATMENT.



   All significant industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater
treatment as required to comply with this chapter and achieve compliance with
any applicable federal categorical pretreatment standards within the time
limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations. The city
may require the development of a compliance schedule for installation of
pretreatment technology and/or equipment by any industrial user that cannot
meet discharge limits required by this chapter. Any facilities required to
pretreat wastewater to a level required by this chapter shall be provided,
operated and maintained at the user’s expense. Detailed plans showing the
pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the
Pretreatment Coordinator for review, and shall be acceptable to the city
before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating
procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of
modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent that complies with
the provisions of this chapter. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment
facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to
the city prior to the user’s initiation of the changes.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)



§ 52.098  ANNUAL PUBLICATION.



   (A)   The city shall annually publish in the largest newspaper of
general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the
jurisdictions served by the POTW a list of significant users which were in
significant non-compliance with any pretreatment requirements or standards.
The notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken against
the user(s) during the same 12 months.



   (B)   All records relating to the city’s pretreatment program
shall be made available to officials of the EPA or approval authority upon
request. All records shall be maintained for a minimum of three years in
accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(O)(2).



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)



§ 52.099  SIGNIFICANT NON-COMPLIANCE.



   A USER is defined as being in significant non-compliance when it
commits one or more of the following conditions:



   (A)   Causes imminent endangerment to human health or the
environment or results in the exercise of emergency authority under 40 C.F.R.
part 403 to halt or prevent such a discharge;



   (B)   Involves failure to report non-compliance accurately;



   (C)   Results in a chronic violation defined here as 66% or more of
all measurements taken during a six-month period that exceed (by any
magnitude) the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same
pollutant parameter;



   (D)   Results in a technical review criteria (TRC) violation defined
here as 33% or more of all measurements for each pollutant parameter taken
during a six-month period that equal or exceed the product of the daily
maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC =
1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats and O&G and 1.2 for all other pollutants, except pH).
For pH violations, see the definition in § 52.002 of this chapter;



   (E)   Any violation of a pretreatment effluent limit that the
Pretreatment Coordinator determines has caused, alone or in combination with
other discharges, interference or pass through or has endangered the health
of the POTW personnel or the public;



   (F)   Any discharge causing imminent endangerment to human
health/welfare or to the environment or resulting in the Pretreatment
Coordinator’s use of his or her emergency authority to halt or prevent such
a discharge;



   (G)   Violations of compliance schedule milestones, failure to
comply with schedule milestones for starting or completing construction or
attaining final compliance by 90 days or more after the schedule date;



   (H)   Failure to provide required reports within 45 days of the due
date; or



   (I)   Any violation or group of violations, which may include a
violation of best management practices, which the Superintendent determines
will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local
pretreatment program.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.100  CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.



   (A)   Information and data on a user obtained from reports,
questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from
inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency
without restriction unless the user specifically requests in writing and is
able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such
information would divulge information, processes or methods of production
entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user.



   (B)   (1)   When requested by the person furnishing a report, the
portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes
shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made
available to all governmental agencies for uses related to this chapter, the
NPDES/KPDES permit, sludge disposal system permit and/or the pretreatment
programs upon request.



      (2)   Such portions of a report shall be available for use by
the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings
involving the person furnishing the report.



      (3)   Wastewater constituents and characteristics shall not be
recognized as confidential information and shall be available to the public
without restriction.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)



§ 52.101  SIGNATORY REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   (1)   All applications, reports or information submitted to
the city shall be signed and certified in accordance with the following
requirements.



      (2)   Written designation of the signatory official must be
received by the city prior to acceptance of any application or other required
document.



   (B)   All permit applications shall be signed:



      (1)   For a corporation: by a principal executive officer of
at least the level of vice-president or plant manager; and



      (2)   For a partnership or sole proprietorship: by a general
partner or the proprietor, respectively.



   (C)   All other correspondence, reports and self-monitoring reports
shall be signed by a person described above or by a duly authorized
representative of that person. A person is a duly authorized representative
only if:



      (1)   The authorization is made in writing by a person
described above; and



      (2)   The authorization specifies either an individual or a
position having facility or activity, such as the position of plant manager,
superintendent or position of equivalent responsibility.



   (D)   Any person signing a document under this section shall make
the following written certification: “I certify under penalty of law that
this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or
supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified
personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my
inquiry of the person(s) who manage the system, or those persons directly
responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to
the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware
that there are significant penalties for submitting false information,
including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.”



   (E)   A facility determined to be a non-significant categorical
industrial user by the Superintendent pursuant to § 52.002 of this chapter
must annually submit the following certification statement signed in
accordance with the signatory requirements in this section. This
certification must accompany any alternative report required by the
Superintendent: “Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly
responsible for managing compliance with the Categorical Pretreatment
Standards under 40 C.F.R. [Part], I certify that, to the best of my knowledge
and belief that during the period from [month/day], [year] to [month/day],
[year]: (a) The facility described as [Facility Name] met the definition of a
Non-Significant Categorical Industrial User as described in Article 1(B)
Definitions of this chapter; (b) The facility complied with all applicable
Pretreatment Standards and Requirements during this reporting period; and (c)
the facility never discharged more than 100 gallons of total categorical
wastewater on any given day during this reporting period.”



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)



FEES AND CHARGES



§ 52.115  PURPOSE.



   This subchapter provides for the recovery of costs from users of the
POTW for the implementation of the program established herein. The applicable
charges or fees shall be set forth in the city’s schedule of charges and
fees.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013; Ord. 014-165, passed 10-13-2014)



§ 52.116  CHARGES AND FEES.



   (A)   The city may adopt charges and fees which may include:



      (1)   Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and
operating the city’s pretreatment program;



      (2)   Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance
procedures;



      (3)   Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and
construction;



      (4)   Fees for permit applications;



      (5)   Fees for filing appeals;



      (6)   Fees for consistent removal by the POTW of excessive
strength conventional pollutants;



      (7)   Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out
the requirements contained herein; and



      (8)   Fees to recover maintenance costs for maintenance
operation above and beyond those considered to be a result of normal wear and
tear.



   (B)   These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this
chapter and are separate from all other fees chargeable by the city.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013; Ord. 014-165, passed 10-13-2014)



§ 52.117  CONSUMER PRICE INDEX.



   (A)   The sewer rates adopted by the city in fiscal year ending
6-30-2004 shall be adjusted for increase/decrease in the Consumer Price Index
as reported by the U.S. Government, Department of Commerce, beginning
1-1-2006 and the rate shall be adjusted each anniversary.



   (B)   The Mayor of the city is authorized and directed to report to
the Council the reported change in the Consumer Price Index (CPI) and the
Mayor is directed to adjust the sewer rate adopted in fiscal year ending
6-30-2004 by the applicable change in the Consumer Price Index.



(Ord. 005-664, passed 6-21-2005)



§ 52.118  WASTEWATER HAULERS; CHARGES.



   (A)   Rates and charges. For each 1,000 gallons or portion thereof
of wastewater (sewerage) discharged by a wastewater (sewerage) hauler for
treatment into the city’s wastewater treatment plant, there shall be fee of
$50.45 for residential users and $64.15 for commercial users, plus an
applicable surcharge as established by any ordinances of the city.



   (B)   Billing collection, penalty.



      (1)   The charges aforesaid shall be billed monthly, on
statements which shall be issued on or about the first day of each month, and
all bills for such service shall be considered due and payable 15 days after
the date of issue.



      (2)   If a bill is not paid within 15 days after such date of
issue, such bill shall be considered delinquent, and there shall be imposed a
penalty on each bill not so paid, in an amount equal to 10% of the charges
(other than sale tax) shown on the face amount of such delinquent bill. The
city may serve a customer written notice of his or her delinquency and of the
fact that such customer is entitled, upon written request, to a hearing on
the question of termination of service. If such bill is not paid within ten
days after the mailing of such notice and, if no hearing is requested, or if
a hearing is requested and timely held, and such customer’s delinquency is
thereby established, the city may disconnect the service of such wastewater
(sewerage) hauler without further notice. If the service is discontinued by
reason of delinquency in the payment of any bill, said service shall not be
continued until the wastewater (sewerage) hauler pays all charges and
penalties owed, plus the amount of $20 as a service charge.



      (3)   If any deadline date falls on a Sunday or legal holiday,
such deadline shall not expire until the next secular day thereafter.



   (C)   Miscellaneous provisions.



      (1)   Prior to the discharging of any sewerage into the
city’s wastewater treatment plant, a permission receipt shall be obtained
from the operator of the plant, or his or her designated representative.



      (2)   The city’s wastewater treatment plant operator shall
establish a discharge point for use by any wastewater (sewerage) hauler. Only
this discharge point may be used for discharge of sewerage. Any violation of
this provision shall result in immediate termination of the discharge
privilege.



      (3)   The wastewater (sewerage) hauler shall maintain the area
surrounding the discharge point in a safe, clean manner insuring that all
debris, spillage or any other unsightly matter is removed from the discharge
point. Any violation of this provision shall result in immediate termination
of the discharge privilege.



      (4)   The wastewater (sewerage) hauler’s employee and/or
personnel shall not remain on the city’s wastewater treatment plant
property, except while their truck load is being discharged.



      (5)   The wastewater (sewerage) hauler will be permitted to
discharge their truck loads of sewerage at the city’s wastewater treatment
plant between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday,
excluding holidays designated by the Mayor of the city.



      (6)   The city reserves the right to terminate and/or suspend
a wastewater (sewerage) haulers discharge at any time because of plant
overload, equipment failure or breakdown, obtaining test results which are
beyond permitted limitations, or because of administrative actions by the
state, or as needed by decision of the wastewater treatment plant operator.



      (7)   Before a wastewater (sewerage) hauler is permitted to
discharge any sewerage into the city’s wastewater treatment plant it must
produce and file with the sewer plant operator, or his or her designee, the
following information:



         (a)   Type of waste:



            1.   Septic tank: domestic household only;



            2.   Septic tank: commercial/industrial; and



            3.   Portable toilets.



         (b)   Name of person, address and telephone number of
waste generator;



         (c)   Date waste removed from generators property; and



         (d)   Approximate volume (gallons).



      (8)   A wastewater (sewerage) hauler shall furnish to the
city, a copy of the wastewater (sewerage) hauler’s state permit, vehicle
license number(s); employees names and addresses and insurance coverage
before any discharge is allowed.



(Ord. 998-441, passed 8-10-1998)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.119  JIM BEAM SANITARY SEWER; CHARGES.



   (A)   (1)   The City Council finds Salt River Enterprises, Inc.
has paid the sum of $500,000 for the construction of the Jim Beam Sanitary
Sewer line. The City Council finds this payment is the advanced payment of
the system development fees of this line.



      (2)   The City Council further finds the payment is for the
service fee for the 107 acres, more or less of Salt River Enterprises, Inc.,
referred as the “Bourbon Trail Business Park” as shown by plat.



   (B)   The City Council authorizes and directs the collection of
payment of subsequent developments connecting and/or having use of the
described “Jim Beam Sanitary Sewer” line now referred as “The
Shepherdsville South Bullitt Interceptor” on an acreage assessment of the
sum of $2,500 per acre in addition to any other assessments, fees or
connecting costs and other charges with the use of this sanitary sewer line.



   (C)   The City Council directs and authorizes the City Clerk to
collect this fee upon the application for access to, or connecting to this
“Jim Beam Sanitary Sewer” line now referred as “The Shepherdsville
South Bullitt Interceptor”.



(Ord. 014-170, passed 12-29-2014)



POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS



§ 52.130  RIGHT TO ENTER PREMISES.



   The Pretreatment Coordinator and other duly authorized employees and
representatives of the city and authorized representatives of applicable
federal and state regulatory agencies bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing pertinent to
discharges to the public sewer system in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)



§ 52.131  RIGHT TO OBTAIN INFORMATION REGARDING DISCHARGE.



   Duly authorized employees of the city and representatives of the state
and EPA are authorized to obtain information including, but not limited to,
copying of records concerning character, strength and quantity of industrial
wastes which have a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the
wastewater collection system.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)



§ 52.132  ACCESS TO EASEMENTS.



   Duly authorized employees and representatives of the city bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the city holds an easement for the purpose of, but
not limited to, construction, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling,
repair and maintenance of any portions of the wastewater facilities lying
within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any on said easement
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the easement pertaining to
the private property involved.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)



§ 52.133  SAFETY.



   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in § 52.132 of this chapter, all duly authorized employees of the city shall
observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the
property owner. The city shall secure the property owner against loss or
damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and
demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the property
owner and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such
may be caused by negligence or failure of the property owner to maintain safe
conditions as required by this chapter.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)



ENFORCEMENT



§ 52.145  GENERAL.



   (A)   The city, through the Pretreatment Coordinator, or his or her
designee, to ensure compliance with this chapter, and as permitted through 40
C.F.R. Subch. N and 401 KAR 5:055, may take the following enforcement steps
against users in non-compliance with the ordinance. The remedies available to
the POTW include injunctive relief, administrative, civil and criminal
penalties, immediate discontinuance of discharges and the publishing of the
list of significant violators annually. The enforcement authority shall be
vested in the Pretreatment Coordinator, or his or her designee.



   (B)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may suspend the wastewater
treatment service and/or an industrial user permit when such suspension is
necessary, in the opinion of the Pretreatment Coordinator, in order to stop
an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent
or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, to the
environment, causes interference to the POTW or causes the POTW to violate
any condition of its NPDES/KPDES permit.



   (C)   Any user notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment
service and/or the industrial user permit shall immediately stop or eliminate
the contribution. In the event of a failure of the person to comply
voluntarily with the suspension order, the city shall take such steps as
deemed necessary including immediate severance of the sewer connection to
prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any
individuals. The city may reinstate the industrial user permit and/or the
wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the
non-complying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user
describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the city within 15 days
of the date of occurrence.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)



§ 52.146  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   (A)   Any user found to be violating any provisions of this chapter,
wastewater permit or any order issued hereunder, shall be served by the city
with written notice stating the nature of the violation(s). Within ten days
of the receipt date of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a
plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include
specific required actions, shall be submitted to the Pretreatment
Coordinator. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of potential
liability for any violation occurring before or after receipt of the notice
of violation.



   (B)   If the violations persist or the explanation and/or plan are
not adequate, the city’s response shall be more formal and commitments (or
schedules as appropriate) for compliance will be established in an
enforceable document. The enforcement response selected will be related to
the seriousness of the violation. Enforcement responses will be escalated if
compliance is not achieved expeditiously after the initial action.
Identification of significant non-compliance as defined in § 52.099 of this
chapter will require a formal enforcement action.



   (C)   The full scale of enforcement actions will be as detailed in
the city’s Enforcement Response Plan.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)



§ 52.147  ADMINISTRATIVE ORDERS.



   (A)   Any user discharging in violation of this chapter or other
pretreatment standards or requirements or is determined to be a chronic or
persistent violator or who is determined to be in significant non-
compliance, shall be ordered to appear before the city. At said appearance,
an administrative order may be given to the non-conforming user and an
administrative fine assessed. The fine shall be determined on a case-by-case
basis but consistent with the enforcement response plan. The Pretreatment
Coordinator shall consider the type and severity of violations, duration of
violation, number of violations, severity of impact on the POTW, impact on
human health, users economic benefit from violation, history of violations,
good faith of the user and shall be a non-arbitrary, but appropriate, amount.



   (B)   The administrative order may take any of the following three
forms:



      (1)   Consent orders. The Pretreatment Coordinator, or his or
her designee, is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of
voluntary compliance or other similar documents establishing an agreement
with the industrial user responsible for the non-compliance. Such orders will
include specific action to be taken by the industrial user to correct the
non-compliance within a time period also specified by the order. Consent
orders shall have the same force and effect as orders issued pursuant to §
52.149 of this chapter.



      (2)   Compliance orders. When the Pretreatment Coordinator, or
his or her designee, finds that an industrial user has violated or continues
to violate the ordinance or a permit or order issued hereunder, he or she may
issue an order to the industrial user responsible for the discharge directing
that, following a specified time period, sewer service shall be discontinued
unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances
have been installed and are properly operated. Orders may also contain such
other requirements as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to
address the non-compliance, including the installation of pretreatment
technology, additional monitoring and best management practices.



      (3)   Cease and desist orders. When the Pretreatment
Coordinator finds that an industrial user has violated or continues to
violate this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, the
Pretreatment Coordinator may issue an order to cease and desist all such
violations and direct those persons in non- compliance to:



         (a)   Comply forthwith; or



         (b)   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive
action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened
violation, including halting operations and terminating the discharge.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)



§ 52.148  SHOW CAUSE HEARING.



   (A)   The Pretreatment Coordinator, or his or her designee, may
issue to any user who causes or contributes to violations of this chapter,
wastewater permit or order issued hereunder, an order to appear and show
cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall
be served on the user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held
by the Pretreatment Coordinator regarding the violation, the reasons why the
action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action and directing the user
to show cause, before the Pretreatment Coordinator, why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be
served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt
requested) at least ten days before the hearing. Service may be made on any
agent or officer of the industrial user. Whether or not a duly notified
industrial user or its representative appears, immediate enforcement action
may be pursued.



   (B)   The city may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence,
or designate a representative to:



      (1)   Issue, in the name of the city, notices of hearings
requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of
evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearing;



      (2)   Take the evidence; and/or



      (3)   Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the city for
action thereon.



   (C)   At any hearing held pursuant to this chapter, testimony may be
taken under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so recorded,
will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the
hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof.



   (D)   After the city has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an
order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a
specified time period, the sewer service will be discontinued unless adequate
treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are properly
operated. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may
be issued.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)



§ 52.149  ADDITIONAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES.



   (A)   Performance bonds. The Pretreatment Coordinator may decline to
reissue a permit to any industrial user which has failed to comply with the
provisions of this chapter or any order or previous permit issued hereunder
unless such user first files with it a satisfactory bond, payable to the
POTW, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the Pretreatment
Coordinator to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance.



   (B)   Liability insurance. The Pretreatment Coordinator may decline
to reissue a permit to any industrial user which has failed to comply with
the provisions of this chapter or any order or previous permit issued
hereunder, unless the industrial user first submits proof that it has
obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair POTW damage
caused by its discharge.



   (C)   Remedies non-exclusive.



      (1)   The remedies provided for in this chapter are not
exclusive. The Superintendent may take any, all or combination of these
actions against a non-compliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations
will be in accordance with the city’s enforcement response plan. However,
the Superintendent may take any action described in this chapter against any
user when he or she determines that the circumstances warrant.



      (2)   Further, the Superintendent is empowered to take more
than one enforcement action against any non-compliant user.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)



§ 52.150  WRITTEN NOTICE.



   (A)   (1)   Any user found to be violating any provision of this
chapter or a wastewater permit or order issued hereunder, shall be served by
the Pretreatment Coordinator, or his or her designee, with written notice
stating the nature of the violation.



      (2)   The offender shall permanently remedy all violations
upon receipt of this notice.



   (B)   (1)   As contained in §§ 52.145 through 52.149 of this
chapter, the notice may be of several forms.



      (2)   Also as contained in §§ 52.150 through 52.156 and
52.999 of this chapter, penalties of various forms may be levied against
users for violations of this chapter.



      (3)   The penalties, if levied, shall range from publication
of violators in the local newspaper to administrative penalties of up to
$1,000 per day per violation or criminal prosecution as outlined herein.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.151  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   (1)   Any user violating any of the provisions of this
chapter or a wastewater permit order issued hereunder, may be subject to
termination of its authority to discharge sewage into the municipal sewer
system.



      (2)   Such termination may be immediate if necessary for the
protection of the POTW. Said user may also have water service terminated.



   (B)   Any user who violates the following conditions of this
chapter, or applicable state and federal regulations, is subject to having
his permit revoked in accordance with the procedures of this chapter:



      (1)   Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater
constituents and characteristics of his or her discharge;



      (2)   Failure of the user to report significant changes in
operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics;



      (3)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises
for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or



      (4)   Violation of conditions of the permit.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)



§ 52.152  DESTRUCTION OF POTW.



   No person(s) shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is part of the POTW. Any person(s) violating this provision
shall be subject to criminal prosecution for “disorderly conduct”. It
shall be noted that the Clean Water Act does not require proof of specific
intent to obtain conviction.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.153  LEGAL ACTION.



   If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into
the city’s wastewater disposal system contrary to the provisions of this
chapter, federal or state pretreatment requirements or any order of the city,
the city may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief
in the appropriate court of this jurisdiction in addition to pursuing any
criminal remedies that may be available.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)



§ 52.154  INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.



   Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of
this chapter or permit or order issued hereunder, the Pretreatment
Coordinator, through counsel, may petition the court for the issuance of a
preliminary or permanent injunction or both (as may be appropriate) which
restrains or compels the activities on the part of the user.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)



§ 52.155  LIABILITY.



   (A)   Any user violating any of the provisions of this chapter,
discharge permit or other order issued hereunder shall become liable to the
city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city by reason of such
violation.



   (B)   This civil liability is as provided by state and federal
regulations.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)



§ 52.156  MISREPRESENTATION AND/OR FALSIFYING OF DOCUMENTS.



   Any user who knowingly and/or negligently makes any false statements,
representation or certification of any application, record, report, plan or
other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter,
or industrial user permit, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly
renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this
chapter shall be subject to § 52.999 of this chapter.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Notwithstanding any other section of this chapter, any user
who is found to have violated any provision of this chapter, or permits or
orders issued hereunder, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $1,000 per
violation per day. Each day on which non-compliance shall occur or continue
shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation. Such assessments may be
added to the user’s next scheduled sewer service charge and the
Pretreatment Coordinator shall have such other collection remedies as needed
to collect other service charges. Unpaid charges, fines and penalties shall
constitute a lien against the user’s property. Users desiring to dispute
such penalties must file a written request for the Mayor of the city to
reconsider the penalty within ten business days of being notified of the
penalty. Where the Mayor believes an appeal has merit, he or she shall
convene a hearing on the matter within 15 days of receiving the appeal from
the user. The Mayor’s final decision shall be binding.



   (B)   (1)   Any user who has significantly violated or continues
to violate this chapter or any order or permit issued hereunder, shall be
liable to the city for a civil penalty of not more than $5,000 per violation
per day, plus actual damages incurred by the POTW per day for as long as the
violation continues. Each day in which such violation shall continue shall be
deemed a separate offense. In addition to the above described penalty and
damages, the city may recover reasonable attorney’s fees, court costs,
court reporter’s fees and other expenses associated with the enforcement
activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses.



      (2)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may petition the court to
impose, assess and recover such sums. In determining amount of liability, the
court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not
limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and
duration, any economic benefit gained through the user’s violation,
corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user and any
other factor as justice requires.



   (C)   (1)   Any user who willfully or negligently violates any
provision of this chapter or any orders or permits issued hereunder shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not
to exceed $1,000 per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than 12
months. Each day in which such violation shall continue shall be deemed a
separate offense.



      (2)   In the event of a second conviction, the user shall be
guilty of a Class D felony and shall be punished by a fine in an amount not
lees than $1,000 and not greater than $10,000, or double his or her gain from
city of the offense, whichever is greater or imprisonment not less than one
year, nor more than five years, or both. Each day in which such violation
shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.



      (3)   The Pretreatment Coordinator, or his or her designee,
shall have the authority to pursue criminal charges on behalf of the city in
any court of competent jurisdiction in the commonwealth.



   (D)   Any user who knowingly and/or negligently violates § 52.156
of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor and shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or by imprisonment for
not more than 12 months, or by both. Each day in which such violation shall
continue shall be deemed as a separate offense.



(Ord. 013-137, passed 6-24-2013)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



   Chapter



      70.   PARKING RULES



      71.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES



      72.   RAILROADS



      73.   PARKING SCHEDULES



CHAPTER 70:  PARKING RULES



Section



   70.01   Posting of signs



   70.02   Parking prohibited in certain places



   70.03   Parking at curb



   70.04   Vehicles or merchandise for sale



   70.05   Alleyways



   70.06   Parking meters



   70.07   Disabled person’s parking space



 



   70.99   Penalty



§ 70.01  POSTING OF SIGNS.



   The Chief of Police or any other person authorized by the Mayor and
Council shall cause signs to be posted in all areas where parking is limited
or prohibited, indicating such limitation or prohibitions.



(1991 Code, § 12-36)  (Ord. 012-121, passed 11-26-2012)



§ 70.02  PARKING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN PLACES.



   At any time, it shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand in any
of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer (law
enforcement officer) or traffic-control devices:



   (A)   In any intersection;



   (B)   In a crosswalk;



   (C)   Upon any bridge or viaduct, or in any subway or tunnel or in
the approach thereto;



   (D)   Within 30 feet of a traffic signal, beacon or sign on the
approaching side;



   (E)   Within 20 feet of any intersection or crosswalk;



   (F)   At any place where the standing of a vehicle will reduce the
usable width of the roadway;



   (G)   From moving traffic to less than 15 feet;



   (H)   Within ten feet of a fire hydrant;



   (I)   At any place where the vehicle would block the use of a
driveway;



   (J)   On any sidewalk or parkway;



   (K)   At any place where official signs prohibit parking;



   (L)   Designated fire lanes; and/or



   (M)   Designated handicapped parking areas.



(1991 Code, § 12-38)  (Ord. 012-121, passed 11-26-2012)  Penalty, see §
70.99



§ 70.03  PARKING AT CURB.



   No vehicle shall be parked with the left side of such vehicle next to
the curb, except on one-way streets, and it shall be unlawful to stand or
park any vehicle in a street other than parallel with the curb and with the
two right wheels of the vehicle within 12 inches of the regularly established
curb line.



(1991 Code, § 12-40)  (Ord. 012-121, passed 11-26-2012)  Penalty, see §
70.99



§ 70.04  VEHICLES OR MERCHANDISE FOR SALE.



   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street for the
purpose of displaying it for sale, or to park any vehicle upon any business
street from which vehicles merchandise is peddled.



(1991 Code, § 12-41)  (Ord. 012-121, passed 11-26-2012)  Penalty, see §
70.99



§ 70.05  ALLEYWAYS.



   No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or
under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width
of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person
shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to
block the driveway entrance to any abutting property.



(1991 Code, § 12-42)  (Ord. 012-121, passed 11-26-2012)  Penalty, see §
70.99



§ 70.06  PARKING METERS.



   (A)   A vehicle may be parked along the side or curb of any street
where a parking meter has been erected provided such parking is in accordance
with the sections of these regulations pertaining to parking meter spaces and
along the side or curb of any other street if no part of such vehicle extends
into the main-traveled portion of such street and such parking is otherwise
in accordance with these regulations. The City Council shall, by resolution,
designate the areas of the streets which shall be marked with parking spaces,
along which parking meters shall be erected and no other space markings,
parking signs or parking meters shall be painted or erected on the streets.



   (B)   Any person parking a vehicle at a parking meter space between
the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on any day, except Sunday or a national
holiday, shall pay through the parking meter at such space for its use of the
limited-time parking zones, which are designated by meters red in color, the
sum which is on file in the City Clerk’s office in coin of the United
States for each one-half hour and at all other meters not in the limited-time
zones and not red in color, the sum which is on file in the City Clerk’s
office in the coin of the United States for each one hour. Payment for
parking shall be made by deposit in meters which shall indicate the rate,
time purchased and instructions.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful to park in a space marked with a parking
meter beyond the time paid. Each hour of overparking after the first hour
shall constitute a separate and additional violation.



   (D)   No person shall tamper with, vandalize or injure any parking
meter or, insert or attempt to insert any object other than a coin of the
United States in any parking meter.



(1991 Code, § 12-43)  (Ord. 540.5, passed --; Ord. 540.8, passed --; Ord.
540.9, passed --; Ord. 980-47, passed 2-25-1980)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.07  DISABLED PERSON’S PARKING SPACE.



   (A)   When a motor vehicle which is being operated by or for the
benefit of a handicapped person is displaying an automobile registration
plate as provided in KRS 186.042, an out-of-state handicapped registration
plate, a handicapped parking permit issued by any veterans’ administration
hospital or a special parking permit issued to a handicapped person as
prescribed in KRS 189.460, the motor vehicle may be parked in a designated
handicapped parking place.



   (B)   When parked in a space where a parking limit is imposed, the
vehicle may be parked for a period of two hours in excess of the legal
parking period permitted, except where ordinances or police regulations
prohibit parking on a highway for the purpose of creating a fire lane or
where the ordinance or police regulation provides for the accommodation of
heavy traffic during morning, afternoon or evening hours or where the motor
vehicle is parked in such a manner as to clearly be a traffic hazard.



   (C)   No person shall park in a designated handicapped parking area
in a motor vehicle not displaying either a handicapped automobile
registration plate as provided in KRS 186.042 or an out-of-state handicapped
registration plate on the rear of the vehicle unless he or she displays on
the rear view mirror of his or her motor vehicle a special parking permit
issued to the handicapped. No person shall park a vehicle displaying a
special parking permit in a designated handicapped parking area when such
vehicle is not being used for the benefit of a handicapped person.



   (D)   Parking spaces for disabled people shall be at least 96 inches
wide and shall have an adjacent access aisle 60 inches wide, minimum. Parking
access aisles shall be part of the accessible route to the building or
facility entrance. Two accessible parking spaces may share a common access
aisle. Parked vehicle overhangs shall not reduce the clear width of an
accessible circulation route.



   (E)   (1)   Accessible parking spaces shall be designated as
reserved for the disabled by a sign showing the international symbol of
accessibility.



      (2)   Such signs shall be above grade.



(1991 Code, § 12-44)  (Ord. 990-210, passed 4-9-1990)  Penalty, see §
70.99



§ 70.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   (1)   Any person who violates the provisions of §§ 70.01
through 70.05 of this chapter shall be subject to a civil fine of not less
than $25 for each offense except as hereafter set out. In addition to the
above fine provision, the vehicle constituting the violation may be removed.
The civil fine for illegal parking in a designated fire lane or designated
handicapped parking area shall be the sum of $75.



      (2)   Any individual in receipt of a civil penalty citation
may appeal the assessment of the civil fine by filing a written protest with
the City Clerk with seven days of the issuance of the citation. Said protest
shall be delivered by certified mail to the City Clerk at City Hall, 634
Conestoga Parkway, Shepherdsville, Kentucky 40165. Said protest shall be
considered by the City Council at a regular scheduled city business meeting
within 45 days of the filing of the protest. The individual who has filed the
protest shall have opportunity to contest the civil citation and may present
sworn testimony to support the protest. The decision of the City Council to
uphold or deny the protest is final. Payment of the civil penalty is due upon
the denial of the protest. Any individual who fails to protest the issuance
of the citation with seven days of its issuance shall be required to make
payment of the civil citation within 14 days of its issuance to the City
Clerk, City Hall, 634 Conestoga Parkway, Shepherdsville, Kentucky 40165.



      (3)   Any individual who has failed to pay the civil citation
when due shall be guilty of a violation and shall receive a criminal fine of
not less than $100, and no more than $250, upon conviction.



      (4)   Any individual who feels aggrieved by any decision of
the City Council shall have the right to appeal the decision to District
Court in the county and avail himself or herself of any judicial remedy
allowed by law.



(1991 Code, § 12-37)



   (C)   The operator of an unlawfully parked vehicle, per § 70.06 of
this chapter, may, within 72 hours of the violation, pay to the city $2.50 if
the motor vehicle was parked on a meter or a no-parking zone and $5 if the
motor vehicle was parked in a fire lane. After the expiration of the 72
hours, the payment of the fine for a metered space or a non-parking zone
shall escalate to $5 and the payment for a fine for a motor vehicle within a
fire lane shall escalate to $10. If the fine is not paid, as stated herein,
any person who violates any of the provisions of § 70.06 of this chapter
shall be fined, upon conviction in the District Court, not less than $10, nor
more than $100, or imprisoned for not longer than five days, or both.



(1991 Code, § 12-43)



   (D)   Any person who violates the provisions of § 70.07 of this
chapter shall be fined not less than $20, nor more than $2,000, or imprisoned
in the County Jail for not more than one year, or both.



(1991 Code, § 12-44)



(Ord. 540.5, passed --; Ord. 540.8, passed --; Ord. 540.9, passed --; Ord.
980-47, passed 2-25-1980; Ord. 990-210, passed 4-9-1990; Ord. 012-121, passed
11-26-2012)



CHAPTER 71:  RECREATIONAL VEHICLES



Section



Bicycles



   71.01   Riding on sidewalks



   71.02   Equipment



 



   71.99   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   Bicycles, see KRS 189.040(9), 189.080, 189.287, 189.410



BICYCLES



§ 71.01  RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or operate a bicycle on the
sidewalks of the city. Bicycles shall be ridden on streets or roads used by
automobile traffic.



(1991 Code, § 12-61)  (Ord. 520.2, passed --)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.02  EQUIPMENT.



   Any bicycle operated after dark or the hours after sundown shall be
equipped with a headlight, pursuant to KRS 189.040(9). The bicycle shall have
on the rear fender of the vehicle a reflector or light for the purpose of
protecting the rider of the vehicle.



(1991 Code, § 12-62)  (Ord. 520.2, passed --)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of §§ 71.01
and 71.02 of this chapter shall, for each and every violation, be fined in
the sum of not less than $5, nor more than $500.



(1991 Code, § 12-63)  (Ord. 520.2, passed --)



CHAPTER 72:  RAILROADS



Section



   72.01   Obstructing street crossings



   72.02   Responsibility of railroad company



   72.03   Speed



 



   72.99   Penalty



§ 72.01  OBSTRUCTING STREET CROSSINGS.



   No railroad company shall obstruct any public highway or street by
stopping or permitting trains, engines or cars to stand upon a public grade
crossing for more than five minutes at any one time, unless such stopping and
standing is caused by circumstances beyond control of the railroad company.



(1991 Code, § 12-81)  (Ord. 540.10, passed --)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.02  RESPONSIBILITY OF RAILROAD COMPANY.



   (A)   No member of a railroad train crew shall be held personally
guilty of violating this chapter regulating the blocking of public grade
crossings by trains, engines or cars, on proof that his or her action was
necessary to comply with the orders or instructions of the railroad company
or its officers.



   (B)   Nothing in this section, however, shall relieve the railroad
company from any responsibility placed upon it by this chapter.



(1991 Code, § 12-82)  (Ord. 540.10, passed --)



§ 72.03  SPEED.



   No railroad train shall pass through the corporate limits of the city
at a speed greater than 35 mph.



(1991 Code, § 12-83)  (Ord. 540.10, passed --)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.99  PENALTY.



   Any railroad company that violates the provisions of this chapter shall
be fined not less than $25, nor more than $100, for each offense. If a grade
crossing is obstructed by two or more trains stopping and standing thereon in
succession without allowing the cumulated highway traffic to pass, the
obstruction by each such successive train shall constitute a separate offense.



(1991 Code, § 12-84)  (Ord. 540.10, passed --)



CHAPTER 73:  PARKING SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Prohibited parking



SCHEDULE I. PROHIBITED PARKING.



   It shall be unlawful to angle park or double park on Buckman Street.
Parallel parking only shall be lawful on Buckman Street.



(1991 Code, § 12-39)  (Ord. 540.5, passed --)  Penalty, see § 10.99



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      90.   PARADES



      91.   HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES



      92.   ANIMALS



      93.   FAIR HOUSING



CHAPTER 90:  PARADES



Section



General Provisions



   90.01   Definitions



   90.02   Interfering with parades; obstructing routes



Permit Regulations



   90.15   Permit required



   90.16   Application; fee



   90.17   Conditions for issuance



   90.18   Council action; notice to applicant



   90.19   Alternate permit



   90.20   Information stated on permit



   90.21   Compliance with permit; carrying permit during parade



   90.22   Revocation of permit



 



   90.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 90.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PARADE. Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or
procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street,
sidewalk, park or other public place in the city.



   PARADE PERMIT. A permit required by this chapter.



(1991 Code, § 11-96)  (Ord. 1020.5, passed --)



§ 90.02  INTERFERING WITH PARADES; OBSTRUCTING ROUTES.



   (A)   No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede, or
interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or
animal participating or used in a parade.



   (B)   No driver of a vehicle, except a police car or other emergency
vehicle as defined by state statutes, shall drive through the vehicles or
persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and
are conspicuously designated as a parade.



   (C)   The Chief of Police shall have the authority, when reasonably
necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a street or
other public thoroughfare or part thereof constituting a part of the route of
a parade. The Chief of Police shall post signs to such effect, and it shall
be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in
violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street or other
public thoroughfare unposted in violation of this section.



(1991 Code, § 11-97)  (Ord. 1020.5, passed --)  Penalty, see § 90.99



PERMIT REGULATIONS



§ 90.15  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start
any parade unless a parade permit has been obtained from the City Council.



   (B)   This permit requirement shall not apply to:



      (1)   Funeral processions;



      (2)   Students going to and from school classes or
participating in educational activities; provided, such conduct is under the
immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; and/or



      (3)   A governmental agency acting within the scope of its
functions.



(1991 Code, § 11-116)  (Ord. 1020.5, passed --)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.16  APPLICATION; FEE.



   (A)   A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an
application with the City Council on forms provided by the Council.



   (B)   An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the
City Council not less than one day or not more than 60 days before the date
on which it is proposed to conduct the parade. The application shall be taken
up at the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting.



   (C)   The application for parade permit shall set forth the
following information:



      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the persons
seeking to conduct such parade;



      (2)   If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf
of or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the
headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads
of such organization;



      (3)   The name, address and telephone number of the person who
will be parade chairperson and who will be responsible for its conduct;



      (4)   The date when the parade is to be conducted;



      (5)   The route to be traveled, the starting point and the
termination point;



      (6)   The approximate number of persons who, and animals if
any, and vehicles which will constitute such parade, the type of animals, if
any, and the description of the vehicles;



      (7)   The hours when such parade will start and terminate;



      (8)   A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or
only a portion of the width of the street, sidewalk, park or other public
place proposed to be traversed;



      (9)   The location of the street of any assembly area for such
parade;



      (10)   The time at which units of the parade will begin to
assemble at any such assembly area or areas;



      (11)   The interval of space to be maintained between units of
each parade;



      (12)   If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf
of or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit
shall file with the City Council a communication in writing from such person
authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his or her behalf; and



      (13)   Any additional information which the City Council shall
find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit
should issue.



   (D)   There shall be paid at the time of filing an application for a
parade permit a fee of $3.50.



(1991 Code, § 11-117)  (Ord. 1020.5, passed --)



§ 90.17  CONDITIONS FOR ISSUANCE.



   The City Council shall issue a permit, as provided for under this
chapter, when, from a consideration of the application and from such other
information as may be otherwise obtained, it finds that:



   (A)   The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the
safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route;



   (B)   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so
great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of
movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police
protection to the city;



   (C)   The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of
so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to
portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of
march and areas contiguous thereto;



   (D)   The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly
points of the parade will not duly interfere with proper fire and police
protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly
areas;



   (E)   The conduct of the parade will not interfere with the movement
of firefighting equipment en route to a fire;



   (F)   The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to
its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delay routes;
and/or



   (G)   The parade will not be held for the sole purpose of
advertising any product, goods or events, and it is not designated to held
purely for private profit.



(1991 Code, § 11-118)  (Ord. 1020.5, passed --)



§ 90.18  COUNCIL ACTION; NOTICE TO APPLICANT.



   (A)   The City Council shall act upon the application for a parade
permit at the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting after the filing
thereof.



   (B)   If the City Council disapproves the application, it shall mail
to the applicant within three days, Saturdays, Sundays and holidays excepted,
after the date upon which the application was rejected a notice of its
action, stating the reason for its denial of the permit.



(1991 Code, § 11-119)  (Ord. 1020.5, passed --)



§ 90.19  ALTERNATE PERMIT.



   The City Council, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall
be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time or
over a route different than that named by the applicant. An applicant
desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within three days after notice
of Council authorization of an alternate permit, file a written notice of his
or her acceptance with the City Council. An alternate parade permit shall
conform to the requirements of and shall have the effect of a parade permit
under this chapter.



(1991 Code, § 11-120)  (Ord. 1020.5, passed --)



§ 90.20  INFORMATION STATED ON PERMIT.



   Each parade permit shall state the following information:



   (A)   Starting time;



   (B)   Minimum speed;



   (C)   Maximum speed;



   (D)   Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units
of the parade;



   (E)   The portions of the street, sidewalk, park or other public
place to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade;



   (F)   The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions
thereof; and



   (G)   Such other information as the City Council shall find
necessary to the enforcement of this chapter.



(1991 Code, § 11-121)  (Ord. 1020.5, passed --)



§ 90.21  COMPLIANCE WITH PERMIT; CARRYING PERMIT DURING PARADE.



   (A)   A permittee under this chapter shall comply with all permit
directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances.



   (B)   The parade chairperson, or other person heading or leading
such activity, shall carry the parade permit on his or her person during the
conduct of the parade.



(1991 Code, § 11-122)  (Ord. 1020.5, passed --)



§ 90.22  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   The City Council shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit
issued under this chapter upon application of the standards for issuance as
herein set forth.



(1991 Code, § 11-123)  (Ord. 1020.5, passed --)



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined an amount
not less than $25, nor exceeding $100.



(1991 Code, § 11-98)  (Ord. 1020.5, passed --)



CHAPTER 91:  HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES



Section



Nuisances



   91.01   Definitions



   91.02   Common law and statutory nuisances



   91.03   Certain conditions declared a nuisance



   91.04   Exemptions



   91.05   Abatement procedures



Weeds, Shrubs and the Like; Obstructions



   91.35   Upkeep; duty



   91.36   Interference with public ways prohibited



   91.37   Height of weeds, grass and the like



   91.38   Obstructing streets prohibited



   91.39   Littering



   91.40   Falling material



   91.41   Explosive material



   91.42   Cisterns, cellars and the like



   91.43   Excessive numbers of pets



   91.44   Notice to remove



Abandoned and Inoperable Vehicles and Equipment



   91.55   Definitions



   91.56   Abandonment of vehicles



   91.57   Leaving of wrecked, non-operating vehicle on street



   91.58   Disposition of wrecked or discarded vehicles



   91.59   Impounding



   91.60   Residential property; nuisance



   91.61   Commercial property; nuisance



   91.62   Abatement of nuisance; by owners; by city



 



   91.99   Penalty



NUISANCES



§ 91.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AUTOMOBILE PARTS. Any portion or parts of any motor driven vehicle as
detached from the vehicle as a whole.



   DWELLING. Any part of any building or its premises used as a place of
residence or habitation or for sleeping by any person.



   GOODS. Any goods, warehouse merchandise or other property capable of
being the object of the sale regulated hereunder.



   INOPERATIVE CONDITION. Unable to move under its own power due to
defective or missing parts and which has remained in such condition for a
period of not less than 30 consecutive days.



   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any style or type of motor driven vehicle used for the
conveyance of persons or property.



   NUISANCE. Public nuisance.



   PERSON. Individuals, partnerships, voluntary associations and
corporations.



   SCRAP METAL. Pieces or parts of steel, iron, tin, zinc, copper,
aluminum or any alloy thereof, whether covered with porcelain or any other
material, whether intact or in parts, which has served its usefulness in its
original form and can no longer be used for its originally intended purpose.



   UNFIT FOR FURTHER USE. In a dangerous condition; having defective or
missing parts; or in such a condition generally as to be unfit for its
originally intended purpose.



   UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION. Dangerous or detrimental to life or health
because of: want of repair; defects in the drainage; plumbing, lighting,
ventilation or construction; infection with contagious disease; or the
existence on the premises of an unsanitary condition likely to cause sickness
among occupants of the dwelling.



   YARD SALES. All sales entitled “garage sales”, “lawn sale”,
“attic sale”, “rummage sale” or “yard sale”, or any similar
casual sale of tangible personal property which is advertised by any means
where the public at large is or can be made aware of the sale.



(Ord. 005-667, passed 7-25-2005)



§ 91.02  COMMON LAW AND STATUTORY NUISANCES.



   In addition to what is declared in this subchapter to be a public
nuisance, the offenses which are known to the common law and statutes of the
state as public nuisances may be treated as such and be proceeded against as
is provided in this subchapter or in accordance with any other provision of
law.



(Ord. 005-667, passed 7-25-2005)



§ 91.03  CERTAIN CONDITIONS DECLARED A NUISANCE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or person having
control or management of any land within the county to permit a public
nuisance to develop thereon.



   (B)   The following conditions are declared to be public nuisances:



      (1)   Dwellings unfit for human habitation. The erection, use
or maintenance of a dwelling which is unfit for human habitation;



      (2)   Dangerous buildings adjoining streets. Any building,
house or structure so out of repair and dilapidated that it will, if the
condition is allowed to continue, endanger the life, limb or property of, or
cause hurt, damage or injury to, persons or property using or being upon the
streets or public way of the county adjoining the premises, by reason of the
collapse of the building, house or structure or by the falling of parts
thereof or of objects therefrom;



      (3)   Dangerous trees or stacks adjoining street. Any tree,
stack or other object standing in such a condition that it will, if the
condition is allowed to continue, endanger the life, limb or property of, or
cause hurt, damage or injury to persons or property upon the public streets
or public ways adjacent thereto, by falling thereof or of parts thereof;



      (4)   Dilapidated buildings. Any building, house or structure
which is so out of repair and dilapidated that is constitutes a fire hazard
liable to catch on fire or communicate fire, or which due to lack of adequate
maintenance or neglect, endangers the public health, welfare or safety or
materially interferes with the peaceful enjoyment by owners or occupants of
adjacent property;



      (5)   Accumulation of rubbish.



         (a)   An accumulation of any premises of filth, refuse,
trash, garbage or other waste material which endangers the public health,
welfare or safety, or materially interferes with the peaceful enjoyment by
owners or occupants of adjacent property because of the danger of its
catching or communicating fire, its attracting and propagating vermin,
rodents or insects or its blowing of rubbish into any street, sidewalk or
property of another. Garbage or refuse may be kept in covered containers.
Such containers shall be constructed of metal or plastic material in such a
manner as to be strong, not easily corrodible, rodent-proof and shall have
tight-fitting covers which shall be kept in place thereon at all times,
except when refuse is being deposited therein or removed therefrom. Boxes,
papers, tree cuttings and odd articles shall be bundled and kept together at
the pick-up site.



         (b)   For the purpose of this division (B)(5), the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



            1.   GARBAGE. All putrescible wastes, except
sewage and body waste. Including vegetable and animal offal and carcasses of
dead animals, but excluding recognizable industrial by- products, and shall
include all substances from all public and private establishments and from
all residences.



            2.   REFUSE. Includes all non-putrescible waste.



      (6)   Noxious odors or smoke. Emission into the surrounding
atmosphere of odor, dust, smoke or other matter which renders ordinary use or
physical occupation of other property in the vicinity uncomfortable or
impossible;



      (7)   Noise.



         (a)   Emission of noise which, between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., is audible 50 feet from the property line of the
property on which the source of the noise is located.



         (b)   The following noises shall be exempt:



            1.   Noises originating from any safety signals,
warning devices and emergency relief valves;



            2.   Noises resulting from any authorized
emergency or law enforcement vehicle or training facilities; and



            3.   Noises emanating from festivals or other
periodic activates and celebrations where said activity has been authorized
by the appropriate city officials.



      (8)   Storage of explosives or combustible material. The
storage of combustible or explosive material, which creates a safety hazard
or other property or persons in the vicinity. Excluded is storage of
combustible materials for construction purposes; provided that, all
applicable state and federal regulations are complied with;



      (9)   Weeds. The existence of grass or other rank vegetation
in excess of a height of 12 inches;



      (10)   Open wells. The maintenance of any open, uncovered or
insecurely covered cistern, cellar, well pit, excavation or vault situated
upon private premises in any open or unfenced lot or place;



      (11)   Trees and shrubbery obstructing streets and sidewalks.
The growing and maintenance of trees with less than 14 feet clearance over
streets or less than eight feet over sidewalks, or the growing maintenance of
shrubbery in excess of three feet in height within the radius of 20 feet from
the point where the curb line of any street intersects the curb line of
another street. No shrub shall be planted between the curb line and the
property line of any street within a radius of 20 feet from the point where
the curb line of any street intersects with the curb line of another street;



      (12)   Junk; scrap metal; motor vehicles. The storage of
unlicensed motor vehicles in an inoperative condition, motor vehicles unfit
for further use, automobile parts or scrap metal, except on premises whose
zoning allows such use or upon property owned by a governmental agency;



      (13)   Open burning. The open burning of leaves, brush,
construction materials or other debris without specific notice to the Chief
of the city’s Fire Department; and



      (14)   Yard sales.



         (a)   Any item(s) which are not sold on the date of the
yard sale and not removed from the sale location within 24 hours after the
yard sale date;



         (b)   Sales in which the vehicles in attendance impede
the flow of traffic on the street;



         (c)   Temporary yard sale signs and/or banners which are
not removed within 24 hours after the yard sale date;



         (d)   Yard sale signs which are attached to any public
utility pole and/or traffic-control sign post;



         (e)   Yard sales conducted before dawn or after dusk of
any day; and



         (f)   When a yard sale is on consecutive days, unsold
items which are not secured and covered from dusk until dawn.



(Ord. 005-667, passed 7-25-2005)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.04  EXEMPTIONS.



   All agricultural and silvicultural operations as provided in KRS
413.072 are exempt from the provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 005-667, passed 7-25-2005)



§ 91.05  ABATEMENT PROCEDURES.



   (A)   (1)   It shall be the duty of the city’s Code Enforcement
Officer, or his or her designee, to serve or cause to be served a notice upon
the owner or occupant of any premises on which there is kept or maintained
any nuisance in violation of the provisions of this subchapter and to demand
the abatement of the nuisance within five days unless the nuisance
constitutes an immediate danger to the health and well being of the community.



      (2)   If such danger is present, the nuisance shall be abated
within 24 hours of notice.



      (3)   Notice shall be served upon persons by certified mail,
but if the whereabouts of the persons are unknown and cannot be ascertained
by the city’s Code Enforcement Officer, or his or her designee, in the
exercise of reasonable diligence, the city’s Code Enforcement Officer, or
his or her designee, shall make an affidavit to the effect, and the serving
of notice may be made by publication in a newspaper of general circulation
for two consecutive publications. A copy of the notice shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises affected by the notice and it shall be
recorded in the office of the county’s Clerk.



   (B)   If the person so served does not abate the nuisance within the
prescribed amount of time, the city may proceed to abate the nuisance,
keeping the account of the expense of the abatement and the expense shall be
charged and paid by the owner or occupant. In the event that said expense is
not paid within ten days of notice of said expense mailed to the owner, the
expense shall be added to the next regular property tax bill against the
property.



   (C)   (1)   Charges for nuisance abatement shall be a lien upon
the premises.



      (2)   Whenever a bill for charges remains unpaid for 60 days
after the due date for payment of property tax bills, the city’s Code
Enforcement Officer, or his or her designee, may file with the county’s
Clerk a statement of lien claims. This statement shall contain a legal
description of the premises, the expenses and costs incurred the date the
nuisance was abated and a notice that the city claims a lien for this amount.
Notice of the lien claim shall be mailed to the owner of the premises, if his
or her address is known.



      (3)   However, the failure to record the lien claim or to mail
the notice, or the failure of the owner to receive the notice, shall not
affect the right to foreclose the lien for charges as provided in division
(D) below.



   (D)   Property subject to a lien for unpaid nuisance charges shall
be sold for non-payment and the proceeds of the sale shall be applied to pay
the charges after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of
statutory liens.



   (E)   The city’s Attorney is authorized and directed to institute
such proceedings, in the name of the city, in any court having jurisdiction
over the matter, against any property for which the bill has remained unpaid
60 days after it has been recorded.



(Ord. 005-667, passed 7-25-2005)



WEEDS, SHRUBS AND THE LIKE; OBSTRUCTIONS



§ 91.35  UPKEEP; DUTY.



   It shall be the duty of all persons, corporations and firms within the
city to maintain lands, shrubbery and all other necessary upkeep as to
provide for a city that is clean, presentable and debris free.



(Ord. 008-738, passed 1-14-2008)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.36  INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC WAYS PROHIBITED.



   All weeds, bushes or other natural or unnatural interference with any
public ways within 200 feet of the centerline of each public way must be cut,
cleaned and cleared to provide safety and healthiness to the people of the
city.



(Ord. 008-738, passed 1-14-2008)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.37  HEIGHT OF WEEDS, GRASS AND THE LIKE.



   All weeds, thistle, burdock, jimson, ragweed, milkweed, poison ivy,
poison oak, iron weeds, grass and shrubbery (excluding ornamental shrubs,
farm crops, vegetables and trees) within the centerline of each and every
public way must be cut as to not allow growth more than six inches above the
ground.



(Ord. 008-738, passed 1-14-2008)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.38  OBSTRUCTING STREETS PROHIBITED.



   Trees and shrubbery obstructing streets and sidewalks shall be
unlawful. The growing and maintenance of trees with less than 14 feet of
clearance over streets or less than eight feet over sidewalks, or the growing
and maintenance of shrubbery in excess three feet of height within the radius
of 20 feet from the point where the curb line of any street intersects to the
curb line of another street. No shrub shall be planted between the curb line
and the property line of any street within the radius of 20 feet from the
point where the curb line of street intersects with the curb line of another
street.



(Ord. 008-738, passed 1-14-2008)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.39  LITTERING.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to dump, place or throw any trash, debris
or other unnatural product of any kind upon the streets, alleys and other
rights-of-way, be them public or private, within the city limits.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to allow an accumulation on any premises
of filth, refuse, trash, garbage, organic material, dirt, construction debris
or other waste material which endangers the public health, welfare or safety,
or materially interferes with the peaceful enjoyment by owners or occupants
of adjacent property because of danger it will catch or communicate fire,
attract and propagate vermin, rodents or insects, or blow said debris into
any street, sidewalk or property of another.



(Ord. 008-738, passed 1-14-2008)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.40  FALLING MATERIAL.



   It shall be unlawful to allow any tree, stack or other object standing
in such condition that it will, if the condition is allowed to continue,
endanger the life, limb or property of, or cause hurt, damage or injury to,
persons or property upon the public streets or public ways adjacent thereto,
by the falling thereof or of parts thereof.



(Ord. 008-738, passed 1-14-2008)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.41  EXPLOSIVE MATERIAL.



   The storage of explosive material, which creates a safety hazard to
other property or persons in the vicinity, shall be considered unlawful.



(Ord. 008-738, passed 1-14-2008)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.42  CISTERNS, CELLARS AND THE LIKE.



   It shall be unlawful to maintain any open, uncovered or insecurely
covered cistern, cellar, well, pit, excavation or vault situated upon private
premises in any open or unfenced lot or place.



(Ord. 008-738, passed 1-14-2008)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.43  EXCESSIVE NUMBERS OF PETS.



   It shall be unlawful to keep pets, including cats and dogs, in excess
of five mature animals without a kennel license (conditional use permit). It
shall also be unlawful to keep animals traditionally defined as livestock
(including, but not limited to, cattle, swine, sheep, goats and chickens) in
any area not zoned agriculture. The failure to keep any animal’s pen, yard,
lot or other enclosure in a sanitary condition and free from preventable
odors shall be unlawful. Animals at licensed slaughterhouses, meat packing
establishments, stockyards, rendering houses, those kept on land zoned
agricultural, and those displayed for public exhibition shall not be
considered unlawful.



(Ord. 008-738, passed 1-14-2008)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.44  NOTICE TO REMOVE.



   Following receiving written notice by the city, owners and tenants
shall have ten days to mow grass and/or remove all debris, trash, refuse,
junk or any other material that the city sees as an impediment to the
city’s welfare.



(Ord. 008-738, passed 1-14-2008)  Penalty, see § 91.99



ABANDONED AND INOPERABLE VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT



§ 91.55  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDON(ED). The act of possessing in any manner an inoperable motor
vehicle no longer capable of self movement or possessing a vehicle required
by law to be licensed or registered in the commonwealth and said vehicles’
registration or license having expired for more than 30 days.



   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.



   PROPERTY. Any real property within the city which is not a street or
highway.



   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between boundary lines of every
right-of-way, paved or unpaved, for the use of the public for purposes of
travel.



   VEHICLE. A machine propelled by power, other than human power, or
dwelling used for occupancy by people or animals, designed to travel along
the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides or used to transport
persons or property or pull machinery, and shall include, without
limitations, automobiles, trucks, trailers, motorcycles, tractors, buggy,
wagons, recreational vehicles or mobile homes and shall include all vehicles
required to be licensed by the commonwealth.



(Ord. 005-667, passed 7-25-2005)



§ 91.56  ABANDONMENT OF VEHICLES.



   No person shall abandon any vehicle within the city, and no person
shall leave any vehicle, at any place within the city for the time and under
the circumstances as to cause the vehicle reasonable to appear to be
abandoned.



(Ord. 005-667, passed 7-25-2005)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.57  LEAVING OF WRECKED, NON-OPERATING VEHICLE ON STREET.



   No person shall leave any partially dismantled, or non-operating,
wrecked or junked vehicle or any part of any vehicle on any street or highway
within the city.



(Ord. 005-667, passed 7-25-2005)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.58  DISPOSITION OF WRECKED OR DISCARDED VEHICLES.



   (A)   DISCARDED VEHICLES are any vehicles, as defined in § 91.55 of
this chapter, which are unlicensed or have a license which has been expired
for a period in excess of 30 days.



   (B)   No person in charge or control of any property within the
city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow
any partially dismantled, or non-operating, wrecked, junked or discarded
vehicle to remain on the property longer than seven days; and no person shall
leave any vehicle property within the city for longer than seven days; except
that, this subchapter shall not apply with regard to: a vehicle in an
enclosed building; a vehicle on the premise of a properly zoned business
enterprise; except no business enterprise shall store partially dismantled,
non-operating, wrecked, junked or discarded vehicles for a period in excess
of seven days unless the vehicle is in an enclosed storage place not visible
to the general public.



(Ord. 005-667, passed 7-25-2005)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.59  IMPOUNDING.



   (A)   The Chief of Police, or any member of his or her Department
designated by him or her, and any Code Enforcement Officer of the city, is
hereby authorized to remove or have removed any vehicle left at any place
within the city which reasonably appears to be in violation of this
subchapter or lost, stolen or unclaimed.



   (B)   The vehicle shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or
disposed of in accordance with the provisions of KRS 376.275.



(Ord. 005-667, passed 7-25-2005)



§ 91.60  RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY; NUISANCE.



   Unsheltered storage of one old unused, stripped, junked or other
automobiles not in good and safe operating condition, and of any other
vehicle, machinery, implements and/or equipment (called “personalty”)
which is no longer safely useable for the purpose for which it was
manufactured, for a period of seven days (except in a licensed junkyard)
within the residentially zoned areas of the city, is hereby declared to be a
nuisance and dangerous to the public safety.



(Ord. 005-667, passed 7-25-2005)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.61  COMMERCIAL PROPERTY; NUISANCE.



   Unsheltered storage of one or more old, unused, stripped, junked or
other automobiles not in good and safe operating condition, and of any other
vehicle, machinery, implements and/or equipment (called “personalty”)
which is no longer safely useable for the purpose for which it was
manufactured, for a period of seven days or more, (except in a licensed
junkyard or other property zoned a storage facility) in any commercially
zoned area within the city, is hereby declared to be a nuisance and dangerous
to the public safety.



(Ord. 005-667, passed 7-25-2005)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.62  ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE; BY OWNERS; BY CITY.



   (A)   The owner, owners, tenants, lessees and/or occupants of any
lot within the corporate limits of the city upon which such storage is made,
and also the owner, owners and/or lessees of said personalty involved in such
storage, shall jointly and severally abate said nuisance by the prompt
removal of said personalty into complete enclosed buildings authorized to be
used for such storage purposes, if within the corporate limits of the city,
or otherwise to remove it to a location without said corporate limits.



   (B)   Whenever said owners fail to abate said nuisance, then the
city shall remove the said personalty to a location of its selection, the
expenses therefor to be billed to said owners, jointly and severally, said
bill to be assessment to be collected with ad valorem taxes and shall be a
lien upon said property.



(Ord. 005-667, passed 7-25-2005)



§ 91.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   Violation of the provisions of §§ 91.01 through 91.05 of
this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates §§ 91.01 through 91.05 of
this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, on
conviction thereof, be fined not less than $100, nor more that $500, or
imprisoned for not more than 30 days or both; and, in addition, shall pay all
costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day a violation continues shall
be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the
city from taking any other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy
any violation.



   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any section, clause,
line, paragraph or part of §§ 91.35 through 91.44 of this chapter shall be
fined not less than $10 and not more than $100 for each offense. Each day’s
continued violation shall constitute a separate offense.



   (D)   If said owners allow, per §§ 91.55 through 91.62 of this
chapter, said nuisance to exist or fail to abate said nuisance, they and each
of them, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than $50, nor more
than $250, for each offense and a separate offense shall be deemed committed
on each day during or on which such nuisance is permitted to exist.



(Ord. 005-667, passed 7-25-2005; Ord. 008-738, passed 1-14-2008; Ord.
009-776, passed 11-23-2009; Ord. 010-781, passed 6-14-2010)



CHAPTER 92:  ANIMALS



Section



General Provisions



   92.01   Definitions



   92.02   Restraint required



   92.03   Impoundment; redemption



   92.04   Issuance of citations



   92.05   Confinement of animal in heat



   92.06   Nuisances



   92.07   Humane treatment



   92.08   Exhibitions



   92.09   Interference with enforcement



Licensing



   92.20   License required



   92.21   Applicability to non-residents



Rabies Control



   92.35   Vaccination required



   92.36   Vaccination certificates, tags



   92.37   Rabies voucher



   92.38   Cat vaccination tags



Commercial Ventures



   92.50   Kennels; guard and sentry dogs



   92.51   Pet shops



   92.52   Riding schools or stables



 



   92.99   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   Animals, see KRS 252.170 et seq.



   Dogs, see KRS 258.005 et seq.



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 92.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANIMAL. Any living creature, except human beings, domestic or wild,
excluding livestock, poultry, pet rodents, pet birds and vermin.



   ANIMAL DEALER. Any person engaged in the business of buying any animal
for the purpose of resale to pet shops, research facilities or to another
animal dealer.



   ANIMAL POUND. Any premises designated and operated by the Fiscal Court
of the county for the purpose of impounding and caring for animals held under
authority of this chapter.



   CIRCUS. A variety show which features animal acts.



   DOG WARDEN. The official designated by the Fiscal Court to be in charge
of the animal compound and the primary enforcement officer for the county of
the sections of this chapter and the state laws regulating animals and owners
of animals.



   HUMANE OFFICER. Any person designated by a humane society as a law
enforcement officer and who qualifies to perform such duties under the laws
of the state.



   HUMANE SOCIETY. Any organization existing for the purpose of the
prevention of cruelty to animals incorporated under the laws of the state.



   KENNEL. Any person maintaining an establishment where any animals of
any species are kept for the purpose of breeding, buying, selling, showing or
boarding such animals or engaged in the training of dogs for guard or sentry
purposes, and which establishment is so constructed that the animals cannot
stray therefrom; this definition shall, however, exclude non-commercial
kennels as defined in KRS 100.365.



   LIVESTOCK. Horses, stallions, colts, geldings, mares, sheep, rams,
lambs, bulls, bullocks, steers, heifers, cows, calves, mules, jacks, jennets,
burros, goats, kids, swine and confined and domesticated hares and rabbits.



   OWNER. Any person owning, keeping or harboring animals.



   PET BIRDS. Any tamed or domesticated bird kept caged or within doors.



   PET RODENTS. Hamsters, gerbils, woodchucks, mice or similar rodents
which are kept as domesticated or tamed animals and kept caged or within
doors at all times.



   PET SHOP. Any person engaged in the business of breeding, buying,
selling at retail or boarding animals of any species for profit-making
purposes.



   POULTRY. All domesticated fowl and all game birds which are legally
kept in captivity.



   QUALIFIED PERSON. A person granted a permit of the state’s Board of
Health to vaccinate animals against rabies, and may include owners or
operators of licensed kennels.



   RESTRAINT. An animal shall be deemed to be under RESTRAINT if on the
premises of his or her owner and in a pen, cage or on a leash or if
accompanied by a responsible person and under that person’s control.



   THEATRICAL EXHIBIT. Any exhibition or act featuring performing animals.



   VACCINATION. The injection by a veterinarian or other qualified person
of vaccine approved by and administered in accordance with the regulations of
the state’s Board of Health.



   VETERINARIAN. A licensed practitioner of veterinary medicine,
accredited by the Bureau of Animal Industry, U.S. Department of Agriculture.



   VETERINARY HOSPITAL. Any establishment maintained and operated by a
licensed veterinarian for the diagnosis and treatment of diseases and
injuries of animals or for the boarding of animals.



   ZOOLOGICAL GARDEN. Any park or zoo operated by a person, partnership,
private corporation or governmental agency.



(1991 Code, § 3-1)  (Ord. 840.4, passed --)



§ 92.02  RESTRAINT REQUIRED.



   All animals shall be kept under restraint at all times.



(1991 Code, § 3-2)  (Ord. 840.4, passed --)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.03  IMPOUNDMENT; REDEMPTION.



   (A)   Unrestrained animals may be taken by the dog warden, police or
humane officer and impounded in the animal pound or an animal shelter
maintained by a humane society and there confined in a humane manner.
Impounded animals shall be kept for not less than seven days unless reclaimed
by their owners. If, by a license tag or other means, the owner can be
identified, the agency impounding such dog shall immediately notify the owner
by telephone or mail of the impoundment of the animal. Animals not claimed by
their owners within seven days of their impoundment, or placed in suitable
new homes, shall be humanely euthanized by the agency.



   (B)   Any owner reclaiming any impounded animal shall pay a fee of
$5, plus maintenance expense for any male dog or spayed dog, male cat or
spayed cat or animals of other species; a fee of $15, plus maintenance
expense, shall be charged for redemption of an unspayed female dog or
unspayed female cat at the first redemption of such animal, and a fee of $25,
plus maintenance expense, for each subsequent redemption of such animal. If
the animal has been quarantined, the redemption fee shall be $10. Proof of
vaccination for rabies and a current license shall be required before any
animal is released. If no proof of vaccination is shown, a rabies voucher
must be purchased before the animal is released and, if a license is not
produced, a license must also be purchased before release.



   (C)   Such owner, upon reclaiming the animal, shall be issued a
citation for any violation of this chapter.



(1991 Code, § 3-3)  (Ord. 840.4, passed --)



§ 92.04  ISSUANCE OF CITATIONS.



   In addition to or in lieu of impounding of an animal found at large,
any enforcement officer so authorized may issue to the owner of such animal a
notice of ordinance violation, specifying the section or sections violated
and indicating the specific nature of the violation. Such notice shall impose
upon the owner the obligation of either payment of the minimum fine under
this chapter of $15 within 72 hours or appearance to answer the charges
specified in the citation at the time and place indicated on the citation. If
the fine is not paid and the owner is convicted of the violations specified,
the owner shall be punished as provided in § 92.99 of this chapter.



(1991 Code, § 3-4)  (Ord. 840.4, passed --)



§ 92.05  CONFINEMENT OF ANIMAL IN HEAT.



   Every female dog or cat in heat shall be confined in a building or
secure enclosure in such manner that such female dog or cat cannot come into
contact with another animal, except for planned breeding.



(1991 Code, § 3-5)  (Ord. 840.4, passed --)  Penalty, see § 92.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see KRS 258.255



§ 92.06  NUISANCES.



   No owner shall fail to exercise proper care and control of his or her
animals so as to prevent the following actions by them: excessive, continuous
or untimely barking or howling; molesting of passers- by; chasing of
vehicles; attacking other domestic animals; trespassing upon school grounds;
trespassing upon private property; or damaging of property of any nature.



(1991 Code, § 3-6)  (Ord. 840.4, passed --)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.07  HUMANE TREATMENT.



   (A)   No owner shall fail to provide his or her animals with good
and wholesome food and water, proper shelter and protection from the weather,
veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering and with humane care and
treatment. If any animal is restrained by a chain, leash or similar
restraint, such restraint shall not be less than ten feet in length and
either on a swivel designed to prevent the animal from choking or strangling
itself or else on a chain run. No person shall beat, cruelly ill-treat,
torment, overload, overwork or otherwise chase any animal, or cause to permit
any dog fight, cock fight or other combat between animals. No owner shall
abandon an animal, abandonment consisting of leaving such animal for a period
in excess of 24 hours without providing for someone to feed, water and check
on the animal’s condition. If an animal is found so abandoned, such animal
may be taken by the dog warden, police or humane officer and impounded in the
animal pound or an animal shelter maintained by a humane society and there
confined in a humane manner. Such animal, if taken from private property,
shall be kept for not less than ten days, with the same procedure otherwise
to be followed as in § 92.03 of this chapter. If an animal is so abandoned,
the owner, rather the person, if any, whom he or she has charged with the
animal’s care, shall be liable for citation for violation of this section.
No person shall crop a dog’s ears, except a licensed veterinarian.



   (B)   No person shall place any poisonous substance which may be
harmful to any animal, as described herein, in any location where it may be
readily found and eaten by such animal.



(1991 Code, § 3-7)  (Ord. 840.4, passed --)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.08  EXHIBITIONS.



   No person shall keep or permit to be kept on his or her premises any
wild or vicious animal for display or for exhibition purposes, whether
gratuitously or for a fee. This section shall apply to a zoological garden,
theatrical exhibit or circus. No theatrical exhibit or act shall be held in
which animals are encouraged to perform through the use of chemical,
electrical or mechanical devices.



(1991 Code, § 3-8)  (Ord. 840.4, passed --)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.09  INTERFERENCE WITH ENFORCEMENT.



   No person shall in any manner interfere with, hinder, molest or abuse
any officer or individual authorized to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.



(1991 Code, § 3-9)  (Ord. 840.4, passed --)  Penalty, see § 92.99



LICENSING



§ 92.20  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   On or before July 1 of each year, every owner of a dog or cat
or other animal four months old or older shall apply to the dog warden for a
license for each dog, cat or other animal kept by him or her. The application
shall be accompanied by a license fee as follows:



      (1)   Each dog: $1.50;



      (2)   Each cat: $1.50;



      (3)   Each animal or other species: $1.50;



      (4)   Any kennel or pet shop having between five and ten
animals in its possession during the year: $10;



      (5)   Any kennel facility having in excess of ten animals
during the year: $15;



      (6)   Any animal dealer: $50;



      (7)   Any commercial zoo, animal act, circus or similar act of
exhibition of animals, covering all animals kept: $50;



      (8)   Any lively or riding stable, covering all horses kept:
$50; and



      (9)   Any abattoir, stockyard, hatchery, livestock auction or
other place where livestock or poultry are regularly bred, kept, offered for
sale or slaughtered for commercial purposes, covering all animals kept during
the year: $100.



   (B)   No fee shall be required of any humane society, veterinary
hospital, municipal animal control facility or zoological garden operated by
a governmental agency.



   (C)   No license shall be issued for any kennel unless such kennel
has been inspected by the dog warden and found to be meeting the standards
for kennels herein.



(1991 Code, § 3-31)  (Ord. 840.4, passed --)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.21  APPLICABILITY TO NON-RESIDENTS.



   Articles requiring a license shall not apply to non-residents of the
city who are only keeping domestic pets; provided that, the animals of such
owners shall not be kept in the city longer than 30 days and that the animals
are kept under restraint. No non-resident shall, however, keep any pet in the
county over the age of four months that has not been vaccinated.



(1991 Code, § 3-32)  (Ord. 840.4, passed --)  Penalty, see § 92.99



RABIES CONTROL



§ 92.35  VACCINATION REQUIRED.



   On or before July 1 of each year, every owner of an animal four months
old or over shall have it vaccinated against rabies. The owner of an animal
becoming four months of age shall have such animal vaccinated by the
fourteenth day after the date the animal attains this age or by July 1,
whichever comes first. Such vaccination shall be in accordance with the
vaccination requirements prescribed by the state’s Board of Health in all
respects, except the requirement that the vaccination be at six months of
age. Vaccination each year is not necessary if a vaccine approved by the
Board for longer periods is used. All such vaccinations shall be performed by
a licensed veterinarian or other qualified person.



(1991 Code, § 3-46)  (Ord. 840.4, passed --)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.36  VACCINATION CERTIFICATES, TAGS.



   The veterinarian or other qualified person that vaccinates an animal
shall issue to the owner thereof a vaccination certificate on a form
prescribed by the state’s Board of Health. The vaccination certificate
shall be prepared and issued in triplicate, one copy to be given to the owner
of the animal vaccinated and one copy to be forwarded by the veterinarian or
other qualified person to the county’s Board of Health. Each certificate
shall bear the name and address of the person who issued it, a serial number
and a brief description of the animal vaccinated. The veterinarian or other
qualified person shall also furnish each owner with a metal tag bearing the
certificate number and the year of vaccination. The tag may bear the name of
the person issuing it.



(1991 Code, § 3-47)  (Ord. 840.4, passed --)



§ 92.37  RABIES VOUCHER.



   Where a rabies voucher is purchased from the dog warden at the time of
applying for a license, the person purchasing such voucher shall, within 14
days, take the animal to a licensed veterinarian or other qualified person
who will vaccinate the animal, issuing a regular vaccination certificate in
the manner prescribed above. Such person shall return the voucher to the
animal pound which will present the voucher to the county’s Fiscal Court,
from which payment will be made to the person performing the vaccination.



(1991 Code, § 3-48)  (Ord. 840.4, passed --)



§ 92.38  CAT VACCINATION TAGS.



   The tag furnished by the veterinarian or other qualified person for
cats shall be given to the owner who shall retain same to be produced
whenever called upon to verify that any cat in his or her possession or owned
by him or her has had the required vaccination. The certificate of
vaccination may be produced if the tag has been lost.



(1991 Code, § 3-49)  (Ord. 840.4, passed --)



COMMERCIAL VENTURES



§ 92.50  KENNELS; GUARD AND SENTRY DOGS.



   (A)   All kennels shall, in addition to the other requirements of
this chapter, comply with the minimum standards of this section. Failure to
meet these standards shall be grounds for denial or revocation of a license
and the issuance of a citation subjecting the owner to the penalties herein.
Facilities shall be subject to inspection by the dog warden upon his or her
request during normal business hours. The minimum standards are as follows.



      (1)   Enclosures must be provided which shall allow adequate
protection against weather extremes. Floors of buildings, runs and walls
shall be of an impervious material to permit proper cleaning and disinfecting.



      (2)   Building temperature shall be maintained at a
comfortable level. Adequate ventilation shall be maintained.



      (3)   Each animal shall have sufficient space to stand up, lie
down and turn around in a natural position without touching the sides or tops
of cages.



      (4)   Cages are to be made of material and construction that
permit cleaning and sanitizing.



      (5)   Cage floors of concrete, unless radiantly heated, shall
have a resting board or some type of bedding.



      (6)   Runs shall provide an adequate exercise area and
protection from the weather. Runs shall have an impervious surface.



      (7)   All animal quarters and runs are to be kept clean, dry
and in a sanitary condition.



      (8)   The food shall be free from contamination, wholesome,
palatable and of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to meet the normal
daily requirements for the condition and size of the animal.



      (9)   All animals shall have fresh water available at all
times. Water vessels shall be mounted or secure in a manner that prevents
tipping and be of the removable type.



(1991 Code, § 3-66)



   (B)   Any kennel shall, in addition to the other requirements of
division (A) above, comply with the standards of this division (B) whenever
any dog is trained as a guard or sentry dog. Failure to meet these standards
shall be grounds for denial of or revocation of a kennel license and the
issuance of a citation subjecting the owner to the penalties herein. Such
standards are as follows.



      (1)   Runs shall have at least six-foot-high fences completely
surrounding them to which are to be added anti-climbers or the top must be
completely covered.



      (2)   All gates and entrances to the runs, kennel and training
area must be kept locked when not in use.



      (3)   A perimeter fence of at least eight feet high must be
installed to encircle the training and kennel area, to which area shall be
added anti-climbers. Fences must be maintained escape-proof.



      (4)   A dog in training as a guard or sentry dog must be
confined at all times to its kennel or run or training area unless he or she
is under the control of the handler.



      (5)   Any individual involved in training or guard or sentry
dogs must have completed a recognized course to qualify for giving such
training or to be able to demonstrate equivalent experience in giving such
training.



(1991 Code, § 3-67)



(Ord. 840.4, passed --)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.51  PET SHOPS.



   (A)   All pet shops, including pet shops run in conjunction with
another holding facility, shall, in addition to the other requirements of
this chapter, comply with the minimum standards of this section. Failure to
meet these standards shall be grounds for denial of or revocation of a
license and the issuance of a citation subjecting the owner to the penalties
herein. Facilities shall be subject to inspection by the dog warden upon his
request during normal business hours. Such standards are as follows.



      (1)   There shall be available hot water at a minimum
temperature of 160°F for washing cages and disinfecting and cold water
easily accessible to all parts of the shop. Fresh water shall be available to
all species at all times. Containers are to be cleaned and disinfected each
day. All water containers shall be mounted so the animal cannot turn them
over and shall be removable for cleaning.



      (2)   Room temperature of the shop shall be maintained at a
level that is healthful for every species of animal kept in the shop.



      (3)   All cages and enclosures are to be of a non-porous
material for easy cleaning and disinfecting. Each cage must be of sufficient
size that the animal will have room to stand, turn and lie down in the
natural position.



      (4)   All animals under three months of age shall be fed at
least three times per 24 hours. Food for all animals shall be served in a
clean dish so mounted that the animal cannot readily tip it over and shall be
of the removable type.



      (5)   Each bird must have sufficient room to sit on a perch.
Perches must be placed horizontal to each other in the same cage. Cages must
be cleaned every day and cages must be disinfected when birds are sold.
Parrots and other large birds shall have separate cages from smaller birds.



      (6)   The water temperature for fish shall be maintained at a
constant temperature that is healthful.



      (7)   There shall be sufficient, clean, dry bedding to meet
the needs of each individual animal.



      (8)   All animals must be fed, watered and cages cleaned every
day, including Sundays and holidays.



   (B)   Skunks sold at pet shops shall be quarantined six months prior
to sale unless it can be shown that the mother of such animal has been held
in captivity and quarantined six months prior to the birth of such animal
being sold and that the animal being sold has been in possession of the pet
shop since birth.



(1991 Code, § 3-68)  (Ord. 840.4, passed --)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.52  RIDING SCHOOLS OR STABLES.



   (A)   All riding schools or stables shall, in addition to other
requirements of this chapter, comply with the minimum standards of this
section. Failure to meet these standards shall be grounds for denial of or
revocation of a license and the issuance of a citation subjecting the owner
to the penalties herein. Facilities shall be subject to inspection by the dog
warden upon his or her request during normal business hours.



   (B)   Such standards are as follows.



      (1)   All animals shall be provided with daily food and water,
free from contamination, and such food shall be wholesome, palatable and of
sufficient quantity and nutritive value to meet the normal daily requirements
for the condition and size of the animal.



      (2)   All equipment used for riding must fit properly for each
individual animal.



      (3)   All buildings and sheds used for stabling animals shall
be well-lighted and ventilated and provide protection from the weather. All
buildings and sheds used for stabling animals shall be kept clean and in good
repair at all times and manure shall be removed therefrom daily. Any
enclosure where animals are kept shall be graded and drained so as to keep
their surfaces reasonably dry.



      (4)   Flies must be controlled through general sanitation and
necessary means.



      (5)   Animals let for riding purposes must be in good physical
condition.



(1991 Code, § 3-69)  (Ord. 840.4, passed --)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter (except
§§ 92.07(B) and 92.09 of this chapter) shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not less than
$15, nor more than $500, or be imprisoned for not less than five days, nor
more than 60 days, or both so fined and imprisoned.



   (B)   Any person violating §§ 92.07(B) or 92.09 of this chapter
shall, upon conviction, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined
not less than $50, nor more than $500, or be imprisoned for not less than ten
days, nor more than six months, or both so fined and imprisoned.



   (C)   If any violation is continuing, each day’s violation shall
be deemed a separate violation.



(1991 Code, § 3-10)  (Ord. 840.4, passed --)



CHAPTER 93:  FAIR HOUSING



Section



   93.01   Definitions



   93.02   Applicability



   93.03   Enforcement



   93.04   Enumeration of unlawful practices



 



   93.99   Penalty



§ 93.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DISCRIMINATION. Any direct or indirect act or practice of exclusion,
distinction, restriction, segregation, limitation, refusal, denial or any
other act or practice of differentiation or preference in the treatment of a
person or persons because of race, color, religion or national origin.



   FINANCIAL INSTITUTION. Any person engaged in the business of lending
money or guaranteeing losses.



   HOUSING ACCOMMODATION. Improved and unimproved property and means a
building, structure, lot or part thereof which is used or occupied, or is
intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied as the home or
residence of one or more individuals. Such accommodations include the
following.



      (1)   HOUSING UNIT. A single room, suite of rooms or
apartment, containing cooking and kitchen facilities, occupied or intended
for occupancy as living quarters by a person, by a family or by a group of
persons living together.



      (2)   ROOMING UNIT. A room or group of rooms forming a single,
habitable unit used for living or sleeping, but which does not contain
cooking and kitchen facilities.



   MEMBERS OF A FAMILY. The owner and spouse and any son, daughter, parent
or grandparent of the owner or spouse or any person who is wholly dependent
on any of them.



   OWNER. A lessee, sublessee, co-tenant, assignee, managing agent or
other person having the right of ownership or possession, or the right to
sell, rent or lease any housing accommodation.



   PERSON. An individual and any group of one or more natural persons such
as, but not limited to, labor unions, joint apprenticeship committees,
partnerships, associations, corporations, unincorporated organizations,
mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, legal representatives,
trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, any individual acting in a financial or
representative capacity, either appointed by a court or otherwise, the city
and county or any of its agencies and any other legal, governmental or
commercial entity as well as a natural person. The term PERSONS, when applied
to any of the foregoing, includes members, representatives, officers and
directors.



   REAL ESTATE BROKER or REAL ESTATE SALESPERSON. An individual, whether
licensed or not, who, for a fee, commission, salary or for other valuable
consideration, or who, with the intention or expectation of receiving or
collecting same, lists, sells, purchases, exchanges, rents or leases any
housing accommodation, including options thereupon, or who negotiates or
attempts to negotiate such activities; or who advertises or holds himself or
herself out as engaged in such activities; or who negotiates or attempts to
negotiate a loan, secured by a mortgage or other encumbrance, upon transfer
of any housing accommodation; or who is engaged in the business of charging
an advance fee or contract for the collection of a fee in connection with a
contract whereby he or she undertakes to promote the sale, purchase,
exchange, rental or lease of any housing accommodation through its listing in
a publication issued primarily for such purpose; or an individual employed by
or acting in behalf of any of these.



   REAL ESTATE OPERATOR. Any person who is engaged in the business of
selling, purchasing, exchanging, renting or leasing real estate, or the
improvements thereon, including options; or that derives income, in whole or
in part, from the sale, purchase, exchange, rental or lease of real estate;
or an individual employed by or acting on behalf of any of these.



   REAL PROPERTY. Buildings, structures, real estate, lands, tenements,
leaseholds, cooperatives, condominiums and hereditaments, corporeal and
incorporeal, or any interest in the above.



(1991 Code, § 6-26)  (Ord. 983-94, passed 3-10-1983)



§ 93.02  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   Nothing in this chapter shall:



      (1)   Apply to the rental or lease of any rooming unit in a
housing accommodation which contains not more than two housing units, if the
owner or a member of his or her family resides in the housing accommodation;



      (2)   Apply to the rental or lease of any rooming units in a
housing unit containing one rooming unit or less, if the owner of a member of
his or her family resides in the housing unit; or



      (3)   Make it a discriminatory practice for a religious
institution or organization or a charitable or educational organization
operated, supervised or controlled by a religious institution or organization
to give preference to members of the same religion in a real property
transaction that is calculated by such religious corporation, association or
society to promote the religious principals for which it is established or
maintained.



   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect the legal
rights of a private individual homeowner to dispose of his or her property
through private sale without the aid of any real estate operator, broker or
salesperson and without advertising or public display.



   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall require a real estate operator
to negotiate with any individual who has not shown evidence of financial
ability to consummate the purchase or rental of a housing unit.



(1991 Code, § 6-27)  (Ord. 983-94, passed 3-10-1983)



§ 93.03  ENFORCEMENT.



   In the enforcement of this chapter, the City Council has the following
powers and duties:



   (A)   To meet and exercise its powers at any place within the city;



   (B)   To employ attorneys, hearing examiners, clerks and other
employees and agents, and to appoint and empower committees and divisions to
assist in effecting the purpose and provisions of this chapter;



   (C)   To accept gifts or bequests, grants or other payments, public
or private, to help finance its activities;



   (D)   To remove, initiate, investigate, seek to conciliate, hold
hearings on and pass upon complaints alleging violations of this chapter;



   (E)   To administer oaths;



   (F)   To compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of
evidence before it by subpoena issued by the Circuit Court;



   (G)   To issue remedial orders, after notice and hearing requiring
cessation of violations and to seek enforcement of such orders;



   (H)   To issue such affirmative orders to carry out the purposes of
this chapter. Affirmative action orders may include, but is not limited to,
the remedies enumerated in KRS 344.230(3);



   (I)   To adopt, promulgate, amend and rescind rules and regulations
to effectuate the purposes and provisions of this chapter, including
regulations concerning the notices; and



   (J)   All other such powers as provided in the state’s Civil
Rights Act, being KRS Ch. 344.



(1991 Code, § 6-28)  (Ord. 983-94, passed 3-10-1983)



§ 93.04  ENUMERATION OF UNLAWFUL PRACTICES.



   (A)   It is an unlawful practice for a real estate broker, a real
estate salesperson, a real estate operator or an individual employed by or
acting on behalf of any of them to:



      (1)   Refuse to sell, exchange, rent or lease or otherwise
deny to or withhold real property from an individual because of his or her
race, color, religion or national origin;



      (2)   Discriminate against an individual because of his or her
race, color, religion or national origin in the terms, conditions or
privileges of the sale, exchange, rental, lease of real property or in the
furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith;



      (3)   Refuse to receive or transmit a bona fide offer to
purchase, rent or lease real property to an individual because of his or her
race, color, religion or national origin;



      (4)   Refuse to negotiate for the sale, rental or lease of
real property to an individual because of his or her race, color, religion or
national origin;



      (5)   Represent to an individual that real property is not
available for inspection, sale, rental or lease when in fact it is so
available or to refuse to permit an individual to inspect the real property
because of his or her race, color, religion or national origin;



      (6)   Print, circulate, post or mail or cause to be printed,
circulated, posted or mailed an advertisement or a sign, or to use a form of
application for the purchase, rental or lease of real property, or to make a
record of any inquiry in connection with the prospective purchase, rental or
lease of real property which indicates, directly or indirectly, a limitation,
specification or discrimination as to race, color, religion or national
origin or an intent to make such a limitation, specification or
discrimination;



      (7)   Offer, solicit, accept, use or retain a listing of real
property for sale, rental or lease with the understanding that an individual
may be discriminated against in the sale, rental or lease of that real
property or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection
therewith because of his or her race, color, religion or national origin;
and/or



      (8)   Otherwise deny or withhold real property from an
individual because of his or her race, color, religion or national origin.



   (B)   It is an unlawful practice for a real estate operator, or for
a real estate broker, or a real estate salesperson, or for a financial
institution or an employee of any of them or any other persons, for the
purposes of inducing a real estate transaction from which he or she may
benefit financially, to:



      (1)   Represent that a change has occurred or will or may
occur in the composition with respect to race, color, religion or national
origin of the owners or occupants in the block, neighborhood or area in which
the real property is located; and/or



      (2)   Represent that this change will or may result in the
lowering of property values, an increase in criminal or antisocial behavior,
or a decline in the quality of schools in the block, neighborhood or area in
which the real property is located.



   (C)   It is an unlawful practice for a financial institution or an
individual employed by or acting on behalf of a financial institution to:



      (1)   Discriminate against an individual because of the race,
color, religion or national origin of the individual or the present or
prospective owner, tenant or occupant of the real property or of a member,
stockholder, director, officer, employee or representative of any of them, in
the granting, withholding, extending, modifying or renewing the rates, terms,
conditions, privileges or other provisions of financial assistance or in the
extension of services in connection therewith; and/or



      (2)   Use a form of application for financial assistance or to
make or keep a record or inquiry in connection with applications for
financial assistance which indicate directly or indirectly a limitation,
specification or discrimination as to race, color, religion or national
origin or an intent to make such a limitation, specification or
discrimination.



(1991 Code, § 6-30)  (Ord. 983-94, passed 3-10-1983)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates an order of the City Council issued in
accordance with this chapter shall, upon conviction in a court of competent
jurisdiction, be subject to a fine of not less than $25, nor more than $100,
or imprisonment for 30 days, or both.



   (B)   Any person holding a city occupational license to sell or
trade in real estate who violates an order of the City Council in accordance
with this chapter in addition to the penalties set out above shall also be
subject to suspension of such license for a period of not less than 30 days.



   (C)   If a real estate broker, a real estate salesperson or an
employee thereof has failed to comply with any order issued by the City
Council or has been found to have committed an unlawful practice in violation
of this chapter, the City Council shall so notify in writing the Real Estate
Commission of the state.



   (D)   It shall be no defense that a violation of this chapter was
procured by a person not subject to provisions of this chapter.



   (E)   It shall be no defense to a violation of this chapter by a
real estate operator, real estate broker, real estate salesperson, financial
institution or other persons subject to the provisions of this chapter that
the violation was requested, sought or otherwise procured by a person not
subject to the provisions of this chapter.



(1991 Code, § 6-29)  (Ord. 983-94, passed 3-10-1983)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      110.   GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS



      111.   OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAXES



      112.   ALCOHOL



      113.   INSURANCE COMPANIES



      114.   TAXICABS



      115.   SOLICITATIONS



      116.   FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS



      117.   ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS



      118.   GARBAGE COLLECTION LICENSES



CHAPTER 110:  GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS



Section



General Provisions



   110.01   License required



   110.02   Definition



   110.03   Revenue



   110.04   Fees



   110.05   Issuance of license



Specific Businesses



   110.20   Off-site motor vehicle sales



   110.21   Local deposit franchise tax



   110.22   Farmers market annual license fee



 



   110.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 110.01  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   Each person engaged for compensation in any trade, occupation, business
or profession within the city shall procure from the city an annual license
and shall pay to the city a fee for such license as is hereinafter provided
for the privilege of engaging in such trade, occupation, business or
profession.



(Ord. 016-209, passed --2016)



§ 110.02  DEFINITION.



   As used in this subchapter, the word PERSON shall include, but is not
limited to, corporations, joint stock companies, partnerships, associations
and individuals.



(Ord. 016-209, passed --2016)



§ 110.03  REVENUE.



   The revenue derived from the license fee herein levied shall be paid
into and become a part of the General Fund of the city.



(Ord. 016-209, passed --2016)



§ 110.04  FEES.



   (A)   The license fee herein levied shall be due on July 1 each
year, unless otherwise stated; except that, persons commencing or desiring to
operate a trade, business, occupation or profession for only part of a
license year, and having sales of less than the sum of $500, after July 1 of
each license year shall pay a prorated fee, except as otherwise specifically
proved here, equal to as many twelfths of the annual license fee as there are
calendar months remaining in the license year, including the month in which
the license is granted. Persons who cease business during the license year
shall be entitled to a refund of the license fee only if there is more than
six months remaining in the license year and the licensee advised the City
Clerk at 634 Conestoga Parkway, Shepherdsville, Kentucky 40165 in writing at
least 30 days prior to the cessation of business as to the intention to close
permanently. The license fee refund, if the notice is given, shall be
prorated equal to as many twelfths of the annual license fee as there are
calendar months remaining in the license year.



   (B)   The following fees shall be paid by a person conducting or
engaged in the following business, occupations or professions.



      (1)   Group I. Alcoholic Beverages, Sale of.



         (a)   Liquor dealers holding a state retail package
liquor license: $400;



         (b)   Alcoholic beverage dealer who holds a state
distributors or wholesaler’s or brewer’s license, making sales or
deliveries in the city: $200; and



         (c)   Malt beverage dealer holding a state retail
license: $200.



      (2)   Group II. Amusement. Distributing/servicing/operating
coin-operated amusement machines (e.g., nickelodeons and music machines):
$10/per machine;



      (3)   Group III: Fireworks Stands.



         (a)   For purposes of this division (B)(3), the term
FIREWORKS is as defined in KRS 227.702.



         (b)   Each individual or entity desiring to sell
fireworks within the city on a temporary basis shall obtain a temporary
business license from the city’s Government Center. Said individual or
entity shall complete an application and shall state thereon the dates of
operation of the temporary business. Temporary businesses selling fireworks
may operate for up to 14 days. Any structure erected for the sale or storage
of fireworks on a temporary basis must be removed within three days of the
closure of the temporary business.



         (c)   The fee for said temporary license shall be $1,000
to be used for fire prevention and education.



         (d)   No license shall be issued by the city until all
necessary inspections are complete and proof of compliance has been provided
to the city.



         (e)   No license shall be issued until proof of
liability insurance of at least $1,000,000 has been obtained and provided to
the city by all temporary businesses selling fireworks.



         (f)   Each temporary business selling fireworks shall
provide visibly marked parking, including handicapped accessible parking if
otherwise required by law. Said required parking shall comply with the
county’s planning and zoning regulations.



         (g)   Each temporary business selling fireworks shall
submit a site plan to the city’s Fire Department with dimensions stated
thereon showing parking and proximity to other structures.



         (h)   Each temporary business selling fireworks shall
abide by the regulations of the current edition of the National Fire
Protection Association 1124 (NFPA 1124) in relation to distance between
fireworks location and other structures.



         (i)   All temporary businesses selling fireworks shall
at all times have posted signs prohibiting smoking on site and prohibiting
the discharge of any explosive or fireworks on site. At least one sign shall
be posted on each side of the structure or lot wherein hazardous materials
are stored.



         (j)   Temporary businesses selling fireworks shall be
exempt from remitting occupational withholding tax to the city.



         (k)   All persons working at a temporary business
selling fireworks shall be at least 18 years of age or older; except that,
minors may work in said business if said minor is the child of the owner or
manager of the business and works under his or her direct supervision.



         (l)   No fireworks may be sold to anyone under the age
of 18.



         (m)   Any electrical work done on the premises of a
temporary business selling fireworks shall be done to current code and must
comply with all state, federal and local laws.



         (n)   No person shall sleep in a tent or in the open on
the site of a temporary business selling fireworks.



      (4)   Group IV. All Other Businesses. All other businesses not
being included in Group I, Group II or Group III shall pay a license fee of
$100 per year.



(Ord. 016-209, passed --2016)



§ 110.05  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Each person required by this subchapter to obtain a license
shall obtain same on or before the license fee provided for herein becomes
due from the City Clerk and shall disclose at the time of application for
such license or licenses all occupations or businesses in which he or she is
or will be engaged during the license year.



   (B)   The City Clerk shall not issue any malt beverage or liquor
licenses under this subchapter until the applicant presents to her proof of
the issuance to the applicant of a similar license by the state for the same
period.



(Ord. 016-209, passed --2016)



SPECIFIC BUSINESSES



§ 110.20  OFF-SITE MOTOR VEHICLE SALES.



   The city permits the “off-site” sale of motor vehicles within the
city limits; provided further that, said “off-site” sale shall be
conducted on property zoned “highway commercial” (B-1) or
“industrial” (I-C).



(Ord. 004-634, passed --2004)



§ 110.21  LOCAL DEPOSIT FRANCHISE TAX.



   (A)   There is hereby imposed on all “financial institutions”,
as defined in KRS Ch. 136, located within the corporate limits of the city
for the 1996 tax year and all subsequent years, a franchise tax at the rate
of 0.017% on all deposits, as defined in KRS 136.575(1), maintained in such
financial institutions.



   (B)   The city will issue tax bills to financial institutions no
later than December 1 of each year. Payment of the tax shall be due with a 2%
discount by December 31 of each year, or without the discount by January 31
of the subsequent year.



   (C)   All taxes due in accordance with these sections which are not
paid before 6-30-1997, for tax year 1996, or which are not paid before
January 31, for all subsequent tax years, shall be deemed delinquent and
shall be subject to a penalty of 10% and shall bear interest at the rate of
6% per annum.



   (D)   The city shall have a lien for taxes not paid prior to
6-30-1997, for the tax year 1996 and 1-31-1998, for all tax years 1997 and,
thereafter, upon any and all property of the financial institution which lien
shall be superior to all encumbrances subsequent to said dates herein.



   (E)   Said tax is levied for the purpose of raising revenue to pay
salaries of officers and employees; for the repair and maintenance of street,
public ways and public buildings in said city; to pay for lighting city
streets; and to pay all proper charges and legal demands against the city.



(Ord. 996-390, passed 12-9-1996)



§ 110.22  FARMERS MARKET ANNUAL LICENSE FEE.



   (A)   All fresh farm produce and farm products may be sold by the
owner of the farm producing those items for sale during the times and at a
location designated and approved for such purpose by the city for an annual
fee of $20.



   (B)   Nothing contained herein shall excuse any requirement of any
federal, state, or county agency for inspection or certification of any
product offered for sale under this section and any product requiring such
inspection or certification shall not be offered for sale without same.



(Ord. 018-257, passed 4-23-2018)



§ 110.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in a trade,
occupation, business or profession within the city without reporting and
paying the license fees herein provided and required by §§ 110.01 through
110.05 of this chapter. Any person, firm or corporation violating any
provisions of §§ 110.01 through 110.05 of this chapter shall be fined not
less than $50 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.



(Ord. 016-209, passed --2016)



CHAPTER 111:  OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAXES



Section



   111.01   Definitions



   111.02   License application required



   111.03   Occupational license tax payment required



   111.04   Apportionment



   111.05   Employers to withhold



   111.06   Returns required



   111.07   Extensions



   111.08   Refunds



   111.09   Federal audit provisions



   111.10   Administrative provisions



   111.11   Information to remain confidential



   111.12   Use of occupational license tax



 



   111.99   Penalty



§ 111.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUSINESS. Any enterprise, activity, trade, occupation, profession or
undertaking of any nature conducted for gain or profit. BUSINESS shall not
include the usual activities of board trade, chambers of commerce, trade
associations or unions, or other associations performing services usually
performed by trade associations or unions. BUSINESS shall not include funds,
foundations, corporations or associations organized and operated for the
exclusive and sole purpose of religious, charitable, scientific, literary,
educational, civic or fraternal purposes, where not part of the earnings,
incomes or receipts of such unit, group or association, inures to the benefit
of any private shareholder or other person.



   BUSINESS ENTITY. Each separate corporation, limited liability company,
business development corporation, partnership, limited partnership,
registered limited liability partnership, sole proprietorship, association,
joint stock company, receivership, trust, professional service organization
or other legal entity through which business is conducted.



   CITY. The City of Shepherdsville, Kentucky.



   COMPENSATION. Wages, salaries, commissions or any other form of
remuneration paid or payable by an employer for services performed by an
employee, which are required to be reported for federal income tax purposes
and adjusted as follows:



      (1)   Include any amounts contributed by an employee to any
retirement, profit sharing or deferred compensation plan, which are deferred
for federal income tax purposes under a salary reduction agreement or similar
arrangement, including, but not limited to, salary reduction arrangements
under I.R.C. §§ 401(a), 401(k), 402(e), 403(a), 403(b), 408, 414(h) or 457;
and



      (2)   Include any amounts contributed by an employee to any
welfare benefit, fringe benefit or other benefit plan made by salary
reduction or other payment method which permits employees to elect to reduce
federal taxable compensation under the Internal Revenue Code, including, but
not limited to, I.R.C. §§ 125 and 132.



   CONCLUSION OF THE FEDERAL AUDIT. The date that the adjustments made by
the Internal Revenue Service to net income as reported on the business
entity’s federal income tax return become final and unappealable.



   EMPLOYEE. Any person who renders services to another person or any
business entity for compensation, including an officer of a corporation and
any officer, employee or elected official of the United States, a state or
any political subdivision of a state, or any agency of instrumentality of any
one or more of the above. A person classified as an independent contractor
under the Internal Revenue Code shall not be considered an EMPLOYEE.



   EMPLOYER. The person for who an individual performs or performed any
service, of whatever nature, as the employee of such person; except that:



      (1)   If the person for whom the individual performs or
performed the services does not have control of the payments of the wages for
such services, the term EMPLOYER means the person having control of the
payment of such wages; and



      (2)   In the case of a person paying wages on behalf of a
non-resident alien individual, foreign partnership or foreign corporation,
not engaged in trade or business within the United States, the term EMPLOYER
means such person.



   FINAL DETERMINATION OF THE FEDERAL AUDIT. The revenue agent’s report
or other documents reflecting the final and unappealable adjustments made by
the Internal Revenue Service.



   FISCAL YEAR. An accounting period of 12 months ending on the last day
of any month other than December.



   INTERNAL REVENUE CODE. The Internal Revenue Code in effect on
12-31-2003, exclusive of any amendments made subsequent to that date, other
than amendments that extend provisions in effect on 12-31-2003, that would
otherwise terminate.



   NET PROFIT. Gross income, as defined in I.R.C. § 61, minus all the
deductions from gross income allowed by I.R.C. Ch. 1, and adjusted as follows:



      (1)   Include any amount claimed as a deduction for state tax
or local tax which is computed, in whole or in part, by reference to gross or
net income and which is paid or accrued to any state of the United States,
local taxing authority in a state, District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of
Puerto Rico, any territory or possession of the United States or any foreign
country or political subdivision thereof;



      (2)   Include any amount claimed as a deduction that directly
or indirectly is allocable to income which is either exempt from taxation or
otherwise not taxed;



      (3)   Include any amount claimed as a net operating loss
carry-back or carry-forward allowed under I.R.C. § 172;



      (4)   Include any amount of income and expenses passed through
separately as required by the Internal Revenue Code to an owner of a business
entity that is a pass-through entity for federal tax purposes; and



      (5)   Exclude any amount of income that is exempt from state
taxation by the commonwealth’s Constitution, or the Constitution and
statutory laws of the United States.



   PERSON. Every natural person, whether a resident or non-resident of the
city. Whenever the word PERSON is used in a clause prescribing and imposing a
penalty in the nature of a fine or imprisonment, the word, as applied to a
partnership or other form of unincorporated enterprise, shall mean the
partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, shall mean the
officers and directors thereof.



   RETURN or REPORT. Any properly completed and, if required, signed form,
statement, certification, declaration or any other document permitted or
required to be submitted or filed with the city.



   SALES REVENUE. Receipts from the sale, lease or rental of goods,
services or property.



   TAX DISTRICT. Any city of the first to fifth class, county, urban
county, charter county, consolidated local government, school district,
special taxing district or any other statutorily created entity with the
authority to levy net profits, gross receipts or occupational license taxes.



   TAXABLE NET PROFIT.



      (1)   In case of a business entity having payroll or sales
revenue only within the city means net profit, as defined herein; and



      (2)   In case of a business entity having payroll or sales
revenue both within and without a city means net profit, as defined herein,
and as apportioned under § 111.04 of this chapter.



   TAXABLE YEAR. The calendar year or fiscal year ending during the
calendar year, upon the basis of which net income is computed.



(Ord. 014-171, passed 12-30-2014)



§ 111.02  LICENSE APPLICATION REQUIRED.



   Every person and business entity engaged in any business in the city
shall be required to apply for and obtain an occupational license from the
city before the commencement of business or in the event of a change of
business status. Licensees are required to notify the city of any changes in
address, the cessation of business or any other changes which render the
information supplied to the city in the license application inaccurate.



(Ord. 014-171, passed 12-30-2014)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.03  OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAX PAYMENT REQUIRED.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) below, every person or
business entity engaged in any business for profit and any person or business
entity that is required to make a filing with the Internal Revenue Service or
the commonwealth’s Revenue Cabinet shall be required to file and pay to the
city an occupational license tax for the privilege of engaging in such
activities within the city. The occupational license tax shall be measured by
1.5% of all wages and compensation paid or payable in the city for work done
or services performed or rendered in the city by every resident and
non-resident who is an employee.



   (B)   The occupational license tax imposed in this section shall not
apply to the following persons or business entity:



      (1)   Any bank, trust company, combined bank and trust
company, or trust, banking and title insurance company organized and doing
business in this state, any savings and loan association whether state or
federally chartered;



      (2)   Any compensation received by members of the
commonwealth’s National Guard for active duty training, unit training
assemblies and annual field training;



      (3)   Any compensation received by precinct workers for
election training or work at election booths in state, county and local
primary, regular or special elections;



      (4)   Public service corporations that pay an ad valorem tax
on property valued and assessed by the commonwealth’s Department of Revenue
pursuant to the provisions of KRS 136.120. Licensees whose businesses are
predominantly non-public service who are also engaged in public service
activity are required to pay a license fee on their net profits derived from
the non-public service activities apportioned to the city;



      (5)   Persons or business entities that have been issued a
license under KRS Ch. 243 to engage in manufacturing or trafficking in
alcoholic beverages. Persons engaged in the business of manufacturing or
trafficking in alcoholic beverages are required to file a return, but may
exclude the portion of their gross receipts derived from the manufacturing or
trafficking in alcoholic beverages; and



      (6)   Life insurance companies incorporated under the laws of
a doing business in the commonwealth.



(Ord. 014-171, passed 12-30-2014)



§ 111.04  APPORTIONMENT.



   (A)   Except as provided herein, gross receipts shall be apportioned
as follows:



      (1)   For business entities with both payroll and sales
revenue in more than one tax district, by multiplying the gross receipts by a
fraction, the numerator of which is the payroll factor, described in division
(A)(3) below, plus the sales factor, described in division (B) below, and the
denominator of which is two;



      (2)   For business entities with sales revenue in more than
one tax district, by multiplying the gross receipts by the sales factor as
set forth in division (B) below; and



      (3)   The payroll factor is a fraction, the numerator of which
is the total amount paid or payable in the city during the tax period by the
business entity for compensation, and the denominator of which is the total
compensation paid or payable by the business entity everywhere during the tax
period. Compensation is paid or payable in the city based on the time the
individual’s service is performed within the city.



   (B)   The sales factor is a fraction, the numerator of which is the
total sales revenue of the business entity in the city during the tax period
and the dominator of which is the total sales revenue of the business entity
everywhere during the tax period:



      (1)   The sales, lease or rental of tangible personal property
is in the city if:



         (a)   The property is delivered or shipped to a
purchaser, other than the United States government, or to the designee of the
purchaser within the city regardless of the F.O.B. point or other conditions
of the sale; or



         (b)   The property is shipped from an office, store,
warehouse, factory or other place of storage in the city and the purchaser is
the United States Government.



      (2)   Sales revenues, other than revenues from the sale, lease
or rental of tangible personal property or the lease or rental of real
property, are apportioned to the city based upon a fraction, the numerator of
which is the time spent in performing such income-producing activity within
the city and the denominator of which is the total time spent performing that
income-producing activity;



      (3)   Sales revenue from the sale, lease or rental of real
property is allocated to the tax district where the property is located;



      (4)   If the apportionment provisions of this section do not
fairly represent the extent of the business entity’s activity in the city,
the business entity may petition the city or the city may require, in respect
to all or any part of the business entity’s business activity, if
reasonable;



      (5)   Separate accounting; and



      (6)   The exclusion of any one or more of the factors:



         (a)   The inclusion of one or more additional factors
which will fairly represent the business entity’s business activity in the
city; or



         (b)   The employment of any other method to effectuate
an equitable allocation and apportionment of gross receipts.



   (C)   When compensation is paid or payable for work done or services
performed or rendered by an employee, both within and without the city, the
license tax shall be measured by that part of the compensation paid or
payable as a result of work done or service performed or rendered within the
city. The license tax shall be computed by obtaining the percentage which the
compensation for work performed or services rendered within the city bears to
the total wages and compensation paid or payable. In order for the city to
verify the accuracy of a taxpayer’s reported percentages under this
division (C), the taxpayer shall maintain adequate records.



   (D)   All partnerships, S corporations and all other entities where
income is “passed through” to the owners are subject to this chapter. The
occupational license tax imposed in this chapter is assessed against income
before it is “passed through” these entities to the owners.



   (E)   If any business entity dissolves, ceases to operate or
withdraws from the city during any taxable year, or if any business entity in
any manner surrenders or loses its charter during any taxable year, the
dissolution, cessation of business, withdrawal or loss of charter shall not
defeat the filing of returns and the assessment and collection of any
occupational license tax for the period of that taxable year during which the
business entity had business activity in the city.



   (F)   If a business entity makes, or is required to make, a federal
income tax return, the occupational license tax shall be computed for the
purposes of this chapter on the basis of the same calendar or fiscal year
required by the federal government, and shall employ the same methods of
accounting required for federal income tax purposes.



(Ord. 014-171, passed 12-30-2014)



§ 111.05  EMPLOYERS TO WITHHOLD.



   (A)   Every employer making payment of compensation to an employee
shall deduct and withhold from the compensation on occupational license tax
calculated under § 111.03 of this chapter.



   (B)   Every employer required to deduct and withhold tax under this
section shall, for the quarter ending after January 1 and for each quarter
ending thereafter, on or before the end of the month following the close of
each quarter, make a return and report to the city, and pay to the city, the
tax required to be withheld under this section, unless the employer is
permitted or required to report within a reasonable time after some other
period as determined by the city.



   (C)   Every employer who fails to withhold or pay to the city any
sums required by this chapter to be withheld and paid shall be personally and
individually liable to the city for any sum or sums withheld or required to
be withheld in accordance with the provisions of this section.



   (D)   The city shall have a lien upon all the property of any
employer who fails to withhold or pay over to the city sums required to be
withheld under this section. If the employer withholds, but fails to pay the
amounts withheld to the city, the lien shall commence as of the date the
amounts withheld were required to be paid to the city. If the employer fails
to withhold, the lien shall commence at the time the liability of the
employer is assessed by the city.



   (E)   Every employer required to deduct and withhold tax under this
section shall annually on or before February 28 of each year complete and
file a form furnished or approved by the city a reconciliation of the
occupational license tax withheld where compensation is paid or payable to
employees. Either copies of federal forms W-2 and W-3, transmittal of wage
and tax statements or a detailed employee listing with the required
equivalent information, as determined by the city, shall be submitted.



   (F)   Every employer shall furnish each employee a statement on or
before January 31 of each year showing the amount of compensation and
occupational license tax deducted by the employer form the compensation paid
to the employee for payment to the city during the preceding calendar year.



   (G)   An employer shall be liable for the payment of the tax
required to be deducted and withheld under this section.



   (H)   The president, vice-president, secretary, treasurer or any
other person holding an equivalent corporate office of any business entity
subject to this section shall be personally and individually liable, both
jointly and severally, for any tax required to be withheld from compensation
paid or payable to one or more employees of the business entity, and neither
the corporate dissolution or withdrawal of the business entity from the city,
nor the cessation of holding any corporate office, shall discharge that
liability; provided that, the personal and individual liability shall apply
to each and every person holding the corporate office at the time the tax
becomes or became obligated. No person shall be personally and individually
liable under this division (H) unless such person had authority to collect,
truthfully account for or pay over the tax imposed by this chapter at the
time that the taxes imposed by this chapter become or became due.



   (I)   Notwithstanding divisions (G) and (H) above, every employee
receiving compensation in the city subject to the tax imposed under § 111.03
of this chapter shall be personally liable for any amount due. In all cases
where the employer does not withhold the tax levied under this chapter from
the employee, such employee or employees shall be responsible for filing with
the city, county, school district each quarter in the same manner as if he,
she or they were the employer.



(Ord. 014-171, passed 12-30-2014)



§ 111.06  RETURNS REQUIRED.



   (A)   All business entity returns for the preceding taxable year
shall be made by April 15 of each year, except returns made on the basis of a
fiscal year, which shall be made by the fifteenth day of the fourth month
following the close of the fiscal year. Blank forms for returns shall be
supplied by the city.



   (B)   Every business entity shall submit a copy of its federal
income tax return and all supporting statements and schedules at the time of
filing its occupational license tax return with the city. Whenever, in the
opinion of the city, it is necessary to examine the federal income tax return
of any business entity in order to audit the return, the city may compel the
business entity to produce for inspection a copy of any statements and
schedules in support thereof that have not been previously filed. The city
may also require copies of reports of adjustments made by the federal
government.



   (C)   Every business entity subject to an occupational license tax
governed by the provisions of this chapter shall keep records, render under
oath statements, make returns and comply with rules as the city from time to
time may prescribe. Whenever the city deems it necessary, the city may
require a business entity, by notice served to the business entity, to make a
return, render statements under oath or keep records, as the city deems
sufficient to determine the tax liability of the business entity.



   (D)   The city may require, for the purpose of ascertaining the
correctness of any return or for the purposes of making an estimate of the
taxable income of any business entity, the attendance of a representative of
the business entity or of any other person having knowledge in the premises.



   (E)   The full amount of the unpaid tax payable by any business
entity, as appears from the face of the return, shall be paid to the city at
the time prescribed for filing the occupational license tax return,
determined without regard to any extension of time for filing the return.



(Ord. 014-171, passed 12-30-2014)



§ 111.07  EXTENSIONS.



   (A)   The city may grant any business entity an extension of not
more than six months, unless a longer extension has been granted by the
Internal Revenue Service or is agreed to by the city and the business entity,
for filing its return, if the business entity, on or before the date
prescribed for payment of the occupational license tax, requests the
extension and pays the amount properly estimated as its tax.



   (B)   If the time for filing a return is extended, the business
shall pay, as part of the tax, an amount equal to 12% per annum simple
interest on the tax shown due on the return, but not been previously paid,
from the time the tax was due until the return is actually filed and the tax
paid to the city. A fraction of a month is counted as an entire month.



(Ord. 014-171, passed 12-30-2014)



§ 111.08  REFUNDS.



   (A)   Where there has been an overpayment of tax under § 111.05 of
this chapter, a refund or credit shall be made to the employer to the extent
of overpayment only if a written application for refund or credit is received
by the city from the employer within two years from the date the overpayment
was made.



   (B)   An employee who has compensation attributable to activities
performed outside the city, based on time spent outside the city, whose
employer has withheld the remitted to the city, the occupational license tax
on the compensation attributable to activities performed outside the city,
may file for a refund within two years of the date prescribed by law for the
filing of a return. The employee shall provide a schedule and computation
sufficient to verify the refund claim and the city may confirm with the
employer the percentage of time spent outside the city and the amount of
compensation attributable to activities performed outside the city prior to
approval of the refund.



(Ord. 014-171, passed 12-30-2014)



§ 111.09  FEDERAL AUDIT PROVISIONS.



   (A)   (1)   As soon as practicable after each return is received,
the city may examine and audit the return. If the amount of tax computed by
the city is greater than the amount returned by the business entity, the
additional tax shall be assessed and a notice of assessment mailed to the
business entity by the city within years from the date the return was filed,
except as otherwise provided in this division (A).



         (a)   In the case of a failure to file a return or of a
fraudulent return, the additional tax may be assessed at any time.



         (b)   In the case of a return where a business entity
understates net profit, or omits an amount properly includable in net
profits, or both, which understatement or omission or both, it is in excess
of 25% of the amount of net profit stated in the return, the additional tax
may be assessed at any time within six years after the return was filed.



         (c)   In the case of an assessment of additional tax
relating directly to adjustments resulting from a final determination of a
federal audit, the additional tax may be assessed before the expiration of
the times provided in this division (A), or six months from the date the city
receives the final determination of the federal audit from the business
entity, whichever is later.



      (2)   The times provided in this division (A) may be extended
by agreement between the business entity and the city. For the purposes of
this division (A), a return filed before the last day prescribed by law for
filing the return shall be considered as filed on the last day.



      (3)   Any extension granted for filing the return shall also
be considered as extending the last day prescribed by law for filing the
return.



   (B)   Every business entity shall submit a copy of the final
determination of the federal audit within 30 days of the conclusion of the
federal audit.



   (C)   The city may initiate a civil action for the collection of any
additional tax within the times prescribed in division (A) above.



(Ord. 014-171, passed 12-30-2014)



§ 111.10  ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.



   (A)   No suit shall be maintained in any court to restrain or delay
the collection or payment of the tax levied by this chapter.



   (B)   Any tax collected pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
may be refunded or credited within two years of the date prescribed by law
for the filing of a return or the date the money was paid to the city,
whichever is the later; except that:



      (1)   In any case where the assessment period contained in §
111.09 of this chapter has been extended by an agreement between the business
entity and the city, the limitation contained in this division (B) shall be
extended accordingly; and



      (2)   If the claim for refund or credit relates directly to
adjustments resulting from a federal audit, the business entity shall file a
claim for refund or credit within the time provided for in this division (B)
or six months from the conclusion of the federal audit, whichever is later.



   (C)   The authority to refund or credit overpayments of taxes
collected pursuant to this chapter is vested exclusively in the city.



(Ord. 014-171, passed 12-30-2014)



§ 111.11  INFORMATION TO REMAIN CONFIDENTIAL.



   (A)   No present or former employee of any tax district shall
intentionally and without authorization inspect or divulge any information
acquired by him or her of the affairs of any person, or information regarding
the tax schedules, returns or reports required to be filed with the tax
district or other proper officer, or any information produced by a hearing or
investigation, insofar as the information may have to do with the affairs of
the person’s business. This prohibition does not extend to information
required in prosecutions for making false reports or returns for taxation, or
any other infraction of the tax laws, or in any way made a matter of public
record, nor does it preclude furnishing any taxpayer or the taxpayer’s
properly authorized agent with information respecting his or her own return.
Further, this prohibition does not preclude any employee of the tax district
from testifying in any court, or from introducing as evidence returns or
reports filed with the tax district, in an action for violation of a tax
district tax laws or in any action challenging a tax district tax laws.



   (B)   The city reserves the right to disclose to the Commissioner of
Revenue of the commonwealth or his or her duly authorized agent all such
information and rights to inspect any of the books and records of the city if
the Commissioner of Revenue of the commonwealth grants to the city the
reciprocal right to obtain information from the files and records of the
commonwealth’s Department of Revenue and maintains the privileged character
of the information so furnished; provided further that, the city may publish
statistics based on such information in such a manner as not to reveal data
respecting net profits or compensation of any person.



   (C)   In addition, the city is empowered to execute similar
reciprocity agreements as described in division (B) above with any other
taxing entity, should there be a need for exchange of information in order to
effect diligent enforcement of this chapter.



(Ord. 014-171, passed 12-30-2014)



§ 111.12  USE OF OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAX.



   All money derived from the license taxes under the provisions of this
chapter shall be paid to the city and placed to the credit of the city’s
General Revenue Fund.



(Ord. 014-171, passed 12-30-2014)



§ 111.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   A business entity subject to tax on gross receipts may be
subject to a penalty equal to 10% or $10, whichever is greater, of the tax
due for each calendar month or fraction thereof if the business entity:



      (1)   Fails to file any return or report on or before the due
date prescribed for filing or as extended by the city; or



      (2)   Fails to pay the tax computed on the return or report on
or before the due date prescribed for payment.



   (B)   Every employer who fails to file a return or pay the tax on or
before the time prescribed under § 111.05 of this chapter may be subject to
a penalty in the amount equal to 5% of the tax due for each calendar month or
fraction thereof. The total penalty levied pursuant to this shall not exceed
25% of the total tax due; however, the penalty shall not be less than $25.



   (C)   In addition to the penalties prescribed in this section, any
business entity or employer shall pay, as part of the tax, an amount equal to
0.5% per month after due date until the tax is paid to the city. A fraction
of a month is counted as an entire month.



   (D)   Every tax imposed by this chapter, and all increases, interest
and penalties thereon, shall become, from the time the tax is due and
payable, a personal debt of the taxpayer to the city.



   (E)   The city may enforce the collection of the occupational tax
due under § 111.03 of this chapter and any fees, penalties and interest as
provided in divisions (A), (B), (C) and (D) above by civil action in a court
of appropriate jurisdiction. To the extent authorized by law, the city shall
be entitled to recover all court costs and reasonable attorney fees incurred
by it in enforcing any provision of this chapter.



   (F)   In addition to the penalties prescribed in this section, any
business entity or employer who willfully fails to make a return or willfully
makes a false return, or who willfully fails to pay taxes owing or collected,
with the intent to evade payment of the tax or amount collected, or any part
thereof, shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.



   (G)   Any person who willfully aids or assists in, or procures,
counsels or advises the preparation or presentation under, or in connection
with, any matter arising under this chapter of a return, affidavit, claim or
other document, which is fraudulent or is false as to any material matter,
whether or not the falsity or fraud is with the knowledge or consent of the
person authorized or required to present the return, affidavit, claim or
document, shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.



   (H)   A RETURN, for the purpose of this section, shall mean and
include any return, declaration or form prescribed by the city and required
to be filed with the city by the provisions of this chapter or by the rules
of the city or by written request for information to the business entity by
the city.



   (I)   Any person violating the provisions of § 111.11 of this
chapter by intentionally inspecting confidential taxpayer information without
authorization, shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned for not longer
than six months, or both.



   (J)   Any person violating the provisions of § 111.11 of this
chapter by divulging confidential taxpayer information shall be fined not
more than $1,000 or imprisoned for not more than year, or both.



(Ord. 014-171, passed 12-30-2014)



CHAPTER 112:  ALCOHOL



Section



General Provisions



   112.01   Classification of licenses; fee schedule



   112.02   Sale at golf courses



   112.03   Sale at restaurants and dining facilities



Alcoholic Beverages Other Than Beer



   112.15   License required



   112.16   Application requirements



   112.17   Issuance of license



Wine



   112.30   License required



   112.31   Fee



   112.32   Application requirements



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 112.01  CLASSIFICATION OF LICENSES; FEE SCHEDULE.



   (A)   For the privilege of trafficking in alcoholic beverages in the
city and pursuant to the authority of KRS 243.070, there is hereby
established a corresponding city license for each of the state licenses
described in the following schedule. The actions, business and transaction
authorized and permitted thereby and the expiration dates thereof shall be
the same as those of the state licenses to which the city licenses correspond
and which are indicated and described in the sections of state law indicated
in the following schedule. The fees for such city licenses shall be as
indicated.



   (B)   The license year shall be July 1 of each year through June 30
of the following year. Licenses may be issued for less than the full license
year upon payment of the proportion of the annual license fee equal to
one-twelfth times the number of months or fraction of a month remaining in
the license year; provided that, the minimum license fee shall be one-half of
the annual license fee. All licenses shall expire on June 30 of each year,
regardless of when the license was issued.



   (C)   No person shall traffic in alcoholic beverages within the city
without both a valid city license and a valid state license therefor.



(Ord. 013-148, passed 11-25-2013)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Business license fees, see § 110.04



§ 112.02  SALE AT GOLF COURSES.



   (A)   KRS 244.290 authorizes the city to establish hours and time
when distilled spirits, wine and beer may be sold by the drink on Sundays.
The city finds specific authority to authorize the sale of spirits, wine and
beer at 18-hole golf courses pursuant to KRS 242.123 if the course meets the
United States Golf Association criteria as a regulation golf course. The city
finds that all, or substantially all, of the resident and/or registered
voters residing in the city residing within precinct 18A (D107) Cedar Grove
North and within the corporate confines of that portion of the precinct lying
within the city have petitioned to permit Sunday sales.



   (B)   (1)   Sunday sale of spirits, beer and wine shall be
permitted at all golf courses within precinct 18A that lie within the city
limits; provided that, the golf course is certified as a regulation golf
course under the rules of the United States Golf Association.



      (2)   Such sale of such distilled spirits, beer and wine shall
be permitted by the drink during ordinary hours of course operation until
closing of the golf course and in no event later than 10:00 p.m.



   (C)   A license fee of $150 for beer and $250 for distilled spirits
and wine shall be paid by any golf course participating on a fiscal year
basis, per annum, to the city. The payment of the fee shall be accompanied
with proof satisfactory to the city that the golf course is recognized by the
United States Golf Association.



(Ord. 008-760, passed 12-8-2008)



§ 112.03  SALE AT RESTAURANTS AND DINING FACILITIES.



   (A)   (1)   Sunday sale of distilled spirits and wine, under KRS
244.290, and malt beverages, under KRS 244.480, shall be permitted at all
restaurants and dining facilities in the city; provided that, such
restaurants and dining facilities have at least 70% of their gross receipts
generated from the sale of food and have a seating capacity of at least 100
people.



      (2)   Such sale of distilled spirits, malt beverages and wine
shall be permitted by the drink during ordinary hours of restaurant or dining
facility operation but not earlier than 2:00 p.m. and not later than 10:00
p.m. on Sunday.



   (B)   (1)   A license fee for Sunday sales of $300 for distilled
spirits, wine and malt beverages shall be paid by any restaurant and dining
facility participating on a fiscal year basis, per annum, to the city per KRS
243.070(7).



      (2)   The payment of the fee shall be accompanied with proof
satisfactory to the city that the applicant is in compliance with division
(A) above.



(Ord. 014-151, passed 3-10-2014)



ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES OTHER THAN BEER



§ 112.15  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   In order to operate premises on which alcoholic beverages other than
beer and including wine are sold at retail by the drink, a license from the
city shall be required.



(1991 Code, § 7-36)  (Ord. 410.1, passed --)



§ 112.16  APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   In order to secure a license, the applicant must present the
following to the local Alcoholic Beverage Commissioner:



      (1)   A valid existing state license for the retail sale of
liquor and wine by the drink;



      (2)   Proof that the premises licensed shall contain
facilities for the service of food to no less than 20 patrons seated at
tables or counters;



      (3)   Proof that the premises shall contain adequate kitchen
and storage facilities for the preparation of food to be served upon the
premises and that the kitchen facilities are separated from the serving area;
and



      (4)   Proof that the applicant has employed on the premises no
less than one person whose sole responsibility shall be the preparation of
the food in the kitchen facilities for the purpose of sale of food and meals
upon the premises.



   (B)   The license issued by the city shall not be transferable.



(1991 Code, § 7-37)  (Ord. 410.1, passed --)



§ 112.17  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   Upon completion of the requirements in §§ 112.15 and 112.16 of this
chapter for the issuance of the license from the city for the retail sale of
alcoholic beverages other than beer and including wine by the drink and the
payment of an annual fee of $500, the license shall be issued.



(1991 Code, § 7-38)  (Ord. 410.1, passed --)



WINE



§ 112.30  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   There is hereby established by the City Council a restaurant wine
license as authorized pursuant to KRS 243.032.



(1991 Code, § 7-51)  (Ord. 984-120, passed 1-10-1985)



§ 112.31  FEE.



   The annual fee for the issuance of a restaurant wine license shall be:



   (A)   New applications: $300; and



   (B)   Renewals: $200.



(1991 Code, § 7-52)  (Ord. 984-120, passed 1-10-1985)



§ 112.32  APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Before a restaurant wine license is issued, the applicant must:



      (1)   Be the owner or lessee of a restaurant which receives
50% or more of its gross annual income from the sale of food; and



      (2)   Have a minimum seating capacity of 50 people at tables.



   (B)   The license shall be subject to any additional requirements
imposed by the Alcoholic Beverage Administrator of the city, the state’s
Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission or state regulations.



(1991 Code, § 7-53)  (Ord. 984-120, passed 1-10-1985)



CHAPTER 113:  INSURANCE COMPANIES



Section



   113.01   Imposition of license



   113.02   Changing license fee or rate of tax



   113.03   Amount of fee for companies issuing life insurance



   113.04   Amount of fee for companies issuing policies other than
life insurance



   113.05   Due date; breakdown of collections



   113.06   Delinquent payment; interest



   113.07   Collection fee to be retained by insurance company



   113.08   Accounting and reporting procedure



   113.09   Examination of books and records



   113.10   Annual report setting amount of collected premiums



   113.11   Copies of regulations and amendments to be filed



   113.12   Exemptions



§ 113.01  IMPOSITION OF LICENSE.



   Pursuant to KRS 91A.080, there shall be, and hereby is, imposed on each
insurance company a license fee or tax for the privilege of engaging in the
business of insurance within the corporate limits of the city. This chapter,
for the city, shall be effective 7-1-2016.



(Ord. 015-183, passed 5-11-2015)



§ 113.02  CHANGING LICENSE FEE OR RATE OF TAX.



   The City Council may change the license fee or rate of tax hereunder to
be effective July 1 of each year on a prospective basis only.



(Ord. 015-183, passed 5-11-2015)



§ 113.03  AMOUNT OF FEE FOR COMPANIES ISSUING LIFE INSURANCE.



   The license fee or tax, if any, upon an insurance company with respect
to life insurance policies shall be based upon the first year’s premium,
and shall be applied to the amount of such premium actually collected within
each calendar quarter upon the lives of persons residing within the corporate
limits of the city.



(Ord. 015-183, passed 5-11-2015)



§ 113.04  AMOUNT OF FEE FOR COMPANIES ISSUING POLICIES OTHER THAN LIFE
INSURANCE.



   (A)   Any license fee or tax imposed hereunder upon any insurance
company with respect to any policy which is not a life insurance policy shall
be based upon the premiums actually collected by such company within each
calendar quarter on risk located within the corporate limits of the city on
those classes of business which such company is authorized to transact, less
all premiums returned to policy holders; however, any license fee or tax
imposed upon premium receipts shall not include premiums received for
insuring employers against liability for personal injuries to their
employees, or death caused thereby, under the provisions of the Worker’s
Compensation Act.



   (B)   The license fee or tax imposed upon each insurance company
which issues any insurance policy which is not a life insurance policy is and
shall be as follows:



      (1)   Casualty: 4%;



      (2)   Automobile: 4%;



      (3)   Inland marine: 4%;



      (4)   Fire and perils: 4%; and



      (5)   Health: 0%.



(Ord. 015-183, passed 5-11-2015)



§ 113.05  DUE DATE; BREAKDOWN OF COLLECTIONS.



   (A)   The license fee or taxes provided for in this chapter shall be
due 30 days after the end of each calendar quarter.



   (B)   Annually, by March 31, each insurer shall provide the city
with a breakdown of all collections in the preceding calendar year for the
following categories of insurance:



      (1)   Casualty;



      (2)   Automobile;



      (3)   Inland marine;



      (4)   Fire and allied perils; and



      (5)   Health.



(Ord. 015-183, passed 5-11-2015)



§ 113.06  DELINQUENT PAYMENT; INTEREST.



   Any license fee or tax not paid on or before the due date shall bear
interest at the tax interest rate as defined in KRS 131.010(6) from the date
due until paid. Such interest payable to the city is separate from any fee
that may be levied pursuant to KRS 91A.080(6).



(Ord. 015-183, passed 5-11-2015)



§ 113.07  COLLECTION FEE TO BE RETAINED BY INSURANCE COMPANY.



   The Department of Insurance shall, pursuant to regulation, provide for
a reasonable collection fee to be retained by the insurance company, or its
agent, as compensation for collecting such tax. However, the collection fee
shall not be more than 15% of the fee or tax collected and remitted to the
city or 2% of the premiums subject to the tax, whichever is less. To
facilitate computation, collection and remittance of the fee or tax and
collection fee provided for herein, the fees or taxes set forth in this
chapter, together with the collection fee provided herein, may be rounded off
to the nearest dollar amount.



(Ord. 015-183, passed 5-11-2015)



§ 113.08  ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING PROCEDURE.



   Appropriate accounting and reporting procedure for the collection and
reporting of the fees or taxes and the collection fee herein provided shall
be determined by regulations promulgated by the Department of Insurance.



(Ord. 015-183, passed 5-11-2015)



§ 113.09  EXAMINATION OF BOOKS AND RECORDS.



   From time to time, the City Council may request the assistance of the
Department of Insurance in examining or causing to be examined the books and
records of insurance companies for the purpose of determining compliance
herewith.



(Ord. 015-183, passed 5-11-2015)



§ 113.10  ANNUAL REPORT SETTING AMOUNT OF COLLECTED PREMIUMS.



   Every insurance company subject to the license fee imposed by this
section shall, on or before March 31 of each calendar year, furnish the city,
as a sworn statement, an annual report therein setting forth the amount of
premiums collected from policies insuring risk within the city for the
following types of insurance:



   (A)   Casualty;



   (B)   Automobile;



   (C)   Inland marine;



   (D)   Fire and allied perils; and



   (E)   Health.



(Ord. 015-183, passed 5-11-2015)



§ 113.11  COPIES OF REGULATIONS AND AMENDMENTS TO BE FILED.



   The City Clerk shall file a copy of this chapter and amendments hereto
which impose any such license fee or tax with the Commissioner of Insurance
at least 60 days prior to the effective date. The Commissioner of Insurance
shall promptly notify each insurance company engaged in the business of
insurance in the commonwealth that the city has elected to impose this
license fee or tax and the current amount of this license fee or rate of tax.



(Ord. 015-183, passed 5-11-2015)



§ 113.12  EXEMPTIONS.



   No license fee or tax imposed hereunder shall apply to premiums
received on policies of group health insurance provided for state employees
under KRS 18A.225(2) and KRS 18A.228.



(Ord. 015-183, passed 5-11-2015)



CHAPTER 114:  TAXICABS



Section



   114.01   Definitions



   114.02   Administrative rules and regulations



   114.03   Unlawful conduct



   114.04   Driver’s permit; application; display



   114.05   Inspections; sticker; issuance; suspension or revocation



   114.06   Rates of fare



   114.07   Insurance or indemnity bond



   114.08   Clean and safe conditions; driver’s appearance



   114.09   Cash carried by driver



   114.10   Designation; identifying design



   114.11   Use of taximeter



   114.12   Receipts



   114.13   Solicitation, acceptance and discharge of passengers;
advertising



   114.14   Taxicab service



   114.15   Trip card



   114.16   Records and reports



   114.17   Taxicab stands



 



   114.99   Penalty



§ 114.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CERTIFICATE HOLDER. A person who owns or controls a taxicab certificate
issued by the state.



   CRUISE. To drive a taxicab on the streets of the city in search of or
for the purposes of soliciting prospective passengers for hire.



   LICENSED. To have a current business license issued pursuant to
applicable city ordinance.



   PERSON. Includes an individual, firm, partnership, corporation,
company, association or joint stock association, and includes any trustee,
assignee or personal representative thereof.



   RATE CARD. A card approved by the Mayor or his or her designee for
display in each taxicab which contains the rates of fare, fees and other
charges then in force.



   STREETS. Every public road, avenue, alley, boulevard, way, bridge,
viaduct or trestle and the approaches to them, includes off-street parking
facilities and accessways offered for public use whether public or privately
owned, except for-hire parking facilities described in KRS 189.700.



   TAXICAB. A motor vehicle which is required by state law to be operated
under one or more taxicab certificates for which a driver must receive a fare
from the individual(s) using the service at the conclusion of the trip and is
designed or constructed to transport not more than 15 passengers exclusive of
the driver.



   TAXICAB CERTIFICATE. A certificate issued by the commonwealth’s
Transportation Cabinet, granting authority for the operation of a given
number of motor vehicles transporting passengers for hire at or from the
corporate limits of the city and its suburban area, and not operating over
any regular route, and the destination of the motor vehicles being designated
by the passengers at the time of such transportation.



   TAXICAB DRIVER’S PERMIT. The permit issued pursuant to this chapter
by the City Clerk to a person to operate or drive a taxicab on the streets of
the city.



   TAXICAB INSPECTION STICKER. A sticker or emblem issued pursuant to this
chapter by the Mayor to the certificate holder or driver of a taxicab
evidencing that the taxicab has been inspected as provided by this chapter
and is authorized to be operated on the streets of the city.



   TAXIMETER. A meter instrument or device attached to a taxicab which
electronically or mechanically measures the distance driven and the waiting
time on which the fare is based.



   TRIP CARD. A daily record prepared by a taxicab driver of all trips
made by the driver showing the time and place of origin, destination, number
of passengers and the amount of fare and any fees for each trip.



   WAITING TIME. The time when a taxicab is not in motion from the time of
acceptance of a passenger or passengers to the time of discharge, but does
not include any time that the taxicab is not in motion if due to any cause,
other than the request, act or fault of passenger or passenger, or traffic
condition.



   WHEELCHAIR SERVICE. The transportation by a taxicab regulated under
this chapter of a person or persons confined to a wheelchair without
requiring that person to be removed from the wheelchair.



(Ord. 997-416, passed 11-10-1997)



§ 114.02  ADMINISTRATIVE RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Mayor, or his or her designee, shall exercise all administrative
functions of the city in relation to the operation of taxicabs regulated
under this chapter. The Mayor, or his or her designee, shall have the
authority to promulgate such rules and regulations as are necessary for the
orderly and complete administration of this chapter. A copy of all rules and
regulations promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall, for a nominal fee, be
provided to all persons requesting a copy.



(Ord. 997-416, passed 11-10-1997)



§ 114.03  UNLAWFUL CONDUCT.



   (A)   No person shall operate a taxicab for hire on the streets of
the city, no person who holds a certificate for or controls a taxicab shall
permit it to be so driven and no taxicab licensed pursuant to this chapter
shall be so driven at any time for hire, unless the driver of the taxicab has
obtained and has then in force a taxicab driver’s permit issued under the
provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   No person shall operate or permit a taxicab for which he or
she holds the certificate to be operated as a vehicle for hire on the streets
of the city unless such taxicab has a current vehicle license.



   (C)   The provisions of divisions (A) and (B) above shall not apply
to any taxicab, or certificate holder, operator or driver thereof, when the
taxicab is being used for, or such certificate holder or driver thereof is
engaged in, the transportation for hire of passengers from a point outside
the city to a point within the corporate limits of the city. However, the
taxicab shall not be used, nor shall the certificate holders or drivers
thereof be authorized, to pick up passengers within the city unless the
taxicab, the certificate holder and driver thereof are qualified to and do
apply for and receive the permits and license required by this chapter.



(Ord. 997-416, passed 11-10-1997)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.04  DRIVER’S PERMIT; APPLICATION; DISPLAY.



   (A)   Application for driver’s permit.



      (1)   A driver’s permit may be requested from the City Clerk
by submitting an application on the form prescribed by the Mayor, or his or
her designee, and in accordance with regulations promulgated under this
chapter. The application shall be verified under oath and shall contain the
following information:



         (a)   Applicant’s name, address, Social Security
number and telephone number, if any;



         (b)   Applicant’s place and date of birth;



         (c)   Applicant’s age, sex, weight, color of eyes and
hair, race and nationality;



         (d)   Applicant’s residences for two years preceding
the date of application;



         (e)   Applicant’s operator’s license number;



         (f)   Applicant’s chauffeur’s license number;



         (g)   Whether the applicant has ever been licensed as a
chauffeur or as a taxicab driver and, if so, where and when;



         (h)   Whether any such license has ever been suspended
or revoked and, if so, why;



         (i)   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a
felony, a sexual offense, a prostitution-related offense, any state or local
motor vehicle or traffic moving violation, any offense relating to
intoxication by alcohol or controlled substance or any offense relating to
the trafficking in controlled substances; and



         (j)   The names and address of three residents of the
city who have known the applicant for a period of one year next preceding the
date of the application and who will attest to the applicant’s sobriety,
honesty and general good character.



      (2)   Each application shall be accompanied by an “intent to
hire” form signed by the certificate holder and by any other information
deemed necessary by the Mayor. A new intent to hire form must accompany any
change in holder or cab company affiliation.



      (3)   Each applicant and, when licensed, each driver shall
inform the City Clerk within 72 hours whenever the information required by
this section changes.



   (B)   Consideration of applications; standards for issuance.



      (1)   The City Clerk shall, on consideration of the
application and the information required to be submitted with it, approve the
application whenever the following findings are made:



         (a)   The applicant has provided all information
required by this chapter;



         (b)   All information provided by the applicant is true;



         (c)   The applicant is at least 18 years of age;



         (d)   The applicant possesses a valid state operator’s
license and state chauffeur’s license;



         (e)   The applicant has not been convicted of a felony
involving the use or threatened use of violence, force or deadly instrument,
or a sexual offense, or a prostitution related offense, or an offense
involving intoxication by alcohol or drugs or of an offense involving the
trafficking in controlled substances; and



         (f)   The applicant has paid a license fee of $15.



      (2)   The Mayor may waive the findings required by division
(B)(1)(e) above on a showing of good cause by the applicant. The waiver shall
be in writing and include the specific reasons for the waiver and shall be
attached to the applicant’s file maintained by the City Clerk. It is a
legislative finding that good cause may be shown either by person’s
compliance with or participation in a rehabilitation program for ex-offenders
or by the fact that a conviction for an offense described in division
(B)(1)(e) above has not occurred within five years last preceding the date of
application.



      (3)   The permit shall be in effect for a period not to exceed
90 days.



   (C)   Driver training program. The Mayor will establish, with
consultation of the taxicab industry, a driver training program to enhance
each driver’s qualification to operate a taxicab within the city. This
training program will, at a minimum, include instruction on the location of
accommodations and attractions within the city and surrounding area, the
history of the city area, customer relations and the content of city taxicab
regulations. Upon satisfactory completion of the program, a certificate will
be issued to the driver.



   (D)   Issuance of the annual driver’s permit.



      (1)   Upon satisfactory completion of the driver training
course established herein, an annual permit shall be issued to replace the
temporary permit. The annual permit shall be in effect until the end of the
calendar year through the last day of the month of birth of the permit holder
unless suspended or revoked by the City Clerk.



      (2)   An annual renewal permit for each subsequent year shall
be issued upon a finding that the information required by the original
application is currently valid and correct, payment of a $10 fee and
certification of satisfactory attendance at a refresher training class.



      (3)   A new permit and the accompanying $10 fee, is required
each time a taxi driver changes affiliation from one holder or taxicab
company to another.



   (E)   Suspension or revocation of driver’s permit. The City Clerk
is authorized to suspend or revoke a driver’s permit, whether temporary or
annual:



      (1)   For violation of any federal, state or local law which
would constitute grounds for denial of a permit; and



      (2)   For a driver’s failure or refusal to comply with the
requirements of this chapter or any regulations promulgated pursuant to this
chapter, or refusal to cooperate with reasonable requests made by an
inspector investigating complaints or conducting periodic random inspections
pursuant to the instruction of the Mayor.



   (F)   Display of driver’s permit. Every driver under this chapter
shall post his or her temporary or annual taxicab driver’s permit in such a
place as to be in full view of all passengers while the driver is operating a
taxicab and in such a manner as is otherwise prescribed by the Mayor.



(Ord. 997-416, passed 11-10-1997)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.05  INSPECTIONS; STICKER; ISSUANCE; SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   (A)   Taxicab inspection sticker.



      (1)   The certificate holder is responsible to obtain a
taxicab inspection sticker. The sticker must be displayed on the taxicab as
prescribed by the City Clerk.



      (2)   An application for a taxicab inspection sticker shall be
filed with the City Clerk on forms provided by the city, shall be verified by
the certificate holder of the taxicab to be covered by the inspection sticker
and shall contain the following information:



         (a)   The legal name, including the registered trade
name, of the certificate holder of the taxicab or taxicabs;



         (b)   The business address of the certificate holder;



         (c)   If a corporation, the name and address of the
designated agent for service of process;



         (d)   The designation of the taxicab as required herein;



         (e)   The amount of coverage provided by an indemnity
bond, liability insurance policy or approved plan of self-insurance required
by this chapter for each taxicab for which application is made;



         (f)   The number of taxicabs for which the certificate
holder is making application;



         (g)   The make, type, year of manufacture and passenger
seating capacity of each taxicab for which application is made;



         (h)   The company number, vehicle identification number
and license plate number of each taxicab for which application is made; and



         (i)   Any other information required by the Mayor.



      (3)   Each application shall be accompanied by the following:



         (a)   A copy of the taxicab certificate or certificates
or a letter issued by the state’s Transportation Cabinet authorizing the
applicant to operate taxicabs at or from the city and its suburban area;



         (b)   For each taxicab for which application is made a
certificate of insurance, copy of an indemnity bond or in the case of a
self-insured company, a copy of the plan of self-insurance approved by the
state’s Department of Insurance and the state’s Transportation Cabinet;
and



         (c)   Any other information required by the Mayor.



      (4)   Each applicant and certificate holder shall inform the
City Clerk immediately whenever the information required by this division (A)
changes.



   (B)   Inspection of taxicabs.



      (1)   Each taxicab for which application for a taxicab
inspection sticker is made shall be inspected by the city’s Police
Department before the inspection sticker is issued. The inspection shall
verify that each taxicab conforms to the following requirements including,
but not limited to:



         (a)   A cash box securely installed in interior of the
vehicle within normal view of all passengers which cash box shall be the
repository for such cash as may be received by the driver during his
operation of the vehicle. The type construction, operation, placement,
installation and securing of the cash box shall comply with such reasonable
regulations as may be prescribed by the Mayor;



         (b)   Conspicuous notice visible on both sides of the
vehicle and to passengers inside the vehicle to the effect that the driver
cannot carry more than $20 for the purpose of making change;



         (c)   For taxicabs providing wheelchair service, a lift
device to provide easy access for those confined to wheelchairs and with
clamps or other similar devices to keep wheelchairs in place while the
taxicab is in motion and such equipment necessary to provide two-way radio
communication;



         (d)   The proper designation as provided herein; and



         (e)   A taximeter fastened so that is shall be visible
to the passengers at all times of day and night which taximeter is operated
electronically or mechanically by a mechanism of standard design and
construction driven either from the transmission or from one of the front
wheels by a flexible and permanently attached driving mechanism. Each
taximeter shall be sealed at all points and connections which, if
manipulated, would affect their correct reading and recording. Each taximeter
shall have thereon a flag or light to denote when the vehicle is employed and
when it is not employed.



      (2)   Every vehicle operating under an inspection sticker
issued pursuant to this chapter shall be reinspected at six-month intervals
or at such shorter interval as may be prescribed by the Mayor. The tuning and
requirements for shorter intervals deemed necessary may be based on a regular
lapse of time or miles driven between reinspections or the occurrence of
certain incidents.



      (3)   Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the Mayor, or any
city police officer, from inspecting a taxicab at any time with or without a
complaint filed by any person.



      (4)   Each taxicab for which application for a taxicab
inspection sticker is made shall submit proof that a mechanical safety
inspection has been conducted by a qualified mechanic.



   (C)   Issuance of inspection sticker.



      (1)   The Mayor, or his or her designee, shall, on
consideration of the application and the items attached thereto, approve the
application for a taxicab inspection sticker whenever the following findings
are made:



         (a)   The applicant has provided the information and
items established herein;



         (b)   The statements made or information provided by the
applicant are true and correct;



         (c)   The applicant has been granted a taxicab
certificate or certificates or issued a letter by the commonwealth’s Bureau
of Vehicle Regulation, authorizing the applicant to operate the designated
number of taxicabs at, from or within the city and its suburban area;



         (d)   There is in full force and effect an indemnity
bond or liability insurance policy as required by this chapter for each
taxicab for which application is made; and



         (e)   Each taxicab for which application is made has
been inspected and met the requirements of this chapter and any regulations
promulgated thereunder.



      (2)   On approval of an application for a taxicab inspection
sticker, the City Clerk shall issue the sticker to the applicant. The license
shall be in effect for a six-month period designated by the City Clerk.



      (3)   A renewal inspection sticker for each six-month period
thereafter shall be issued on compliance by the holder with the requirements
of this chapter and the regulations promulgated thereunder.



      (4)   The Mayor, or his or her designee, shall prescribe the
size, form and content of each inspection sticker or renewal sticker issued
and shall prescribe the manner in which the sticker shall be displayed.



   (D)   Suspension or revocation of inspection sticker.



      (1)   Violation of this chapter or the regulations promulgated
pursuant to this chapter constitute grounds for suspension or revocation of
the inspection sticker or driver’s permit. Upon learning of a violation for
which the Mayor proposes to suspend or revoke a sticker or permit, the Mayor
will give written notification of the alleged violation to the driver and the
certificate holder, and of the manner in which a hearing on the manner may be
requested.



      (2)   The Mayor may immediately suspend an inspection sticker
or driver’s permit for serious violations of applicable ordinances or
regulations when such action is deemed warranted by the Mayor for reasons of
public health and safety. At the time of such action, the driver and the
certificate holder against whom such action is taken shall be notified in
writing of the manner in which a hearing on the matter may be requested.



      (3)   Upon notice of suspension or intended suspension or
revocation of a sticker or permit, the driver or certificate holder shall be
provided an opportunity for a hearing before the Mayor. A request for a
hearing shall be made in writing and within five days of the notice of
suspension. If a hearing is requested, it shall be provided within ten days
of the Mayor’s receipt of the request. The driver or certificate holder may
be represented by counsel and may call witnesses to testify on his or her
behalf. The City Attorney shall prescribe by regulation fair and reasonable
hearing procedures, a copy of which shall be provided to any person against
whom such action is taken.



      (4)   An order of revocation or suspension in excess of ten
days shall be approved and signed by the Mayor.



(Ord. 997-416, passed 11-10-1997)



§ 114.06  RATES OF FARE.



   (A)   The following maximum rates of fare and fees may be charged
for the use of a taxicab and must be posted in each taxicab in a prominent
place as required by regulations promulgated by the Mayor:



      (1)   Hourly rate: $18 per hour for one or more passengers; and



      (2)   (a)   Mileage rate: $1.50 for the first mile. Each
taximeter shall be calibrated to measure mileage in distance less than or
equal to one-fifth of a mile. The mileage rate shall be equally apportioned
over the distances measured by the meter; except that, an initial drop fee
may be assessed for the first mile so that the meter reflects the authorized
rate.



         (b)   Waiting time: $0.30 for each one minute of waiting
time or fraction thereof.



   (B)   Any charges, tolls or fees levied to enter or leave any other
passenger terminals, or to use or cross roads or bridges or pick up or
discharge passengers at public facilities, shall be borne by the passenger in
addition to the metered fare.



   (C)   Nothing contained herein shall constitute a minimum rate of
fare, nor preclude the holder of charging a rate of fare less than the
metered rate of fare would have been had the taximeter been activated.



   (D)   Rates of fare for this section shall not be increased before
12-31-1998.



(Ord. 997-416, passed 11-10-1997)



§ 114.07  INSURANCE OR INDEMNITY BOND.



   (A)   Each taxicab operating under this chapter shall have in full
force and effect an approved indemnifying bond, liability insurance policy or
plan of self-insurance which has been approved by both the commonwealth’s
Department of Insurance and the commonwealth’s Transportation Cabinet in
accordance with KRS 281.655. The types and minimum amounts of insurance to be
carried on each vehicle shall be as follows:



      (1)   Death or injury to any one person: $25,000;



      (2)   Total liability for death of injury to person: $50,000;
and



      (3)   Property damage: $10,000.



   (B)   Each taxicab operating under this chapter shall have in full
force and effect basic reparation benefits in accordance with KRS Ch. 404,
Subtitle 39.



(Ord. 997-416, passed 11-10-1997)



§ 114.08  CLEAN AND SAFE CONDITIONS; DRIVER’S APPEARANCE.



   (A)   Every driver shall maintain a clean and safe taxicab according
to the regulations promulgated by the Mayor.



   (B)   Every driver or operator shall maintain a clean and
presentable appearance according to the regulations promulgated by the Mayor.



(Ord. 997-416, passed 11-10-1997)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.09  CASH CARRIED BY DRIVER.



   No driver shall carry more than $20 cash on his or her person while
operating a taxicab. Notwithstanding the above, no driver shall operate a
taxicab unless that driver has in his or her possession cash in the amount of
$20, suitably denominated to make change for passengers.



(Ord. 997-416, passed 11-10-1997)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.10  DESIGNATION; IDENTIFYING DESIGN.



   (A)   (1)   All taxicabs operated by the same cab company or
under the same registered trade name shall be painted with the identical
color scheme and identifying design. The color scheme and identifying design
must be approved by the Mayor or his or her designee. No company will be
permitted to use a color scheme or design which, in the judgment of the
Mayor, is similar to that of an existing cab company that such similarity is
likely to mislead or confuse the public.



      (2)   Violation of this requirement is punishable by
suspension of revocation of the inspection sticker.



   (B)   Each taxicab shall bear on the outside of each side and the
rear, in painted letters at least five inches in height the name of the
certificate holder or the registered trade name, if any, of the taxicab. In
addition, each taxicab may bear an identifying design approved by the Mayor.



   (C)   Each taxicab shall bear on the outside of each side and the
rear, in painted letters at least five inches in height, a number issued by
the certificate holder. However, no two taxicabs having the same color scheme
shall possess the same number.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle marked with the
identifying design of a taxicab company when there is no affiliation between
the driver or certificate holder and that company. Vehicles formerly operated
in affiliation with a taxicab company must be unmarked within three days of
the date of the termination of the affiliation.



(Ord. 997-416, passed 11-10-1997)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.11  USE OF TAXIMETER.



   It shall be the duty of the driver or operator of a taxicab to
deactivate the taximeter into a cleared position at the termination of each
trip and to keep it deactivated until such time as the taxicab has been
engaged for hire or the driver requested by an inspector to engage it for
testing purposes.



(Ord. 997-416, passed 11-10-1997)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.12  RECEIPTS.



   (A)   The driver of any taxicab shall, on request by the passenger,
render to the passenger a receipt for the amount charged, either by a
mechanically printed receipt or by a specially prepared receipt on which
shall be the name of the owner of the taxicab, the taxicab number, the amount
of meter reading and all charges, the date of transaction, the points of
origination and destination and the name of driver.



   (B)   This receipt shall be signed by the driver before being
rendered to the passenger.



(Ord. 997-416, passed 11-10-1997)



§ 114.13  SOLICITATION, ACCEPTANCE AND DISCHARGE OF PASSENGERS; ADVERTISING.



   (A)   (1)   No driver shall solicit passengers for a taxicab
except when sitting in the driver’s compartment of the taxicab or while
standing immediately adjacent to the curb side thereof. The driver of any
taxicab shall remain in the driver’s compartment or immediately adjacent to
his or her vehicle at all times when the vehicle is on the street; except
that, the driver of any taxicab may park and leave the taxicab on the streets
for up to ten consecutive minutes. A taxicab driver may otherwise park and
leave his or her taxicab longer than ten consecutive minutes, other than at a
designated taxi stand, so long as he or she parks his or her taxicab in
compliance with the traffic code of the city. Nothing herein contained shall
be held to prohibit any driver from alighting to the street or sidewalk for
the purpose of assisting passengers into or out of such vehicles.



      (2)   No driver shall solicit patronage in a loud or annoying
tone of voice or by a sign or in any manner annoying any person or obstruct
the movement of any person, or follow any person for the purpose of
soliciting patronage.



      (3)   Drivers of taxicabs shall not receive or discharge
passengers in the roadway, but shall pull up to the right-hand side of the
road and there receive or discharge passengers, except on one-way streets,
where passengers may be discharged at either the right or left-hand sidewalk,
or side of the roadway in the absence of a sidewalk.



      (4)   No driver shall cruise in search of passengers in such
areas and at such times as would congest traffic or be dangerous to
pedestrians and other vehicles.



      (5)   No driver shall permit any other person to occupy or
ride in the taxicab, unless the person or persons first employing the taxicab
shall consent to the acceptance of additional passenger or passengers.



      (6)   No driver shall permit more persons to be carried in a
taxicab as passengers than the rate seating capacity of his or her taxicab as
stated in the taxicab permit issued by the commonwealth’s Transportation
Cabinet.



      (7)   No driver shall refuse or neglect to convey any orderly
person or persons on request, unless:



         (a)   Previously engaged;



         (b)   Unable or forbidden by the provisions of this
chapter to do so;



         (c)   The driver has reason to believe that the person
is engaged in a violation of federal, state or local law; or



         (d)   The driver has just cause to fear injury to
himself or herself, his or her property or his or her taxicab.



      (8)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any driver
of a taxicab to solicit business for any hotel or to attempt to divert
patronage from one hotel to another.



      (9)   No driver shall engage in selling intoxicating liquors,
solicit or advance any prostitution- related conduct or engage in the
trafficking of controlled substances.



      (10)   No driver of any taxicab shall permit any person to
ride on any part of the vehicle, except the inside.



      (11)   No driver shall interfere in any way with another
driver’s lawful use of a taxicab stand.



   (B)   Subject to the rules and regulations promulgated by the City
Council, a person, certificate holder or driver of a taxicab licensed under
this chapter may affix or install advertising matter in or on the taxicab.



(Ord. 997-416, passed 11-10-1997)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.14  TAXICAB SERVICE.



   (A)   Certificate holders shall maintain a central place of business
within the corporate limits of the city. That place of business must comply
with all city ordinances and regulations, specifically including those
pertaining to zoning and the city’s Building and Safety Codes.



   (B)   All certificate holders or drivers of taxicabs shall answer
all calls received by them for services inside the corporate limits of the
city as soon as they can do so and if such services cannot be rendered within
a reasonable time, they shall notify the prospective passengers how long it
will be before the call can be answered and give the reason therefor.



   (C)   No certificate holder or driver may refuse to accept a call in
an area in which the taxicab is permitted to operate pursuant to the taxicab
certificate issued by the commonwealth’s Transportation Cabinet. To do so
shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and the taxicab inspection
sticker and taxicab driver’s permit issued to such holder or driver may be
revoked or suspended.



(Ord. 997-416, passed 11-10-1997)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.15  TRIP CARD.



   (A)   Every driver shall maintain a daily trip card in his or her
own handwriting on which are recorded all trips made each day, showing the
time and place origin, the destination of each trip, the number of passengers
and the amount of fare and charges. All completed trip cards shall be
returned to the certificate holder by the driver at the conclusion of his or
her tour of duty. The forms for each trip card shall be furnished to the
driver by the certificate holder and shall be in a format approved by the
Mayor.



   (B)   Every certificate holder shall retain and preserve all
driver’s trip cards in a safe place for at least one calendar year, and
these trip cards shall be available to the City Clerk.



(Ord. 997-416, passed 11-10-1997)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.16  RECORDS AND REPORTS.



   (A)   Every holder shall keep accurate records of receipts from
operations, operating and other expenses, capital expenditures and other such
operating information as may be required by the City Clerk. Every holder
shall maintain the records containing such information and other data
required by this chapter at a place readily accessible for examination by the
City Clerk.



   (B)   All accidents arising from or in connection with the operation
of taxicabs which result in death or injury to any person, or in damage to
any vehicle, or to any property in an amount exceeding the sum of $300 shall
be reported by the certificate holder or driver within five days from the
time of occurrence to the Chief of Police.



(Ord. 997-416, passed 11-10-1997)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.17  TAXICAB STANDS.



   Taxicab stands shall be used on a first-come first-served basis. The
driver shall pull onto the stand from the rear and shall advance forward as
the taxicabs ahead pull off. Drivers shall stay within five feet of their
cabs and shall not solicit passengers or engage in loud or boisterous talk
while at the stand. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as preventing
a passenger from boarding the cab of his or her choice that is parked at a
taxicab stand.



(Ord. 997-416, passed 11-10-1997)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be punished by a fine of not less than $50, nor more than $100. Each day the
violation continues shall be a separate offense.



(Ord. 997-416, passed 11-10-1997)



CHAPTER 115:  SOLICITATIONS



Section



Soliciting at Street Intersections



   115.01   Definitions



   115.02   Permit required



   115.03   Permit application



   115.04   Permit issuance



   115.05   Safe and courteous manner



   115.06   Prohibited practices



   115.07   Permit revocation



   115.08   Appeals



 



   115.99   Penalty



SOLICITING AT STREET INTERSECTIONS



§ 115.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION.



      (1)   Any non-profit or charitable organization with a
501(c)(3) license; or



      (2)   Any group associated with a county school that is
engaged in fundraising for a school- sponsored sport or activity. Said school
activity must have a written confirmation from the principal of that school.



   PERMIT. A document authorizing the holder to solicit contributions from
the drivers or passengers of vehicles at designated intersections within the
city.



(Ord. 006-699, passed 7-24-2006)



§ 115.02  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall stand, sit or remain on or in a public right-of-way, or
on or in any public street, sidewalk or highway for the purpose of soliciting
contributions of any kind from drivers or passengers of vehicles using the
street without first obtaining a permit.



(Ord. 006-699, passed 7-24-2006)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.03  PERMIT APPLICATION.



   (A)   Any charitable organization may apply for a permit. The
application for a permit shall be made on forms supplied by the Mayor. The
forms shall require the applicant to indicate the name and nature of the
organization, the date(s) and means of solicitation proposed and such
additional information as the Mayor determines is necessary to assure that
the charitable organization will comply with this subchapter.



   (B)   A charitable organization may apply for a permit within three
months after the date of its last permit.



(Ord. 006-699, passed 7-24-2006)



§ 115.04  PERMIT ISSUANCE.



   (A)   The Mayor may issue a permit if he or she determines that the
charitable organization will be in compliance with all state, federal and
local laws and ordinances, including those specified in this subchapter, and
that the time and location of the solicitation will not coincide with special
events or other solicitations in a manner that will cause traffic congestion.



   (B)   The Mayor shall designate the intersection(s) where the
solicitation will take place.



   (C)   The permit shall only be valid for the dates, times and
locations indicated on the permit. Said permit shall not exceed a continuous
48-hour period.



(Ord. 006-699, passed 7-24-2006)



§ 115.05  SAFE AND COURTEOUS MANNER.



   All soliciting pursuant to a permit issued under this subchapter shall
be done in a safe and courteous manner and shall comply with the following
minimum requirements.



   (A)   All persons engaged in solicitation shall carry a copy of the
permit and shall display it to anyone who requests to see it.



   (B)   Signs, no larger than 24 inches by 36 inches and no smaller
than 18 inches by 24 inches, clearly identifying the organization holding the
permit and stating the purpose of the solicitation shall be placed in each
corner of the intersection and shall be clearly visible to traffic.



   (C)   All persons engaged in solicitation shall wear an orange vest
or jacket.



   (D)   Five orange cones shall be placed on the center dividing lines
of each street or highway leading to the intersection. The cones shall be
placed 20 feet apart so that they are set up over a distance of 100 feet.



   (E)   No more than two persons shall be on each street leading to
the intersection.



   (F)   No one under the age of 16 shall engage in soliciting in or on
the street, highway or right-of- way.



(Ord. 006-699, passed 7-24-2006)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.06  PROHIBITED PRACTICES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in soliciting that is
regulated by this subchapter to do any of the following:



   (A)   Misrepresent the purpose of the solicitation;



   (B)   Solicit in a manner that intimidates, threatens or harasses
the persons solicited; and/or



   (C)   Solicit in any manner that obstructs the safe and free passage
of pedestrian or vehicle traffic.



(Ord. 006-699, passed 7-24-2006)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.07  PERMIT REVOCATION.



   The Mayor, or his or her designee, may revoke a permit upon a
determination that it is being used in violation of this subchapter.



(Ord. 006-699, passed 7-24-2006)



§ 115.08  APPEALS.



   The decision of the Mayor, or his or her designee, to deny or revoke a
permit may be appealed to the City Council. The notice of appeal must be made
in writing and mailed to the Mayor within seven days after the decision to
deny or revoke the permit. The appeal shall be set for a hearing at the
meeting of the City Council within 30 days from the date of the appeal.



(Ord. 006-699, passed 7-24-2006)



§ 115.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   Persons found guilty of violating any provision of §§ 115.01
through 115.08 of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than
$25, nor more than $250. Each day’s violation shall constitute a separate
offense.



(Ord. 006-699, passed 7-24-2006)



CHAPTER 116:  FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS



Section



Restaurant Tax



   116.01   Definitions



   116.02   Tax levied



   116.03   Gross sales reported to City Clerk



   116.04   Transfer of moneys



   116.05   Proceeds



   116.06   Interest and penalties



   116.07   Collector; administrative rules and regulations



   116.08   Collection of license fees; records



   116.09   Information deemed confidential



   116.10   Refund of overpayment



   116.11   Failure to file return; failure to pay; underpayments



 



   116.99   Penalty



Editor’s note:



   The Shepherdsville-Bullitt County Tourist Commission is the Collector
of the restaurant tax.



RESTAURANT TAX



§ 116.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COLLECTOR. The City Clerk or his or her designated representative.



   RESTAURANT. A facility, whether it is a fixed or mobile commercial
establishment, which serves to the public food and beverages, including, but
not limited to, grills, tearooms, sandwich shops, soda fountains, taverns,
bars, cocktail lounges, nightclubs, roadside stands, delicatessens, catering
kitchens, commissaries or similar places which require on-site preparation.
Exempted from this subchapter are non-profit organizations, schools, food
vending machines and establishments serving beverages only in single service
or original containers.



(Ord. 997-415, passed 10-13-1997)



§ 116.02  TAX LEVIED.



   There is hereby levied upon the retail sale of all food and beverages
by a restaurant located within the municipal limits of the city a tax equal
to 2% of the gross amount of each sale (excluding any other tax). This tax
may or may not be passed on to the ultimate customer/consumer at the
discretion of the restaurant.



(Ord. 997-415, passed 10-13-1997)



§ 116.03  GROSS SALES REPORTED TO CITY CLERK.



   (A)   On or before the twentieth day of each calendar month, each
restaurant owner and/or operator shall report to the City Clerk, on forms
provided by the city, the gross amount of sales of that restaurant from food
and beverages for the preceding calendar month, and a calculation of the tax
due for that month by computing 2% of its gross sales from food and beverages.



   (B)   The owner/operator of the restaurant shall remit the tax due
with the completed return to the City Clerk.



   (C)   A return not filed or payment not received, or if mailed, not
postmarked by the due date shall constitute a delinquency.



   (D)   The Collector, at his or her discretion, may cause such
delinquency to be published in a newspaper pursuant to KRS Ch. 424.



   (E)   A declaration or non-declaration of delinquency shall in no
way affect any requirement of filing or payment as provided for in this
subchapter, and the declaration of delinquency shall not be construed to
grant any additional times for payment or filing.



   (F)   Declaration of delinquencies shall not be subject to the
prohibition of public disclosure as to the existence of such delinquencies
only pursuant to § 116.06.



(Ord. 997-415, passed 10-13-1997; Ord. 001-520, passed --2001)



§ 116.04  TRANSFER OF MONEYS.



   (A)   On or before the first day of each calendar month, the City
Clerk shall transfer to the Bullitt County-Shepherdsville Tourist and
Convention Commission the net of moneys collected from the restaurant tax
collected for the previous month.



   (B)   The city shall retain all cost of collection including, but
not limited to, the cost of forms, postage, court cost, attorney’s fees and
all other expenses incurred in collection of this tax.



(Ord. 997-415, passed 10-13-1997)



§ 116.05  PROCEEDS.



   The proceeds of this tax shall be used for the purpose of the operation
and maintenance of a Convention Center within the municipal boundaries of the
city. Should the Bullitt County-Shepherdsville Tourist and Convention
Commission cease to maintain a Convention Center within the municipal
boundaries of the city, this restaurant tax shall cease and no longer be
payable.



(Ord. 997-415, passed 10-13-1997)



§ 116.06  INTEREST AND PENALTIES.



   (A)   Any person who fails to file any return required hereunder
within the time due, shall be charged a penalty of 5% of the amount of the
unpaid restaurant tax for each month such return remains unfiled, not
exceeding a penalty of 25% in the aggregate.



   (B)   All restaurant taxes imposed by this subchapter which remain
unpaid after they become due shall bear interest at the rate of 0.5% per
month (or part thereof) and any person who fails to pay such restaurant tax
when same shall become due, shall also be charged a penalty of 10% of the
amount of such unpaid restaurant tax or $10, whichever shall be greater.



   (C)   Any person who shall fail, neglect or refuse to make any
return or pay any tax due required by this subchapter, or to pay to the city
those so withheld under the terms of this subchapter, or any person who shall
refuse to permit the Collector or any agent or employee designated by him or
her in writing, to examine books, records and papers pertaining to
information required under this subchapter, or who shall knowingly make any
incomplete, false or fraudulent return; or who shall attempt to do anything
whatsoever to avoid the full disclosure of the amount of gross receipts in
order to avoid the payment of the whole or any part of the restaurant license
tax, shall become liable to the city for such tax as well as the interest and
penalty thereon.



(Ord. 997-415, passed 10-13-1997)  Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.07  COLLECTOR; ADMINISTRATIVE RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   (1)   The Collector is hereby charged with the enforcement
of provisions of this subchapter, and is hereby empowered to prescribe, adopt
and promulgate, and enforce rules and regulations relating to any matter
pertaining to the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this
subchapter, including, but not limited to, provisions for the reexamination
and correction of returns to which an underpayment or overpayment is claimed
or found to have been made, and the rules and regulations as promulgated by
him or her shall be binding upon the tax payer; provided, however, all such
rules, regulations and decisions shall be subject to the consent and approval
of the Mayor or City Council.



      (2)   The Collector, or any agent or employee designated by
him or her in writing, may examine the books, papers and records of any
restaurant in order to determine the accuracy of any return made, or if no
return was made, to ascertain the amount of restaurant tax imposed by the
terms of this subchapter, as he or she may deem is reasonably necessary for
the purpose incident to the performance of his or her duties hereunder. The
Collector may enforce this right by application to the appropriate court
having jurisdiction over these matters.



      (3)   The Collector may dispense with examination of the
books, papers and records of any taxpayer in any case where the Collector is
furnished with a certificate of a qualified certified public accountant, or
the sworn statement of any other reputable accountant or bookkeeper stating
that the amount of restaurant tax reported conforms to the state or federal
income tax return filed for the applicable period.



   (B)   The Collector shall have the following duties in connection
with the restaurant tax:



      (1)   Keep accurate records of all returns and of all sums
received for restaurant taxes. Such records shall contain the names and
addresses of each taxpayer, and the dates and amounts of payments. The
Collector shall keep the original returns on file for a period of not less
than three years after filing;



      (2)   Enforce the provisions of this subchapter, all in
accordance with any policies set forth in any ordinance, municipal order or
executive order;



      (3)   Prepare forms and instructions for the returns and
payments required by this subchapter. All instructions shall be clear and
shall be as short as possible;



      (4)   Examine returns and, for any returns appearing to be
incorrect, make inquiries, investigations and adjustments in the amount of
tax due;



      (5)   Where necessary to determine accurate figures for
determining the amount of tax due, examine books, records and information
stored in computers of any taxpayer; provided that, each city officer or
employee acting under this subchapter shall identify himself or herself and
request the information desired. If the officer or employee is refused
admission to any place of business or refused access to any records or
computer memory, the Collector or employee shall leave the premises and shall
seek an appropriate court order, with the assistance of the City Attorney, to
obtain access to the information needed;



      (6)   The Collector shall, within 20 days following the due
date for filing a return and any taxes due under this subchapter, prepare a
notification letter and estimate of tax liability pursuant to § 116.10.



      (7)   The Collector may delegate duties assigned to the
Collector in this subchapter to any officer or employee under the
Collector’s supervision; provided that, the Collector shall approve the
form of all returns and written instructions;



      (8)   The Collector may prepare pamphlets for distribution to
the public, clearly explaining the restaurant tax, returns and payments
required; and



      (9)   The Collector shall perform all of the other duties
assigned to the collector by this subchapter.



(Ord. 997-415, passed 10-13-1997; Ord. 001-520, passed --2001)



§ 116.08  COLLECTION OF LICENSE FEES; RECORDS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Collector to collect and receive
the restaurant tax imposed by this subchapter.



   (B)   The Collector shall keep records showing the amount paid by
each restaurant owner and/or operator and the date of such receipt.



(Ord. 997-415, passed 10-13-1997)



§ 116.09  INFORMATION DEEMED CONFIDENTIAL.



   Any information, including returns, documents or payments made pursuant
hereto and any other information gained by the Collector or any other
official, agent or employee of the city as a result of any return,
investigation, hearing or verification required or authorized by this
subchapter shall be confidential, except in accordance with proper judicial
order; provided, however, such person may disclose to the Commissioner of the
Revenue Cabinet of the state or his or her duly authorized agent, or to the
Commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service, or his or her duly authorized
agent, all such information and extend the right to inspect any of the books
and records of the city to said Commissioner of the Revenue Cabinet of the
state and/or to said Commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service who must
grant to the city the reciprocal right to obtain information from the files
and records of the Department of Revenue of the state and from the files and
records of the Internal Revenue Service and maintains the privileged
character of the information so furnished to them.



(Ord. 997-415, passed 10-13-1997)



§ 116.10  REFUND OF OVERPAYMENT.



   (A)   Any taxpayer (pursuant to this subchapter) who truly believes
that he or she has made or permitted an overpayment of his or her liability
for any restaurant tax required by this subchapter may apply for refund of
said overpayment; provided that, he or she files an amended return, verified
under oath and setting forth in detail the full explanation of the reason of
the said claimed overpayment of his or her liability, within one year of the
date of said overpayment is made or the date his or her said restaurant tax
payment was due, whichever occurs first.



   (B)   If a refund has been properly claimed according to the
provisions of division (A) above, then the Collector shall have the authority
to honor and refund any such overpayment actually made above actual liability
upon the restaurant tax required under this subchapter which he or she
determines, within his or her sole discretion, was made through honest
mistake or inadvertence.



   (C)   In no event shall any refund be made for any payment upon any
restaurant tax unless the refund claim is submitted and filed in strict
compliance with divisions (A) and (B) above upon such refund claim forms or
amended return forms as hereafter shall be promulgated by the Collector from
time to time.



(Ord. 997-415, passed 10-13-1997)



§ 116.11  FAILURE TO FILE RETURN; FAILURE TO PAY; UNDERPAYMENTS.



   The following rules shall apply when a taxpayer fails to file a return,
fails to pay the restaurant taxes withheld when due or pays less than the
amount due.



   (A)   If the taxpayer liable for collecting the restaurant tax and
filing a return fails to make a return, the Collector shall prepare an
estimate of the amount of restaurant taxes due based on the best information
available to the Collector. The Collector may make investigations to assist
in making the estimate. The Collector may consider the volume of business
done in the same type of business, and any other relevant matters. When the
Collector estimates the restaurant taxes, the amount of interest and late
charges provided by this subchapter shall be added to the taxes due. The
Collector shall notify the taxpayer of the amount due. Such notification
shall be in writing and shall contain a brief description of the method and
estimated figures used in arriving at the estimated tax. Any taxpayer may
dispute the amount of the estimated tax by filing within 30 days of
notification of the estimated taxes a return accompanied by payment of the
entire balance due together with the interest and late charges due. Such
return shall be processed like any late return, and shall establish the
restaurant tax liability of the taxpayer in place of the estimated amount
prepared by the Collector. The Collector may, however, later determine that
the amount shown in the return is insufficient so there is a deficiency, in
the same manner as in the case of other returns.



   (B)   (1)   If the Collector determines, by examining available
evidence, that the amount of restaurant taxes paid over by the taxpayer is
less than the amount required by this subchapter, the Collector shall notify
the taxpayer of the deficiency. The Collector may use any of the methods
authorized in division (A) above to determine whether a deficiency exists and
to determine the amount of such deficiency. The Collector shall thereupon
notify the taxpayer of the deficiency. Such notice shall be in writing and
shall state not only the amount of the deficiency, but also the methods and
estimates used in arriving at the amount of the deficiency.



      (2)   If the taxpayer does not object within 30 days of the
date of receiving such notice, the taxpayer shall be deemed to have accepted
the revised figures for the restaurant tax liability. If the taxpayer does
file written objection within the time specified, the taxpayer shall pay the
fees, together with penalties and interest, under protest and may thereupon
pursue administrative and judicial remedies as provided by ordinance and by
state law to seek a refund.



   (C)   If the Collector finds that any taxpayer has overpaid, the
Collector shall notify him or her of his or her overpayment and shall refund
the amount of the overpayment to him or her.



   (D)   When the Collector notifies any taxpayer of any estimated
amount due, alleged overpayment or refund, the Collector shall include in the
notice clear instructions on how, when and where the taxpayer may protest or
appeal the decision.



   (E)   (1)   If any taxpayer or any person, firm, association or
corporation required by this subchapter to pay a restaurant tax or to file a
return shall fail to file any return for any month, such failure to file
shall constitute a continuing offense against the city and the Collector may
proceed to estimate and collect the restaurant taxes at any time.



      (2)   In all other cases, no increases shall be made in the
taxpayer’s restaurant tax liability unless the first notice of such
increase is received by the taxpayer within three years of the time the
return was first due.



(Ord. 997-415, passed 10-13-1997)



§ 116.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   (1)   A restaurant owner and/or operator who collects the
restaurant tax from one or more persons, as per §§ 116.01 through 116.11 of
this chapter, and who fails to file a return and make payments therewith
shall, in addition to the penalties prescribed herein, upon conviction, be
subject to a fine of not less than $50, nor more than $500, or imprisonment
for not more than 30 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, for each
offense. Such criminal penalties shall be in addition to the penalties
imposed in § 116.07(A) of this chapter.



      (2)   Any person who shall fail, neglect or refuse to make any
return or pay any tax due required by §§ 116.01 through 116.11 of this
chapter, per § 116.06 of this chapter, shall, in addition, be subject to a
fine of not less than $50 or more than $500 or imprisonment for not less than
30 days, each day of non-filing constituting a separate offense. Such
criminal penalties shall be in addition to the penalties imposed in § 116.06
of this chapter.



      (3)   Any person or agent divulging such information, per §
116.09 of this chapter, shall, upon conviction, be subjected to a fine of not
less than $50, nor more than $500, or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, or
both, at the discretion of the court and, upon conviction, shall be dismissed
from employment by the city.



(Ord. 997-415, passed 10-13-1997)



CHAPTER 117:  ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS



Section



General Provisions



   117.01   Definitions



   117.02   Administrative authority; references



   117.03   Examination of books, records and the like



Rules, Requirements and Conditions



   117.15   Signage



   117.16   Display of stock



   117.17   Exclusion of persons under 18 years of age



   117.18   Entrance attended; location



   117.19   Hours of operation



   117.20   General location



Licensing Provisions



   117.35   Owners and operators



   117.36   Current information



   117.37   Application inspection; consent



   117.38   Display of license



   117.39   License required after effective date



   117.40   Duration



   117.41   Adult entertainer license



   117.42   Denial of issuance or renewal; suspension or revocation



   117.43   Hearing; notice



   117.44   Final determination



 



   117.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Alcohol, see Ch. 112



   Curfew for minors; parental responsibility, see § 130.01



   Occupational License Tax, see Ch. 111



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 117.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT. Without limitation, material, services, goods,
films, simulations, live performances or other activities which emphasize or
seek to arouse or excite human sexual desires through specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas and which, taken as a whole, appeal
to prurient interests and lack serious literary, political or scientific
value.



   ADULT ESTABLISHMENT.



      (1)   A business entity or endeavor, whether fixed, mobile or
traveling, which makes available adult entertainment to its patrons. ADULT
ESTABLISHMENT refers to its owners, operators, directors, shareholders,
employees and possessions; and includes, but is not limited to, the following:



         (a)   Adult bookstore;



         (b)   Adult motion picture theater;



         (c)   Adult mini-motion picture theater; or



         (d)   Any commercial establishment not otherwise
described herein which:



            1.   In addition to providing services unrelated
to adult entertainment, makes adult entertainment available to its customers;
or



            2.   Designates all or a portion of its premises
as being for adults only, has a policy of excluding minors from all or a
portion of its premises, or which advertises so as to convey the impression
that adult entertainment is available at the premises or at that portion of
the premises designated for adults only.



      (2)   This definition does not include video rental stores
which derive less than 25% of their gross revenues from the rental or sale of
adult films and show no adult films on the premises.



   EMPLOYEE. Any person providing or engaging in adult entertainment who
is hired by, suffered or permitted to work in an adult establishment whether
that person receives remuneration directly from the operator or owner of the
establishment, from patrons of the establishment or from any other source
whether by contract of employment or otherwise.



   LICENSEE. A person who is the holder of a valid license under this
chapter and shall also include an agent, servant or employee of a licensee
whenever a licensee is prohibited from doing a certain act under this chapter.



   OPERATOR. Any person who establishes and/or maintains an adult
establishment as its owner or manager and may also mean a “licensee”, as
defined herein.



   OWNER. Any person who holds legal title to real estate, with or without
possession thereof, or has all or part of the beneficial ownership of any
real estate and the right to the present use or enjoyment thereof, including
a mortgagee in possession.



   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, corporation or business entity.



   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.



      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast below a point immediately
above the top of the areola; and/or



      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even
if completely and opaquely covered.



   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.



      (1)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or
arousal;



      (2)   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or
sodomy; and/or



      (3)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals,
pubic region, buttock or female breast.



(Ord. 993-299, passed 5-19-1993)



§ 117.02  ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY; REFERENCES.



   (A)   (1)   The City Council is empowered to enact whatever rules
and regulations are deemed necessary for the orderly and complete
administration of this chapter, at such times and in the discretion of the
City Council, as the need arises for such rules and regulations.



      (2)   All licensees and persons with license applications
pending shall be mailed copies of all such regulations and they shall be
published one time in the local newspaper as soon as practicable after they
become effective.



   (B)   (1)   All references to the City Council, officials of the
city or other agents or agencies of government shall include the designee of
such City Council, agents, agents or agencies.



      (2)   All references to the singular include the plural, and
the masculine or feminine include the other gender in any place in which the
context of this chapter so requires.



(Ord. 993-299, passed 5-19-1993)



§ 117.03  EXAMINATION OF BOOKS, RECORDS AND THE LIKE.



   The City Council, or any agent or employee so designated by the City
Council, may examine the books, papers and records of any applicant or
licensee as it may deem reasonably necessary for purposes incident to the
performance of his or her duties hereunder.



(Ord. 993-299, passed 5-19-1993)



RULES, REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS



§ 117.15  SIGNAGE.



   An adult establishment, except as otherwise provided by laws which may
be more restrictive, may not have more than one outside sign, and the face of
such sign shall not exceed ten feet in length (horizontal to the ground) and
three feet in width (vertical to the ground) with no flashing lights and with
no lettering, wording, pictorial or representational matter which depicts,
describes or relates to adult entertainment.



(Ord. 993-299, passed 5-19-1993)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.16  DISPLAY OF STOCK.



   An adult establishment may not display its stock-in-trade or any matter
depicting, describing or relating to adult entertainment in public view from
outside the establishment, including, but not limited to, view from public
sidewalks, streets, arcades, hallways or passageways.



(Ord. 993-299, passed 5-19-1993)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.17  EXCLUSION OF PERSONS UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE.



   (A)   An operator of an adult establishment shall not permit a
person under the age of 18 years to be employed by or to enter into such
establishment; provided, however, that, a licensed adult establishment which
devotes only a portion of its business premises to adult entertainment may
permit the public, generally including minors, to enter that portion of the
premises within which no adult entertainment is visible or on display.



   (B)   This section shall not be construed to be an exemption from or
in conflict with any requirement found in any statute, ordinance, regulation
or other provision of the law which is applicable to a licensee or potential
licensee hereunder which is more stringent in terms of the age requirement
for employees or customers.



(Ord. 993-299, passed 5-19-1993)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.18  ENTRANCE ATTENDED; LOCATION.



   (A)   An operator of an adult establishment shall, at all times,
cause the entrance of the establishment to be attended so as to insure
compliance with the requirements contained in § 117.17 of this chapter.



   (B)   The public entrance to an adult establishment shall not be
located within 1,000 feet of the following:



      (1)   Any building containing a public or private elementary,
middle or secondary school, college, vocational school or institution of
higher education;



      (2)   A church;



      (3)   Any park, shopping center or park-like area of open
space under control of any governmental agency. Such distance shall be
measured in a straight line from the nearest property boundary line of the
real estate on which the activities described in divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2)
above are located to the entrance of the adult establishment;



      (4)   Areas zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, B-2, Agricultural or
otherwise used for residential purposes; or



      (5)   The public entrance of another adult establishment.



(Ord. 993-299, passed 5-19-1993)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.19  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   A licensed adult establishment shall not operate between the hours of
12:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.



(Ord. 993-299, passed 5-19-1993)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.20  GENERAL LOCATION.



   A licensed adult establishment shall be located only on property which
is zoned B-1 under the Zoning regulations of the city, subject however to
those restrictions found in § 117.18(B) of this chapter.



(Ord. 993-299, passed 5-19-1993)  Penalty, see § 117.99



LICENSING PROVISIONS



§ 117.35  OWNERS AND OPERATORS.



   (A)   The owner or operator of an establishment providing or
intending to provide, adult entertainment, whether or not previously
licensed, shall make application for a city adult establishment license with
the City Clerk in accordance with this subchapter.



   (B)   Such application shall be in writing, under oath, and shall be
in the form prescribed by the City Clerk and shall contain the following
information:



      (1)   The name and location of the adult establishment and the
name and business address of the applicant;



      (2)   The name, address, date of birth, Social Security number
and photograph of a natural person with ownership interest in the adult
establishment, such natural person to be determined as follows:



         (a)   If the licensee is one or more natural persons,
then one natural person may apply for the license upon certification that
such person owns a greater share in the licensee than any other person;



         (b)   If the licensee is a partnership, then the natural
person designated as the managing general partner or managing partner in the
partnership agreement shall apply, and a copy of the partnership agreement
shall be attached to the license application. If the partnership agreement
does not designate a natural person as a managing partner or a managing
general partner, then the natural person who by virtue of his or her interest
or holding in the partnerships and/or corporations which have formed the
partnership owns a greater share of the licensee than any other single
natural person shall apply. If no partnership agreement exists, then all
partners, either general or limited, shall apply; and



         (c)   If the licensee is a corporation, the natural
person, if any, who owns a greater number of shares in the corporation than
any other person shall apply. If the person owning the greatest number of
shares is not a natural person, then the natural person who by virtue of his
or her interest or holdings in one or more of the partnerships or other
corporations which owns shares in the licensee owns a greater portion of the
licensee than any other individual natural person shall apply.



      (3)   The name and address of all directors and officers of
any licensee or applicant which is a corporation, and the name and address of
the licensee’s designated agent for service of process;



      (4)   In the event the applicant or licensee is not the owner
of record of the real property on which the adult establishment is located or
to be located, the application shall include a notarized statement from the
owner of record of the real property acknowledging that an adult
establishment is to be located on the real property upon the issuance of a
license. The applicant shall also furnish the name and address of the owner
of record of the real property and a copy of the lease or rental agreement;



      (5)   The name, address, date of birth, Social Security number
and photograph of all persons engaged in day-to-day employment or contract
labor on the licensed premises. If the licensee is to engage in the sale,
rental or showing of adult books, goods, films or materials, then all persons
designated to engage in the selection thereof for sale or rental or showing
shall be subject to the provisions of this division (B)(5). All persons who
at any time shall be responsible for attending the entrance of the adult
establishment for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the provisions of
§ 117.17 of this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of this division
(B)(5);



      (6)   The name, address, date of birth, Social Security number
and photograph of the person or persons designated by the applicant to
undertake to keep the applicant, if licensed, at all times in compliance with
the restrictions, requirements and conditions of this chapter; together with
the sworn affidavit of that person stating that they have received a copy of
this chapter and that they willfully undertake on behalf of the applicant to
comply therewith;



      (7)   The name, address, date of birth, Social Security number
and photograph of the person or persons designated by the applicant or
licensee to be responsible for keeping the information required hereunder
current at all times; together with the sworn affidavit of that person or
persons stating that they have received a copy of this chapter, that they
understand the requirements thereof pertaining to disclosure of information,
and that they willfully undertake on behalf of the applicant to comply
therewith;



      (8)   The name and address of any rental agent of the property
on which the adult establishment is or is to be located;



      (9)   The nature of the activity or activities to be engaged
in at such location;



      (10)   All criminal convictions, other than traffic
violations, of the applicants, owners, directors, partners or employees whose
names are required pursuant to this chapter. Any such person who is on parole
shall provide the terms of such parole with the application;



      (11)   The name and street address of any person to whom the
applicant designates that notice be given in case of violation or other
matters affecting the license hereunder;



      (12)   A photograph or drawing of any sign displayed or
proposed to be displayed on the exterior of the adult establishment and a
statement of the dimensions of such sign;



      (13)   Proof of compliance with the occupational license fee
laws of the city;



      (14)   A certificate of occupancy where required and, in all
other cases, a letter of compliance issued by the Zoning Administrator of the
county’s Planning Commission certifying that the business complies with the
applicable zoning ordinance or has non-conforming use rights and that the
proposed use will not constitute an enlargement or expansion of the scope of
such non-conforming rights;



      (15)   A certificate from the Fire Marshal that all applicable
fire regulations have been met;



      (16)   A statement from the Chief Building Inspector that the
premises complies with the applicable provisions of the Uniform Kentucky
Building Code as adopted by the city; and



      (17)   A statement from the county’s Health Department
Director that the premises is adequately ventilated and contains public
restrooms which satisfy the requirements of 902 KAR 10:010. The county’s
Health Department Director shall cause the premises of each licensee to be
inspected annually to determine continued compliance with the provisions of
this section.



   (C)   The certificates and/or statements which are to be obtained
from the Zoning Administrator of the county’s Planning Commission, the Fire
Marshal, the Chief Building Inspector and the county’s Health Department
Director shall be granted or denied within 30 days after the receipt of a
written request for such certificate or statement. If a required certificate
or statement is not granted or denied within that 30-day period, then the
certificate or statement shall be deemed to have been granted for the current
licensing period if the applicant submits with their application an affidavit
setting forth the applicant’s good-faith effort to obtain the certificate
or statement. The affidavit shall be signed by applicant, state the date on
which the written request for the particular certificate or statement was
made, the name and address of the person to whom the written request for the
certificate or statement was made, that the certificate or statement has not
been granted or denied within 30 days of the date of the written request, and
attaching a copy of the written request. Nothing herein shall be deemed or
construed to relieve any individual or entity of the responsibility to comply
with all applicable statutes, ordinances and regulations.



(Ord. 993-299, passed 5-19-1993)



§ 117.36  CURRENT INFORMATION.



   The information required by this section shall be at all times current
even after the granting of a license. It shall be the responsibility of the
operator or other person designated in the license application to notify the
City Clerk no later than the close of the first business day after the
effective date of any changes, alterations or modifications of any
information contained in the application, including, but not limited to: the
name of the establishment; any change in the corporate information required
for the application; names and addresses of employees; names and addresses of
owners of the property on which the establishment is located; the name and
address of the designated agent for service of process; nature of the
activities to be engaged in at the establishment; and the name and address of
any person to whom the applicant designates notice to be given in case of
violation or other matters affecting the license.



(Ord. 993-299, passed 5-19-1993)



§ 117.37  APPLICATION INSPECTION; CONSENT.



   (A)   (1)   Within 30 days after the receipt of a full and
complete application for a city adult establishment license, or an
application for the renewal of such a license, the City Clerk shall cause the
premises to be inspected and shall issue a city adult establishment license
if all restrictions, requirements, and conditions of this chapter have been
met. If the City Clerk fails to issue or deny a license or the renewal of a
license within that 30-day period, the license shall be deemed to have been
issued for the current licensing period.



      (2)   Under no circumstances shall a license be issued, and
any license previously issued or renewed shall be automatically terminated,
if the City Clerk determines that the applicant or any owner, operator,
director, partner, shareholder or employee has been convicted of any offense
involving gambling under KRS Ch. 528, prostitution under KRS Ch. 529,
unlawful transactions with a minor under KRS Ch. 530, obscene matter under
KRS Ch. 531, controlled substances under KRS Ch. 218A, criminal solicitation
under KRS 506.030 if such solicitation related to a prostitution offense
under KRS Ch. 529, sexual misconduct under KRS 510.140, or any similar law of
the United States of America or any other state or territory of the United
States of America within the last five years. The granting of a license does
not certify compliance with all applicable laws, nor does it stop the city
from the enforcement of all applicable laws and ordinances.



      (3)   If any inspection reveals any failure to comply with any
restrictions, requirements or conditions contained herein, the City Clerk
shall notify the applicant in writing of that fact, stating what failures
have been discovered, and allowing a reasonable time to correct such defects.



   (B)   An applicant or licensee shall sign and submit a consent
providing that the Police Chief, and any law enforcement officer with
jurisdiction in the county may inspect and search the licensed premises at
any reasonable time, may confiscate articles found on the premises in
violation of any ordinance or statute, and that the City Clerk may order an
emergency temporary closure of the premises if the public health, safety,
morals and welfare is threatened by multiple violations of any ordinance or
statute involving disturbance of the peace or public disorder reported to the
City Clerk by the Police Chief during the course of one day’s operation of
the premises. The temporary closure shall remain in effect until review of
the alleged violations by the City Council which shall occur within three
business days of such temporary closures.



(Ord. 993-299, passed 5-19-1993)



§ 117.38  DISPLAY OF LICENSE.



   The city adult establishment license granted according to this chapter
shall at all times be conspicuously posted and displayed on the licensed
premises so as to be open to view of the patrons and public authorities.



(Ord. 993-299, passed 5-19-1993)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.39  LICENSE REQUIRED AFTER EFFECTIVE DATE.



   Thirty days after the effective date of this chapter, no operator shall
maintain, operate or conduct an adult establishment unless such person has
applied for a city adult establishment license. Thereafter, no operator shall
own, operate or be employed at an adult establishment which has sought and
been denied a license according to this chapter; and unless all dancers,
performers and entertainers appearing at such establishment have obtained the
license required by § 117.40 of this chapter. No owner shall permit adult
entertainment to be conducted on his or her property unless and until such
establishment is properly licensed according to this section. No person shall
permit himself or herself to be an operator or employee at an adult
establishment which has not been validly licensed according to this section,
except as permitted under § 117.40 of this chapter.



(Ord. 993-299, passed 5-19-1993)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.40  DURATION.



   All city adult establishment licenses shall be for the fiscal year of
the city, July 1 through June 30, or the remaining portion of such fiscal
year. The annual license fee shall be $1,000 and shall not be prorated. All
license fees shall be remitted to the City Clerk. Application for renewal of
a city adult establishment license shall be made on or before June 1 of each
year and accompanied by the annual fee of $1,000. Such application shall also
contain any changes in the information required which have occurred since the
previous application.



(Ord. 993-299, passed 5-19-1993)



§ 117.41  ADULT ENTERTAINER LICENSE.



   (A)   Applicants. Any person intending to engage in the occupation
or profession of a dancer, performer, entertainer or any person employed or
working as contract labor who provides or engages in adult entertainment at
an adult establishment shall, prior to providing or engaging in same, make
application for a city adult entertainer license with the City Clerk in
accordance with this section. Such application shall be in writing, under
oath, and shall be in a form prescribed by the City Clerk and shall include:
the legal name of the applicant; any and all names used by the applicant in
the course of performance of duties as a dancer, performer or entertainer;
the applicant’s residence address; the applicant’s date of birth; the
applicant’s Social Security number; a photograph of the applicant taken
within 30 days prior to the application; and the applicant’s fingerprints.
The applicant shall submit with this application an annual license fee of
$100 which shall not be prorated. The City Clerk shall issue or deny the
applicant a license within 30 days after receiving a full and complete
application. All licenses issued shall expire on June 30 of each year and
shall be renewed by the City Clerk within 30 days after receiving a full and
complete application for renewal. If the City Clerk fails to issue or deny a
license or the renewal of a license within the 30-day period, the license
shall be deemed to have been issued for the current licensing period. Under
no circumstances may an applicant be issued a license, and any license
previously issued or renewed shall be automatically terminated, if the City
Clerk determines that the applicant has been convicted in the past five years
of any offense involving prostitution under KRS Ch. 529, unlawful
transactions with a minor under KRS Ch. 530, obscene matter under KRS Ch.
531, controlled substances under KRS 218A, criminal solicitation under KRS
506.030 if such solicitation related to a prostitution offense under KRS Ch.
529, sexual misconduct under KRS 510.140, or any similar law of the United
States of America or state or territory of the United States of America.



   (B)   Renewal. Application for renewal of a city adult entertainer
license shall be made on or before June 1; and a penalty for late application
shall be assessed in the amount of $25.



   (C)   License required. Thirty days after the effective date of this
chapter, no dancer, performer or person employed or working as contract labor
who provides or engages in adult entertainment at an adult establishment
shall dance, perform or otherwise be occupied in the providing of adult
entertainment without having obtained the license required by this chapter.



(Ord. 993-299, passed 5-19-1993)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.42  DENIAL OF ISSUANCE OR RENEWAL; SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   The City Clerk shall refuse to issue or renew any license provided for
by this chapter, or may suspend any license previously granted under this
chapter, if it is determined that a licensee or applicant:



   (A)   Has failed to comply with the restrictions, requirements and
conditions of this chapter or with such regulations as may be enacted by City
Council pursuant to this chapter;



   (B)   Has knowingly provided false information to gain or to
maintain a license, or has willfully failed to keep the information required
therein current; or



   (C)   Has engaged in conduct which has resulted in the licensed
premises being used for or the site of illegal activities, whether under this
chapter, state or federal law, or by the licensee or its agents, employees or
patrons.



(Ord. 993-299, passed 5-19-1993)



§ 117.43  HEARING; NOTICE.



   (A)   (1)   The licensee or applicant may request a hearing on
the refusal to issue or renew a license or the suspension of a license and
such a hearing shall be conducted by the City Council. Such request must be
in writing and received by the City Clerk within ten days of the date of the
refusal to issue or renew a license or the suspension of a license. Any
licensee or applicant whose application for the issuance or renewal of a
license was denied prior to 5-21-1993 shall have ten days from 5-31-1993,
within which to request the hearing provided for herein. The hearing must
take place within 20 days after the request for the hearing is received.



      (2)   The action by the City Clerk shall be stayed upon
receipt of the request for hearing and pending the decision of the City
Council. At the hearing, the City Council shall consider all relevant factors
including, but not limited to, the following:



         (a)   The licensee’s or applicant’s failure to
comply with the applicable restrictions, requirements and conditions of this
chapter and the willfulness of the failure of the individual designated on
the licensee’s application to undertake such compliance;



         (b)   The extent to which such failure to comply has
been repeated by the licensee or by the individual designated on the
licensee’s application to undertake such compliance;



         (c)   Any mitigating circumstances which the licensee
has shown have made compliance impracticable or impossible;



         (d)   Whether the licensee has remedied the failure to
comply prior to the hearing;



         (e)   The willfulness of the failure of the owner or
operator or the person designated on the licensee’s application to
undertake compliance with the disclosure of current information required
hereunder;



         (f)   The extent to which such failure to disclose
information required to be kept current hereunder has been repeated;



         (g)   The length of time such disclosure requirements
have been out of compliance;



         (h)   The number of violations;



         (i)   The number and frequency of the incidences of the
illegal conduct;



         (j)   Whether the licensee or its agents or employee are
found to have had knowledge of the illegal conduct;



         (k)   Whether the licensee or its agents or employees,
by the manner in which the licensee’s business is conducted, is found to
have permitted or encouraged such illegal conduct; and/or



         (l)   The degree to which the licensee’s business is
found to have permitted or encouraged such illegal conduct.



   (B)   The City Clerk shall serve written notice of the hearing and
of the specific matter or charges to be determined. The notice shall be
served upon the licensee or applicant at the address listed in the
application at least seven days in advance of the hearing. Service of the
notice shall be deemed complete upon mailing by registered United States mail
or upon personal delivery by any person over the age of 18 years. At the
hearing, the licensee/applicant shall be afforded an opportunity to employ
and be represented by an attorney, to present evidence, to cross-examine
adverse witnesses and to otherwise rebut the evidence presented against the
licensee/applicant. Within ten days after the hearing, the City Council shall
issue its findings and conclusions. If the hearing concerned a refusal to
renew a license or the suspension of a license, the City Council shall also
determine what sanctions, if any, are to be imposed on the licensee or the
owner of the licensee’s premises, including the suspension of the
licensee’s license for a period not to exceed five years. If the
licensee’s license is suspended, all persons listed on the application,
whether as partner, director, officer, owner, part-owner or operator, or
managing partner may also be suspended from participating in adult
entertainment activities for a period not to exceed five years if the City
Council finds that such persons knew or reasonably should have known of the
violation for which the license is suspended and failed to take steps
promptly to cure the violation.



(Ord. 993-299, passed 5-19-1993)



§ 117.44  FINAL DETERMINATION.



   The findings and rulings of any hearing before the City Council shall
constitute a final determination of the issues raised and may be appealed to
the county’s Circuit Court, but shall be enforced during the pendency of
any such appeal unless otherwise ordered by the Court. If the hearing is held
by the City Council, the findings and rulings shall be supported by the
affirmative vote of a majority of a quorum.



(Ord. 993-299, passed 5-19-1993)



§ 117.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a
Class A misdemeanor. If the person who violates any provision of this chapter
is a corporation, partnership, joint stock company, association or fiduciary,
then the principal officer or partner responsible for such violations may be
punished by imprisonment as authorized by this section.



   (B)   Upon any conviction of any person for the violation of any
offense in this chapter, all property held in violation of this chapter, and
any personal property, including, but not limited to, books, videotapes,
films and other property used in the commission of or furtherance of an
offense under this chapter shall be forfeited as provided in KRS 500.090 by
court order and sold, destroyed or otherwise disposed of in accordance with
KRS 500.090.



   (C)   In addition to any other penalties imposed for violating this
chapter, the city may secure injunctions and abatement in order to ensure
compliance with this chapter.



   (D)   Each day a violation of this chapter exists shall be a
separate and distinct offense.



(Ord. 993-299, passed 5-19-1993)



CHAPTER 118:  GARBAGE COLLECTION LICENSES



Section



   118.01   License required



   118.02   Application; renewal



   118.03   Fee



   118.04   Vehicle regulations



 



   118.99   Penalty



§ 118.01  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   A license is hereby required for the operation of the business of
collecting, hauling or disposing of garbage or waste material in the city. No
such business shall be operated within the city unless and until a license
has been issued by the city.



(1991 Code, § 7-96)  (Ord. 220.11, passed --)  Penalty, see § 118.99



§ 118.02  APPLICATION; RENEWAL.



   Applications for license under this chapter shall be made to the City
Clerk along with a written statement by the applicant that he or she will
keep his or her trucks or vehicles containing garbage or refuse covered at
all times when they are moving along the streets and highways and that he or
she will collect garbage and refuse on a regular schedule charging uniform
rates based upon the type of service rendered. Application for renewal of
licenses shall be every three months and licenses may be cancelled at any
time upon a finding by the City Council that the public interest will not be
served by permitting the licensee to continue in business. All garbage and
refuse shall be disposed of on the day collected.



(1991 Code, § 7-98)  (Ord. 220.11, passed --; Ord. 220.12, passed --)



§ 118.03  FEE.



   The license fee for garbage haulers shall be $50 for each three-month
period or portion thereof and shall be due on July 1, October 1, January 1
and April 1 of each year.



(1991 Code, § 7-99)  (Ord. 220.11, passed --; Ord. 220.12, passed --)



§ 118.04  VEHICLE REGULATIONS.



   A license shall be issued under this chapter only to applicants who
will serve the city exclusively with covered trucks which are back or side
loaders and which are capable of compacting the trash through sufficient
hydraulic pressure.



(1991 Code, § 7-100)  (Ord. 220.11, passed --)  Penalty, see § 118.99



§ 118.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates § 118.01 of this chapter shall be fined not less than
$50, nor more than $100, and each day upon which a violation occurs shall
constitute a separate offense. Whoever violates any other provision of this
chapter shall be fined not less than $10, nor more than $100.



(1991 Code, § 7-97)  (Ord. 220.14, passed --)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



      130.   GENERAL OFFENSES



CHAPTER 130:  GENERAL OFFENSES



Section



   130.01   Curfew for minors; parental responsibility



   130.02   Regulation of Halloween activities



   130.03   Wearing hoods or masks



   130.04   Firearms, slingshots



   130.05   Throwing missiles



   130.06   Sound-amplifying equipment



   130.07   Police radios in vehicles



   130.08   Making bonfire in public street



   130.09   False fire alarms



   130.10   Unlawful fires



   130.11   Alarms



   130.12   Tobacco use in motor vehicles carrying infants



 



   130.99   Penalty



§ 130.01  CURFEW FOR MINORS; PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ALLOW.



         (a)   Either permit or neglect to refrain or prevent.



         (b)   It requires actual or constructive knowledge on
the part of the parent or guardian; that is, the parent or guardian must
actually know about the minor violating this section, or the circumstances
must be such that a reasonably prudent parent or guardian should have known
the minor was violating this section.



      MINOR. Any person under the age of 18 years.



      PARENT. Any person having legal custody of a minor as a natural
or adoptive parent, as a legal guardian, as a person who stands “in loco
parentis” or as a person to whom legal custody has been granted by order of
a court.



      REMAIN. To stay behind, to tarry or to stay unnecessarily upon or
in any public assembly, building, place, street or highway.



   (B)   Curfew times. It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian
having legal custody of a minor knowingly to permit, or by inefficient
control to allow, such minor to be on or remain in or upon any public
assembly, building, place, street or highway within the city during the
curfew, which shall be in effect during the following periods.



      (1)   For minors age 16 and 17.



         (a)   12:01 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. on Saturday;



         (b)   12:01 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. on Sunday;



         (c)   10:00 p.m. on Sunday to 6:00 a.m. on Monday;



         (d)   10:00 p.m. on Monday to 6:00 a.m. on Tuesday;



         (e)   10:00 p.m. on Tuesday to 6:00 a.m. on Wednesday;



         (f)   10:00 p.m. on Wednesday to 6:00 a.m. on Thursday;
and



         (g)   10:00 p.m. on Thursday to 6:00 a.m. on Friday.



      (2)   For minors under the age of 16. 10:00 p.m. each evening
to 6:00 a.m. the following morning, each day of the week.



   (C)   Exceptions. In the following exceptional cases, a minor in or
upon any public assembly, building, place, street or highway in the city
during the hours set out in division (B) above shall not be considered in
violation of the curfew established by this section:



      (1)   When the minor is accompanied by his or her parent or
guardian;



      (2)   When the minor is accompanied by an adult authorized in
advance by the minor’s parent or guardian;



      (3)   When the minor is exercising First Amendment rights
protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of
religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly; provided that, written
notice signed by the minor and countersigned by the minor’s parent or
guardian is in the possession of the minor and that such written notice
specifies when, where and in what manner the minor will be exercising his or
her First Amendment rights;



      (4)   In case of reasonable necessity, but only after the
minor’s parent or guardian has communicated to the investigating police
officer the facts establishing such reasonable necessity;



      (5)   When the minor is on the sidewalk of the place where the
minor resides, or on the sidewalk of either next-door neighbor or such
next-door neighbor has not communicated an objection to the minor’s
presence to a police officer or to the Police Department;



      (6)   When the minor is returning to his or her home by a
direct route from and within one hour of the termination of a school
activity, or any activity of a religious or other voluntary association;
provided that, satisfactory justification indicating the place and time of
termination of said event is given to the investigating police officer;



      (7)   When authorized by regulation issued by or through the
Mayor, or the Mayor’s designee, in cases of reasonable necessity involving
more minors than may reasonably be dealt with on an individual basis. Such
regulation shall be issued sufficiently in advance to permit publicity
through the news media and through other agencies such as the schools and the
Police Department. The regulation shall define the activity, the scope of the
use of the public assembly, building, place, street or highway permitted, and
the period of time involved, not to extend more than one hour beyond the time
for termination of the activity, and the reason for finding that such
regulation is reasonably necessary;



      (8)   When engaged in a business or occupation for which the
laws of the state authorize a person under 18 years of age to perform;



      (9)   When the minor is, with parental consent, in a motor
vehicle with a lawfully authorized driver; and/or



      (10)   When the minor, who is a duly authorized and licensed
driver, is operating a motor vehicle within the city for the purpose of
passing through, by direct route, from one location to another either within
or out of the city, and this exception shall include all minors who may also
be within the vehicle.



   (D)   Questioning by police. A police officer, upon finding or being
notified of a minor, or an individual reasonably believed to be a minor, in
or upon any public assembly, building, place, street or highway during the
curfew hours and not being subject to one or more of the exceptions set out
in division (C) above, and whose parent or guardian is reasonably believed to
be in violation of this section, may stop and question such minor and request
such information as the minor’s name, age and the name and address of the
minor’s parent or guardian, having legal custody of or standing in loco
parentis for the minor.



(Ord. 011-088, passed 9-26-2011)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.02  REGULATION OF HALLOWEEN ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   (1)   Public “trick-or-treat” and Halloween activities
shall take place only on that date annually determined by the City Council
for such Halloween activities.



      (2)   All such “trick-or-treat” activities not conducted
within a private residence or within a public building shall begin no earlier
than 5:00 p.m., prevailing time, and shall conclude no later than 9:00 p.m.,
prevailing time, on that same date.



   (B)   With the exception of activities carried out entirely within a
private residence or within a public building, no person 13 years of age or
older shall, at any time on the date designated by the City Council for the
celebration of Halloween, wear any hood, mask or device whereby a substantial
portion of the wearer’s face is hidden or covered so as to conceal the
identity of the wearer.



(Ord. 011-088, passed 9-26-2011)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.03  WEARING HOODS OR MASKS.



   (A)   Definition.PUBLIC PLACE means all walks, alleys, streets,
boulevards, avenues, lanes, roads, highways or other ways or thoroughfares
dedicated to public use or owned or maintained by public authority, all
grounds and buildings owned, leased or operated for the use of organizations
enjoying all tax-exempt privileges as a charitable use.



   (B)   Wearing hoods or masks in a public place. No person or persons
shall, while wearing any hood, mask or device whereby a substantial portion
of the face is hidden or covered so as to conceal the identity of the wearer,
enter, be or appear in any public place within the city.



   (C)   Wearing hoods or masks on the property of another. No person
shall, while wearing any hood, mask or device whereby a substantial portion
of the face is hidden or covered so as to conceal the identity of the wearer,
demand entrance or admission, enter or come upon or into, or be upon or in
the premises, enclosure or house of any other person in the city, unless he
or she shall have first obtained the permission of the owner and the occupant
of such property.



   (D)   Exemptions. The following are exempted from the provisions of
divisions (B) and (C) above:



      (1)   Any person under 16 years of age;



      (2)   Any person wearing traditional holiday costumes in
season;



      (3)   Any person using masks in theatrical productions
including use in Mardi Gras celebrations and masquerade balls;



      (4)   Any person lawfully engaged in trades or employment or
in a sporting activity where a mask or facial covering is worn for the
purpose of ensuring the physical safety of the wearer, or because of the
nature of the occupation, trade or professional or sporting activity; and/or



      (5)   Any person wearing a gas mask in drills, exercises or
emergencies.



(Ord. 011-088, passed 9-26-2011)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.04  FIREARMS, SLINGSHOTS.



   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person, adult or infant,
to fire within the limits of the city any firearm of any kind or character
for any purpose whatsoever, except in the enforcement of law; provided that,
the use of firearms in the destruction of rodents, pigeons, squirrels or
similar animals or birds or reptiles that are considered to be a menace to
public health or property may be permitted by special permission of the Mayor
and prior notice to the City Council. It shall be further unlawful for any
person to use any slingshot or other instrument for the purpose of throwing
stones, shot or other hurtful missiles within the city limits.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or furnish
any minor or infant with any sling or slingshot or other instrument for the
purpose of throwing stones, shot or other hurtful missiles within the city
limits, or to furnish any minor or infant with any firearm of any kind or
character for the purpose of use within the city limits or to furnish any
minor or infant with ammunition for said firearms, sling, slingshot or other
instrument.



      (3)   Any firearm of any kind or character or any sling,
slingshot or other instrument for the purpose of throwing stones, shot or
other hurtful missiles, which may be involved or used in violating any of the
provisions of this division (A) shall be subject to confiscation, in addition
to the fine provided for in § 130.99 of this chapter.



   (B)   (1)   For the purpose of this division (B), the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



         BUILDING. Any structure, vehicle, watercraft or aircraft
where citizens are permitted to assemble for purposes of business,
government, education, religion, entertainment or public transportation.



         DEADLY WEAPON.



            1.   Any weapon from which a projectile, readily
capable of producing death or other serious physical injury, may be
discharged or propelled;



            2.   Any knife other than an ordinary pocket knife
or hunting knife;



            3.   Billy, night stick or club;



            4.   Black jack or slap jack;



            5.   Nunchaku karate sticks;



            6.   Shuriken or death star; or



            7.   Artificial knuckles made from metal or other
similar hard material.



         FIREARM. Any weapon which will expel a projectile by the
action of an explosive.



      (2)   No person, including employees of the city, shall carry
a concealed firearm or other deadly weapon into or on any building or portion
of a building owned, leased or controlled by the city, except as otherwise
provided in this division (B).



      (3)   Any building used for public housing by private persons,
highway rest areas, firing ranges and private dwellings owned, leased or
controlled by the city shall be exempt from the provisions of this division
(B). This division (B) shall not apply to sworn officers of the city’s
Police Department, the County Jailer’s office, the County Sheriff’s
office or any other duly sworn law enforcement officer authorized to carry
concealed deadly weapons pursuant to KRS 527.020.



      (4)   The city’s Public Works Department shall post signs at
the entrance to all restricted buildings and areas covered by this division
(B) which shall read as follows:



         “CONCEALED DEADLY WEAPONS PROHIBITED ON THESE PREMISES BY
CITY OF SHEPHERDSVILLE ORDINANCE.”



      (5)   Violation of this division (B) may result in denial of
entry into a restricted building or portion of a building. If an employee of
the city carries a concealed firearm or other deadly weapon into or on any
restricted building or restricted portion of a building, disciplinary
measures, up to and including dismissal from employment, may be imposed.



      (6)   Nothing in this division (B) shall be construed to
permit the carrying of a concealed firearm or other deadly weapon in
violation of KRS 527.020.



   (C)   (1)   It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearm or
airgun, pellet gun or any device projecting lead or missiles, excepting in a
regularly established shooting gallery or indoor target range or at such
times or locations as hereinafter provided.



      (2)   This division (C) shall not be construed to prohibit any
officer of the law from discharging a firearm in the performance of his or
her duty, nor to any citizen from discharging a firearm when lawfully
defending person or property.



      (3)   This division (C) shall not prohibit lawful, in season
(where applicable), hunting upon ten or more contiguous acres owned by the
same person, persons or entity, with permission of said person, persons or
entity.



      (4)   Outdoor target practice shall be permitted during
daylight hours, being between one-half hour after sunrise to one-half hour
before sunset. Target practice may be conducted only upon ten or more
contiguous acres owned by the same person, persons or entity, with permission
of said person, persons or entity. There shall be, for pistols and rifles
(smooth bore or rifled), a sufficient backstop to prevent the projectile from
traveling beyond such backstop. Such backstop, if not part of the natural
terrain, shall be 20 feet in height and 30 feet in width, and located
one-half the stated distance of travel for the projectile (as set forth by
the manufacturer or a recognized shooting authority) from the adjoining
property line in the line of firing.



      (5)   If target practice is conducted on less than ten acres,
outdoor ranges shall be in conformance with the NRA Range Source Book (June
1998) Sec. 1, Ch. 1, Art. 3, Outdoor Ranges, before such outdoor target
shooting shall be permitted.



   (D)   The use of firearms and bows shall be permitted on areas in
the corporate boundary of the city that exceed ten acres in size for purposes
of hunting and firearms training. The City Council requires that any person
discharging a firearm shall comply with all other provisions for the use of
the firearm, including all requirements of the governments of the
commonwealth and the United States of America. The City Council provides this
division (D) does not enable any person who otherwise is unable to possess a
firearm to possess same. The City Council provides that any person who
endangers person or property for the improper use of a firearm shall have no
defense from prosecution criminally or civilly on the basis of this division
(D).



(Ord. 997-400, passed 4-28-1997; Ord. 999-464, passed 6-28-1999; Ord.
011-088, passed 9-26-2011; Ord. 011-092, passed 11-28-2011)  Penalty, see §
130.99



§ 130.05  THROWING MISSILES.



   It shall be unlawful within the city to commit or aid or abet in the
commission of throwing any stone, snowball or other missile upon or at any
vehicle, building, tree or other public or private property or upon or at any
person in any public or private way or place or enclosed or unenclosed ground.



(Ord. 011-088, passed 9-26-2011)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.06  SOUND-AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful within the city to commit or aid or abet
in the commission of any of the following:



      (1)   To operate or cause to be operated any aircraft for any
purpose in or over the city with sound-amplifying equipment in operation;
and/or



      (2)   To operate any vehicle containing sound-amplifying
equipment causing a sound louder than normally operative automobile radio
equipment without first obtaining a permit from the Chief of Police and a
license from the City Clerk and paying a license fee of $25 for each day or
portion of each day that the sound equipment shall be in operation; provided,
however, that, no such sound equipment shall be operated between the hours of
8:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.



   (B)   No person or person shall use, either from a stationary or
fixed position, in any building or elsewhere or in or on any vehicle, an
amplifier or “loud speaker” for the amplification of sounds to be heard
upon the public streets or sidewalks in the city without having first
obtained the approval of the City Council for the use thereof.



(Ord. 011-088, passed 9-26-2011)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.07  POLICE RADIOS IN VEHICLES.



   It shall be unlawful within the city to commit or aid or abet in the
commission of any of the following:



   (A)   To equip or operate any motor vehicle with a high frequency
police radio receiving set, unless such motor vehicle is being used by the
federal, state or city government, a police officer or unless a permit for
the use of same shall be granted by the Chief of Police upon written
application stating the name of the applicant, the license number, engine
number, model and make of the motor vehicle in which it will be installed,
the name and address of the applicant and the reason why the applicant
desires to install such set; provided, however, that, the Police Chief shall
not issue a permit unless he or she finds that the application shows a need
for the issuance of same, that the set will be used for a lawful purpose and
that the public interest will be served by the granting of the application
and unless the applicant shall pay a fee of $25 per year so long as said set
shall be installed within the vehicle; and/or



   (B)   To transfer the permit referred to above.



(Ord. 011-088, passed 9-26-2011)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.08  MAKING BONFIRE IN PUBLIC STREET.



   It shall be unlawful within the city to commit or aid or abet in the
commission of making any bonfire in or upon any public street or place
without the permission of the Chief of Police.



(Ord. 011-088, passed 9-26-2011)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.09  FALSE FIRE ALARMS.



   It shall be unlawful within the city to commit or aid or abet in the
commission of intentionally making, turning in or giving a false alarm of
fire or of need for police or ambulance assistance.



(Ord. 011-088, passed 9-26-2011)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.10  UNLAWFUL FIRES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to kindle or maintain any outdoor fire or
authorize any outdoor fire to be kindled or maintained on any property,
except in accordance with this section.



   (B)   No outdoor fire shall be kindled or maintained or authorized
to be kindled or maintained on any property unless such fire is begun and
contained behind the setback lines established for that property under Ch.
157 of this code of ordinances, without regard to any variances or
non-conforming uses.



   (C)   With prior, specific approval given by the Chief of the Fire
Department, or his or her designee, “open burning” shall be permitted for
the purposes hereinafter set forth in this section. Appropriate advance
notice shall be provided to the Chief prior to any proposed open burning, and
the Chief shall authorize such open burning only upon his or her finding that
the public health, safety and property will not be endangered, that
excessive, unusual or noxious smoke will not be created, and that no
extraneous materials, such as tires or heavy oil, that tend to produce dense
smoke will be used to cause ignition or aid combustion. The Chief may, at any
time, require an open burning in progress to be extinguished. For purposes of
this section, the term OPEN BURNING shall mean the burning of any matter
without an approved burn chamber and a stack or chimney with approved control
devices. Purposes for which open burning is allowed under the terms of this
section are as follows:



      (1)   Fires set for the disposal of trees and tree limbs
felled by storms; provided, such trees and tree limbs originated from that
particular property. The burning of leaves is not allowed;



      (2)   Fires set for the cooking of food for human consumption;



      (3)   Fires set for recreational or ceremonial purposes;



      (4)   Fires set by construction and other workers for comfort
heating purposes;



      (5)   Fires set for the purpose of weed abatement, disease and
pest prevention;



      (6)   Fires set for the prevention of a fire hazard, including
the disposal of dangerous materials if no safe alternative is available;



      (7)   Fires set for the purpose of bona fide instruction and
training of public and industrial employees in the methods of fighting fires;



      (8)   Fires set for recognized agricultural, sylvan-cultural,
range and wildlife management practices;



      (9)   Fires set for the purpose of disposing of accidental
spills or leaks of crude oil, petroleum products or other organic materials,
and the disposal of absorbent material used in their removal, if no other
economically feasible means of disposal is available and practical.
Permission shall be obtained from the commonwealth’s Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection Cabinet prior to such burning; and



      (10)   Heating ropes that are set on fire to repair steel
rails during cold weather.



   (D)   The kindling and maintaining of an outdoor fire with an
approved burn chamber and a stack or chimney with approved control devices is
authorized without advance notice to or approval by the Chief of the Fire
Department for the purpose of disposing any item that is not eligible for
deposit at landfills under applicable laws and regulations.



   (E)   Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, no outdoor
fire shall be kindled or maintained or authorized to be kindled or maintained
on any property if such fire would violate any federal law or regulation or
any law or regulation of the commonwealth or any order of the state’s Fire
Marshal.



   (F)   The provisions hereof shall not be applicable to burning by
any federal, state, county or city government or agency.



(Ord. 011-088, passed 9-26-2011)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.11  ALARMS.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ALARM SITE. Area controlled by a single alarm system, including
those alarms which are designed to elicit a response from the city’s Police
Department and/or the city’s Fire Department.



      ALARM SYSTEM. Any alarm device which automatically causes a
contact with the city’s Police Department for the purpose of reporting an
active alarm.



   (B)   Alarm registration.



      (1)   No person shall install an alarm system or use or
possess an operative alarm system without first notifying the city’s Police
Department. The Department shall require detailed information regarding the
alarm system.



      (2)   Any alarm company servicing equipment in the city limits
shall:



         (a)   Obtain a business license at the office of the
City Clerk;



         (b)   Submit a list of alarm customers within the city
limits to the city’s Police Department; and



         (c)   Keep a log of requests for service for each alarm
system. These logs shall be available for review by the city’s Police
Department and/or the city’s Fire Department and shall be kept for a period
no less than 120 days from the date that service was requested by the alarm
user.



   (C)   False alarms permitted, fees charged.



      (1)   Fees generally. Each alarm user shall be permitted two
false alarms per alarm site per calendar year per Department (i.e., two false
fire alarms and two false police-response (i.e., burglary) alarms each year).
After the second false alarm, the city’s Police Department will notify the
alarm user that further alarms will be billed a per-run fee to defray the
cost of the excessive number of runs/ responses to the city. The alarm user
shall inform the city’s Police Department of action taken to prevent
further false alarms.



         (a)   For each additional false alarm responded to by
the city’s Police and/or Fire Departments during the year, the alarm user
shall be billed a response run fee according to the following schedule,
to-wit:



            1.   Police Department false alarm responses per
calendar year:



               a.   Zero to two false alarms: $0;



               b.   Two to 12 false alarms: $250 each
response run; and



               c.   Thirteen or more false alarms: $300
each response run.



            2.   Fire Department false alarm responses per
calendar year:



               a.   Zero to two false alarms: $0;



               b.   Two to 12 false alarms: $450 each
response run; and



               c.   Thirteen or more false alarms: $500
each response run.



         (b)   If fees could be assessed by both the city’s
Police Department and the city’s Fire Department responding simultaneously
to an excessive false alarm, the alarm user will only be billed for one
response run, whichever of the two is greatest in expense to the city.



      (2)   Service call, penalty. After an alarm user experiences
two false alarms per alarm site per calendar year, the alarm user shall
notify his, her or its alarm service provider of the recurring malfunction
and shall produce proof to the city’s Police Department of the service call
conducted by the alarm service provider within ten days of the false alarm.
Any alarm user who violates this section by failing to present such proof
within the stated time period shall be penalized by acceleration of the fee
schedule set forth above such that every false alarm following the second
false alarm shall result in a response run fee of $250 per the city’s
Police Department response run and $450 per the city’s Fire Department
response run until the seventh false alarm response run, at which time the
fee schedule above shall apply.



      (3)   Exceptions. No alarm user shall be subject to a per run
fee for false alarms that result from acts of God, civil disturbance or
abnormal weather conditions, nor shall a fee be charged if the activation was
a result of an alarm company’s failure to provide service within 24 hours
of reporting a malfunction and requesting service. It shall, however, be the
burden of the alarm user to provide reasonable proof that service was
requested.



   (D)   Duties of alarm protective service providers.



      (1)   Any and all persons, firms, corporations or other
business entities providing alarm protective services to alarm sites within
the city limits shall, within 30 days following enactment of this section,
notify and inform alarm system users for whom the alarm protective service
provider installed an alarm system or otherwise provides services, that the
alarm system user must obtain an alarm permit from the city on or before the
operational date of this section. The operational date of this section shall
be 10-1-2011.



      (2)   Any and all persons, firms, corporations or other
business entities providing alarm protective services shall, before
installing, servicing, repairing, maintaining or replacing an alarm system at
an alarm site within the city limits, notify and inform the alarm system user
for whom such services are to be performed that said alarm system user must
obtain an alarm permit from the city and produce same to the alarm protective
service provider prior to the performance of said service.



      (3)   No person shall install, service, repair, maintain or
replace an alarm system at an alarm site without the alarm system user having
first obtained a valid alarm permit in accordance with the provisions of this
section.



   (E)   Registration of alarm protective service personnel. Any and
all persons who own, have or acquire an interest in any business entity which
provides alarm protective services or who are employed by such business
entity shall, prior to acquiring said interest or commencing business or such
employment, register with the city by completing application for and
obtaining a business license authorizing the conduct of business within the
city limits.



   (F)   Alarm permit application.



      (1)   No person shall operate, cause to be operated or permit
the operation of an alarm system at an alarm site unless a valid alarm permit
has been issued by the city, with exception of an alarm protective service
provider unless the alarm protective system provider is the owner, agent or
person in control of the property which the alarm system is designed to
protect.



      (2)   An alarm system user shall obtain an alarm permit for
each alarm site. There is no fee paid by the alarm system user-applicant for
the alarm permit or the application.



      (3)   Application for an alarm shall be obtained from and
submitted for approval to the city’s Police Department. Said application
shall require the following information:



         (a)   The name, address and telephone number of the
alarm system user;



         (b)   The street address of the alarm site and the name
and telephone number of the occupant thereof;



         (c)   The name, address and telephone number of the
alarm protective service provider or providers who will install and/or
service the alarm system; and



         (d)   The name, address and telephone number of at least
three persons on behalf of the alarm system at any time upon notification
from the city should same become necessary; a minimum of two of the named
three persons must be county residents.



      (4)   The permit holder shall immediately notify in writing
the city’s Police Department, Dispatch, of any and all changes in the
information provided on said application.



      (5)   An alarm permit shall not be transferable.



(Ord. 011-088, passed 9-26-2011)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.12  TOBACCO USE IN MOTOR VEHICLES CARRYING INFANTS.



   (A)   The City Council does ordain that is it unlawful for an
individual to use tobacco products with a residue of smoke in a motor vehicle
occupied by infants (under 18 years of age) within the corporate boundaries
of the city limits.



   (B)   As used in this section, the term of RESIDUE OF SMOKE is
defined as the air-borne residue of a lighted cigarette, cigar, pipe, weed,
plant, regulated narcotic or controlled substance.



   (C)   A law enforcement officer may only utilize the provisions of
this section in connection with the observance of the law enforcement officer
by any one of the five senses of another criminal offense.



(Ord. 016-210, passed 5-10-2016)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   Any parent or guardian violating the provisions of § 130.01
of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a
fine of not less than $50, and not more than $500, and/or to imprisonment for
a period of not to exceed six months.



   (C)   Any person who violates any provision of § 130.02 of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined no more than $100
and/or imprisoned no longer than 30 days.



   (D)   Any person who violates any provision of § 130.03 of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined no more than $100
and/or imprisoned for no longer than 50 days.



   (E)   (1)   Any person violating the provisions of § 130.04(A)
of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less
than $10, or more than $500, for each offense.



      (2)   The penalty for violating § 130.04(C) of this chapter
shall be a fine of not less than $10, nor more than $500. Each discharge of a
single round from any weapon shall constitute a separate offense.



   (F)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of §§ 130.05 through 130.09(A) of this chapter shall be guilty
of a violation and shall be fined no less than $25, nor more than $100, for
each violation and each day such violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.



   (G)   Any person who violates any provision of § 130.12 of this
chapter shall be guilty of a violation and shall be fined no more than $250.



(Ord. 999-464, passed 6-28-1999; Ord. 011-088, passed 9-26-2011; Ord.
016-210, passed 5-10-2016)



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



   Chapter



      150.   PLANNING



      151.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION



      152.   STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES



      153.   MOBILE AND MANUFACTURED HOMES



      154.   POST-CONSTRUCTION STORM WATER RUNOFF



      155.   STORM WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT



      156.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION



      157.   ZONING



CHAPTER 150:  PLANNING



Section



   150.01   Comprehensive Plan



   150.02   Rezoning application; fee



§ 150.01  COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.



   The Comprehensive Plan for the county, which includes the city, was
adopted by the City Council by a resolution of 11-28-1988.



(1991 Code, § 10-1)  (Ord. 910.1, passed --)



§ 150.02  REZONING APPLICATION; FEE.



   There shall be established a fee for the application for rezoning of
real estate within the city limits an amount equal to the current advertising
rate which must be paid by the city to the official newspaper of the county
for publication of the legal notice of rezoning hearings. This fee shall be
payable upon the application for rezoning being filed.



(1991 Code, § 10-2)  (Ord. 979-43, passed 10-11-1979)



CHAPTER 151:  BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION



Section



General Provisions



   151.01   Violations



   151.02   Inspections, tests, examinations of materials and methods



   151.03   Inspection of demolitions



   151.04   Fire prevention and control



   151.05   Drainage compliance



   151.06   Signs in the public right-of-way



   151.07   Maintenance of neighborhoods



Construction and Structure Standards



   151.20   Code adopted



   151.21   Building permits; required; application



   151.22   Approval of plans



   151.23   Variations of plans



   151.24   Permit fees



   151.25   Failure to obtain permit



Electrical Standards



   151.40   Code adopted



   151.41   Amendments



   151.42   Permit required; application



   151.43   Inspection fees



   151.44   Inspection authority



   151.45   Stop-work order



   151.46   Qualifications of inspectors



Unsafe, Dilapidated Structures



   151.60   Definitions



   151.61   Fire-loss inspections; reports



   151.62   Potentially dangerous conditions; issuance of order to
remedy



   151.63   Failure to comply with order; remedial action by city



   151.64   Duty of owners



 



   151.99   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   Enforcement of code by city, see KRS 198B.060, 198B.110



   Housing, buildings and construction, see KRS 198.010 et seq.



   Uniform State Building Code, see KRS 198B.050



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 151.01  VIOLATIONS.



   Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter, any person who
violates a provision of the state’s Building Code or fails to comply with
any of the requirements thereof, or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs
a building or structure in violation of an approved plan or proper direction
of the Building Official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of this chapter, shall be subject to such penalties as are
provided in KRS 198B.990 and other applicable law.



(1991 Code, § 4-1)  (Ord. 982-86, passed 3-22-1982)



§ 151.02  INSPECTIONS, TESTS, EXAMINATIONS OF MATERIALS AND METHODS.



   The Mayor, and/or his or her assign, shall make or cause to be made
such inspections as are necessary to see to the enforcement of the provisions
of this chapter, and to make any tests or examinations of materials or
methods to be used for the purpose of seeing that they comply with the
provisions of this chapter or any related ordinance.



(1991 Code, § 4-26)  (Ord. 982-86, passed 3-22-1982; Ord. 004-630, passed
6-14-2004)



§ 151.03  INSPECTION OF DEMOLITIONS.



   The Mayor, and/or his or her assign, shall make or cause to be made
such inspections of demolitions of property as are necessary to assure that
there has been a permit obtained for the demolition of the property and that
the materials obtained for the demolition of the property and that the
materials are being properly disposed of. The Building Inspector shall make
or cause to be made such inspections of demolitions of property as are
necessary to assure that there has been a permit obtained for the demolition
of the property and that the materials are being properly disposed of.



(1991 Code, § 4-27)  (Ord. 982-86, passed 3-22-1982; Ord. 004-630, passed
6-14-2004)



§ 151.04  FIRE PREVENTION AND CONTROL.



   (A)   The city does hereby adopt the standards of safety promulgated
by the Commissioner of Housing, Buildings and Construction as set forth in
their entirety as 815 KAR 10:020.



   (B)   The Fire Chief of the city is directed to enforce such fire
safety standards pursuant to KRS 227.320 and other applicable statutes and
administrative regulations.



(1991 Code, § 4-141)  (Ord. 989-198, passed 7-24-1989)



§ 151.05  DRAINAGE COMPLIANCE.



   (A)   (1)   In addition to any and all building and sewer tap
permits required by ordinance of the city, every individual, corporation,
partnership or any other form of business entity seeking to construct or
erect a building or addition to a building within the city limits shall be
required to secure a drainage compliance permit.



      (2)   The cost of the drainage compliance permit shall be 1%
of the total cost of the building or addition as certified by the builder and
in accord with the plans; provided, however, the cost of the permit shall be
not less than $200, nor more than $1,000.



      (3)   Upon completion of the building or addition, the permit
holder shall notify the City Inspector who shall inspect the premises and
construction to determine that adequate and proper drainage, including, but
not limited to, culvert, driveway or street gutter cuts, and finish grade are
such as to provide the correct and proper drainage of the property in such a
manner as not to impede flow from other properties or to discharge surface
water upon adjacent properties without adequate provision for runoff to
suitable storm sewers or streams.



      (4)   Upon approval of the Building Inspector that the
foregoing standards have been complied with, the building permit fee
heretofore charged shall be refunded less the amount which shall be paid by
the city to the Inspector for the inspection of same.



      (5)   In the event the permit holder does not seek the
Building Inspector’s review within the allowable time set forth on the
permit, the permit fee shall be forfeited.



      (6)   In the event the permit fee is forfeited, the city may
use such funds to correct any drainage problems on or about the property and
the holder of the permit specifically grants an easement to the city to do so.



   (B)   (1)   The Standard Specifications, Standard Drawings and
Design Manual attached to the ordinance codified herein, as if set forth in
full herein, are incorporated by reference.



         (a)   For the continued effectiveness of the design and
construction standards and to promote the effectiveness of this division (B),
the Mayor or the City Engineer, shall periodically review the Standard
Specifications, Standard Drawings and Design Manual and propose necessary and
reasonable changes, which, if approved by the City Council, shall be promptly
made to the Standard Specifications, Standard Drawings and Design Manual. Any
period changes to the Standard Specifications, Standard Drawings and Design
Manual approved by the City Council shall be recorded in appendices to the
Standard Specifications, Standard Drawings and Design Manual.



         (b)   A copy of said Standard Specifications, Standard
Drawings and Design Manual and appendices (if any) are on file in the office
of the City Clerk and the provisions of said Standard Specifications,
Standard Drawings and Design Manual are hereby made a part of this division
(B) as if copied herein in full, pursuant to the provisions of KRS 83A.060(5).



      (2)   All persons, firms, companies or corporations shall,
before beginning any installation, alteration or change of any street,
sanitary sewers and storm water drainage in the city shall obtain a
construction permit for such work. Permits for installation and/or alteration
shall be constructed in accordance with the criteria established in the
adopted Standard Specifications, Standard Drawings and Design Manual.



(Ord. 999-479, passed 10-11-1999; Ord. 004-619, passed --2004; Ord. 007-715,
passed 1-8-2007)



§ 151.06  SIGNS IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   (A)   No person shall erect or maintain any sign, poster, document,
leaflet or other communication in or on the public right-of-ways and
thoroughfares of the city or upon any of the city’s franchisee’s
electrical, telephonic or cable property (for example, telephone/electric
poles) unless specifically authorized herein.



   (B)   Each violation of this section shall constitute a civil
offense.



(Ord. 018-263, passed 7-9-2018)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.07  MAINTENANCE OF NEIGHBORHOODS.



   (A)   Land subject to regulations.



      (1)   This section applies to the following:



         (a)   Lots in a platted subdivision with a structure;



         (b)   Vacant lots within plated residential subdivisions
in which buildings have been erected upon 60% or more of the lots; and/or



         (c)   On parcels of land along improved streets in
common usage within the city, to a depth of 200 feet or the depth of the
ownership, whichever is the lesser.



      (2)   This section does not apply to:



         (a)   Land used for agricultural purposes, including
weeds in fields devoted to growing any small grain crops such as wheat, oats,
barley or rye;



         (b)   Portions of lots used for flower gardens,
shrubbery or vegetable gardens;



         (c)   Naturally wooded areas, regulated wetlands or
meadows; and/or



         (d)   Areas designated as undeveloped open space.



   (B)   Duty to cut grass. The owner and/or occupants of land to which
this section applies shall not allow tall grass or weeds to grow over eight
inches in height throughout the growing season, including grass and weeds in
the right-of-way, and it shall be the duty of all owners and/or occupants of
land located in the city either to cut or otherwise destroy by lawful means
all tall grass and weeds, as defined in this section, which are growing upon
said property, before they reach a seed-bearing stage, and to prevent said
weeds from perpetuating themselves and from becoming a detriment to public
health. On an undeveloped lot, tall grass and weeds must be cut back at a
distance of at least 30 feet from the roadway so as to allow a clear line of
site.



   (C)   Prohibition of unlicensed and inoperable motor vehicles. The
owner and/or occupants of land to which this section applies shall not permit
the outdoor storage of any unlicensed, uninsured motor vehicle or inoperable
motor vehicle or trailer upon their property on any property in a
residentially zone area. Outdoor storage shall include any ability for
observance by sight of the unlicensed (if required by law) or inoperable
motor vehicle or trailer. For this division (C), RESIDENTIALLY ZONE AREA
shall be defined as real property zoned by city ordinance: R-1, R-2, R-3 or
R-4.



   (D)   Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for the owner and/or
occupant of any lot or parcel of land to which this section applies to allow
or maintain upon any portion of such lot or parcel any growth of tall grass
or weeds as defined herein, or to permit the deposit or accumulation upon any
portion of such lot or parcel of land, of any brush, yard debris, dead
vegetation or cut grass or weeds so as to create a nuisance due to
unsightliness, an unhealthy or unsafe condition, traffic hazard or fire
hazard. Growth of grass to a length greater than eight inches shall be
considered to be a nuisance for the purposes of this section. The owner
and/or occupants of land to which this section applies shall not permit the
outdoor storage of any unlicensed or inoperable motor vehicle or trailer upon
his, her or their property.



   (E)   Abatement. In addition to any criminal penalty provided by
ordinance, the city may provide notice for abatement of any violation by
mail, registered, first class, to the owner of the property as shown by
records of the Property Valuation Administrator at the time of the alleged
violation. The owner/occupant shall have the right to petition the City
Council for a hearing to determine the nature and abatement of the violation
within ten days of the date of mailing the notice for abatement, by delivery
in writing and addressed to the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall set a time
for hearing before the City Council within ten days of the delivery of
notice. The City Council shall hear evidence of the violation from witnesses,
under oath, and shall make a determination of the violation, if any, and any
remedy thereof. Upon finding of violation, the City Council shall prescribe
an abatement of the violation and shall direct the City Clerk to prescribe an
assessment to the real property upon the ad valorem tax bill for the
immediate calendar year to recoup all costs associated with the abatement.



(Ord. 014-167, passed 10-13-2014)  Penalty, see § 151.99



CONSTRUCTION AND STRUCTURE STANDARDS



§ 151.20  CODE ADOPTED.



   The Kentucky Building Code, as promulgated in 815 KAR 7:120 by the
state’s Board of Housing, Buildings and Construction, is hereby adopted in
full as if set out at length herein. A copy of the Kentucky Building Code
together with a copy of all other regulations or NFPA pamphlets adopted or
referred to thereunder is in the office of the City Clerk. The City Clerk
shall at all times keep a copy of the Building Code for reference.



(1991 Code, § 4-41)  (Ord. 981-69, passed 8-24-1981)



§ 151.21  BUILDING PERMITS; REQUIRED; APPLICATION.



   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful to construct or alter any
building or structure in the city, except fences, when the cost of such
construction exceeds $1,000 or where the affect of such construction or
alteration is to enlarge the capacity or affect the bearing walls of any
building or the roof thereof, without first having secured a permit therefor.
It is specifically provided that all mobile/modular homes shall require a
permit for placement or replacement of the mobile/modular homes.



(1991 Code, § 4-42)



      (2)   Application for such permit shall be made to the Clerk,
and shall be accompanied by plans and specifications in duplicate showing the
work to be done; such plans shall be verified by the signature of either the
owner of the premises or by the architect or contractor in charge of
operations.



(1991 Code, § 4-43)



   (B)   (1)   No building permit issued by the City Clerk shall
permit construction pursuant to its terms for a period of more than one year
from its date of issuance.



      (2)   Construction which has not been completed, pursuant to a
valid issued building permit, within one year of the date of issuance of the
permit shall cease, until a permit extension is obtained.



      (3)   One permit extension of six months may be obtained from
the City Clerk upon the payment of a fee equal to one-half of the original
building permit fee.



      (4)   Buildings which are incomplete after the expiration of
the extension period are hereby declared to be a nuisance and shall be
subject to condemnation and removal by the city.



   (C)   (1)   The Mayor, and/or his or her assign, upon receiving
an application for new construction, shall determine if a dumpster is
required. If required, the Mayor shall require a dumpster for proper
disposition of refuse as warranted.



      (2)   (a)   All permits for new construction shall include
plans for surface water runoff. The Mayor, and/or his or her assign, shall
approve all plans for surface water runoff.



         (b)   No person shall cause damage to city rights-of-way
from the accumulation of surface water upon his or her property. The Mayor,
and/or his or her assign, shall specify the type (masonry or metal) and size
of all drainage tiles or pipes used for the removal of surface water upon the
subject property. No person shall have the right to connect with any city
right-of-way until compliance with this division (C).



      (3)   (a)   The City Clerk, upon confirmation that the
improvements that are subject to the building permit have been erected and
constructed within the perimeters of the Kentucky Building Code, the City
Clerk shall issue a certificate of occupancy to the applicant of the building
permit.



         (b)   Upon the event that a report is made that
substantial improvements have been made to the property, but the improvements
have not been completed, including drainage, then the City Clerk may issue a
temporary certificate of occupancy upon the deposit.



         (c)   No person shall permit occupancy of any dwelling
within the city limits until such time a certificate of occupancy is obtained
from the City Clerk.



         (d)   Upon the issuance of a certificate of temporary
occupancy, the applicant shall deposit with the City Clerk to be held in
escrow the sum not less than $1,000 and not more than twice of the estimated
costs of the remaining improvements, including drainage on the property as
determined by the Building Inspector. Anyone aggrieved by the enforcement of
this provision may petition in writing to the City Council for the issuance
of the temporary certificate of occupancy.



   (D)   (1)   The City Clerk is hereby authorized to issue building
permits for residential buildings in each section or phase of the subdivision
as development proceeds in that section or phase. No building permits shall
be issued for a particular section or phase until the following requirements
and improvements have been completed to the satisfaction of the City Engineer:



         (a)   Drainage improvements constructed, including
culverts, catch basins, storm sewers, ditches, retention basins and submittal
of as-built drawings (paper copy and digital copy) by the developer’s
engineer and approved by the City Engineer;



         (b)   Sanitary sewers constructed including sewers,
manholes, property service connections, force mains and pumping stations and
submittal of as-built drawings (paper copy and digital copy) by the
developer’s engineer showing all appurtenances listed above and approved by
the City Engineer. All testing of the sewers (mandrel test, air test, manhole
vacuum test and pump station start up test) are to be completed and are to be
witnessed by the City Engineer, or his or her agent, and approved by the City
Engineer. Completion of the videoing of the sewer line by the city or a
contractor hired by the city and payment by the developer for the videoing
services in the amount of $1.25 per linear foot of sewer;



         (c)   Water mains constructed including lines, valves,
appurtenances and testing. A letter of approval from the Louisville Water
Company accepting the water lines of the entire subdivision or acceptance of
the water lines within a particular section;



         (d)   Streets constructed including crushed stone base,
curbs and gutters and bituminous base asphalt, but excluding bituminous
surface pavement;



         (e)   Contract executed with gas and utility for
construction of gas mains (if applicable) and a copy of that executed
agreement submitted to the City Engineer; and



         (f)   All sewer capacity fees for the development or for
a particular section of the development have been paid by the developer.



      (2)   The developer may elect to secure a performance bond
with corporate surety or an irrevocable letter of credit approved by the City
Engineer and the City Attorney in a sum twice the value of the estimated
improvements to secure performance of divisions (D)(1) through (D)(5) above
and below in lieu of actual construction. The surety bond or letter of credit
shall not be released until total completion of the improvements as outlined
in divisions (D)(1) through (D)(5) above and below.



      (3)   Building permits for model homes may be issued prior to
completion of the above improvements; provided that, the developer agrees not
to sell the model home prior to completion of the above improvements; and,
provided that, the city has approved all engineering for the section of phase
of the subdivision. Model home permits will be issued for no more than 10% of
the units proposed for each section or phase or a minimum of one building for
condominiums.



      (4)   The developer must secure a performance bond with
corporate surety or an irrevocable letter of credit approved by the City
Engineer and the City Attorney in a sum twice the value of the estimated
construction to secure completion of the street bituminous surface pavement
and street lights prior to the completion of 50% of the residential units or
within 18 months of issuance of first building permit (excluding model
permits). Otherwise, the city will cease issuing building permits.



      (5)   Sidewalks are to be completed after the construction of
each home within the subdivision. It will be the developer’s responsibility
to ensure that the sidewalks are constructed after the construction of each
home and subsequent building permits within that development will not be
issued if sidewalks are not completed after construction of the home and in
accordance with city standards.



(Ord. 982-86, passed 3-22-1982; Ord. 996-386, passed 9-23-1996; Ord. 004-630,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 006-714, passed 12-11-2006)



§ 151.22  APPROVAL OF PLANS.



   (A)   Such applications with plans shall be referred to the Mayor,
and/or his or her assign, who shall examine the same to determine whether the
proposed construction or alteration will comply with the ordinance provisions
thereto. Upon arrival, one set of plans shall be returned to the applicant
with the permit and the other shall be retained by the Mayor, and/or his or
her assign. No permit shall be issued until after approval of the plans.



   (B)   Before the city issues a permit, it will be necessary for the
applicant to submit a copy of the zoning compliance permit issued by the
county’s Planning and Zoning Commission.



(1991 Code, § 4-44)  (Ord. 982-86, passed 3-22-1982; Ord. 004-630, passed
6-14-2004)



§ 151.23  VARIATIONS OF PLANS.



   It shall be unlawful to vary materially from the submitted plans and
specifications unless such variations are submitted in an amended plan to the
Mayor, and/or his or her assign, and approved by him or her.



(1991 Code, § 4-45)  (Ord. 982-86, passed 3-22-1982; Ord. 004-630, passed
6-14-2004)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.24  PERMIT FEES.



   (A)   If an inspection is called for, an additional inspection fee
will be warranted.



   (B)   All inspection fees will be paid at the time the building
permit is issued.



   (C)   All fees will be doubled for any construction started without
a building permit.



   (D)   Three inspections shall be made by the Building Official
during construction at the following times: footer; framing; and final;
unless otherwise noted on the fee schedule in division (E) below.



   (E)   Building permits issued by the City Clerk shall expire 12
months from issuance. Upon expiration, the applicant shall reapply for a new
building permit. The fee shall be as set out in the following schedule of
current building inspection fees.



 

Type of Construction
 
Inspection Fee
 
Permit Fee




Combination unit (heat pump or geothermal)
 
$0 per inspection
 
$25


Commercial additions or remodeling (for zones B-1, B-2, IL, IG)
 
$40 per inspection, ($120) (under 20,000 square feet)
 
See below


Demolitions
 
One inspection, $25 refundable deposit
 
$200 (required to ensure removal of all debris)


Heating and air unit
 
$0 per inspection
 
$15


Moving structure from one lot to another (route plan to meet city approval)
 
$15 per inspection
 
$30


New commercial construction (for zones B-l, B-2, IL, IG)
 
$40 per inspection, ($120) (under 20,000 square feet)
 
See below


New residential construction
 
$40 per inspection, ($120)
 
$30 + $0.03 per square foot above 1,000


Residential additions or remodeling
 
$40 per inspection, ($120)
 
$30 + $0.03 per square foot above 1,000


Signs (all signs above 2 feet square and their placement must be approved)
 
$10
 
 




 



   (F)   New commercial construction or commercial additions shall be
assessed a permit fee at the following rate.



      (1)   New construction or remodeling of an existing structure
having zero to 2,000 square feet shall be assessed minimum permit fee of $300.



      (2)   New construction or remodeling of an existing structure
having 2,001 to 300,000 square feet shall be assessed minimum permit fee in
addition to $0.15 per square foot not to exceed $45,000.



      (3)   New construction or remodeling of an existing structure
having 300,001 plus square feet shall be assessed a minimum permit fee of
$0.10 per square foot for every square foot over 300,000 plus a fee of
$45,000.



   (G)   Remodeling or additions shall be measured as the area being
remodeled or added and not the entire building.



(1991 Code, § 4-46)  (Ord. 982-86, passed 3-22-1982; Ord. 999-452, passed
2-22-1999; Ord. 004-630, passed 6-14-2004)



§ 151.25  FAILURE TO OBTAIN PERMIT.



   Any party failing to obtain any permit required under this subchapter
at the initiation of construction or demolition shall pay a penalty equal to
25% of the amount of the building and/or construction permit. In addition,
there shall be assessed a penalty of 10% of the amount of the original
building permit for each week (seven-day increment) that construction and/or
demolition has continued without a permit. In no event shall the total
penalties exceed 100% of the original permit amount.



(1991 Code, § 4-47)  (Ord. 982-86, passed 3-22-1982; Ord. 986-144, passed
11-10-1986)



ELECTRICAL STANDARDS



§ 151.40  CODE ADOPTED.



   Recognizing the necessity of an electrical code, the City Council
hereby adopts as the safe and practical standards for the installation,
alteration and use of electrical equipment in the city the code known as the
National Electrical Code, 1978 Edition, N.F.P.A. #70, as published by the
National Fire Protection Association. These rules and regulations regarding
the installation, alteration and use of electrical equipment known as the
National Electrical Code are hereby adopted by reference as if copied herein
in full. A copy of the adopted National Electrical Code containing such rules
and regulations shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk.



(1991 Code, § 4-66)  (Ord. 979-41, passed 7-12-1979)



Statutory reference:



   Adoption of standard codes by reference, see KRS 83A.060(5)



§ 151.41  AMENDMENTS.



   The code adopted in § 151.40 of this chapter is modified by the Salt
River Rural Electric Co-op amendments, in effect on 7-5-1979. The Salt River
Rural Electric Co-op amendments are hereby adopted by reference and made a
part of this code as if copied herein in full. A copy of the Salt River Rural
Electric amendments shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk.
The Salt River RECC amendments referred to herein are to be complied with on
houses in the Salt River RECC District. However, such amendments do not apply
to houses being serviced by the Louisville Gas and Electric Company.



(1991 Code, § 4-67)  (Ord. 979-41, passed 7-12-1979)



§ 151.42  PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION.



   (A)   All persons shall, before beginning any installation,
alteration or change of electrical wiring or equipment in the city, obtain a
permit for such work. Permits for installation, alteration and use of
electrical equipment shall be issued upon the receipt of an application
therefor made out on a printed form furnished by the Electrical Inspector,
his or her designee, or the City Clerk. The fee shall be paid before final
inspection as herein provided for. Permits shall be posted in plain view,
inside the building near the entrance switch or inside the service switch
when installed.



(1991 Code, § 4-68)



   (B)   The application for an electrical permit shall contain: the
name of the owner or user of the electrical equipment to be installed,
altered or changed; the location of such work by correct address, street and
number; and the name and address of the person making the installation.



(1991 Code, § 4-69)



(Ord. 979-41, passed 7-12-1979)



§ 151.43  INSPECTION FEES.



   The City Council hereby adopts as reasonable fees to be paid for the
inspection of all electrical equipment installed or altered within the city,
the following fees.



 



Branch circuit wiring (rough):


Fixture work


   Fixture outlets, each
 
$0.15


   First 20 sockets or less
 
$5


   For each additional socket over 20, add each
 
$0.15


   Receptacles, each
 
$0.15


Motors and generators


   First machine
 
$5


      Plus for each additional machine
 
$2


   Furnace and air conditioning, each
 
$3


      Combination
 
$5


   Heating devices (space heaters)
 
$1


Number of circuits
 
$2.50 per circuit for each of the first 3 circuits, plus $2 per circuit for
each of the next 2 circuits, plus $1 for each additional circuit


Switch boards or panel boards


   For each panel board
 
$7.50




 



(1991 Code, § 4-70)  (Ord. 979-41, passed 7-12-1979)



§ 151.44  INSPECTION AUTHORITY.



   (A)   The provisions for inspections of work authorized by
electrical permits by the city shall not be construed as prohibiting the
inspection of any electrical wiring or apparatus whenever the Electrical
Inspector determines that public safety requires.



   (B)   No inspection fee shall be charged for this inspection; but,
in case it is determined necessary to replace any wrong or defective wiring
or apparatus upon such inspection, a permit in like manner as the original
shall be obtained.



(1991 Code, § 4-71)  (Ord. 979-41, passed 7-12-1979)



§ 151.45  STOP-WORK ORDER.



   Wherever the Electrical Inspector finds any electrical wires or
apparatus not conforming to the rules and regulations set forth in this
subchapter or any other electrical ordinance, the Electrical Inspector is
hereby empowered to stop work on any installation being made by any person to
whom a license or a permit has not been granted, or who has not paid the
final inspection fees, or who or which does not otherwise comply with the
terms of this subchapter.



(1991 Code, § 4-72)  (Ord. 979-41, passed 7-12-1979)



§ 151.46  QUALIFICATIONS OF INSPECTORS.



   The Electrical Inspector employed by the city or, if an independent
contract is entered into for electrical inspections, that Inspector, shall
possess the qualifications required by the state and shall only be permitted
to charge the fees set out herein for his or her services.



(1991 Code, § 4-73)  (Ord. 979-41, passed 7-12-1979)



UNSAFE, DILAPIDATED STRUCTURES



§ 151.60  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMMISSIONER. The state’s Commissioner of Housing, Buildings and
Construction.



   ORDER or SPECIAL ORDER. An order of the Fire Chief of the city, or his
or her designated agent, designed for the prevention of fire loss, which
affects or may affect the property rights of a particular owner or designated
property.



   OWNER. Any person who owns, occupies or has charge of any property.



   PROPERTY. Property of all types, both real and personal, movable and
immovable.



(1991 Code, § 4-91)  (Ord. 979-39, passed 3-26-1979)



§ 151.61  FIRE-LOSS INSPECTIONS; REPORTS.



   (A)   The Chief of the Volunteer Fire Department or any officer or
member of the Volunteer Fire Department designated by him or her for that
purpose, is authorized to inspect all property for the purpose of
ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions likely to cause fire
loss, or determining the cause or origin of any fire loss, or discovering any
violation of the law or ordinance relating to fire prevention and protection.
This authority shall apply to the interior of occupied, private dwellings
only when a fire loss has occurred therein or when the officer has reason to
believe that unsafe conditions exist in the building. Inspection of the
property in the territory served by the Volunteer Fire Department shall be
made as often as practical or as often as the City Council may direct.



   (B)   A written report of each inspection shall be made and kept on
file in the office of the Chief of the Volunteer Fire Department. Reports of
investigation of fire losses conducted by the Volunteer Fire Department may,
in the discretion of the Chief of the Volunteer Fire Department, be withheld
from the public.



(1991 Code, § 4-92)  (Ord. 979-39, passed 3-26-1979)



§ 151.62  POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS CONDITIONS; ISSUANCE OF ORDER TO REMEDY.



   (A)   (1)   Whenever the Chief of the Volunteer Fire Department
or any officer or member of the Department designated by him or her for that
purpose finds any property which, for want of repairs, lack of sufficient
fire escapes, age, dilapidated condition or any other cause, it is especially
liable to fire loss, or whenever an officer finds in any property combustible
or explosive matter or inflammable materials likely to result in fire loss,
he or she shall order it to be remedied.



      (2)   The order shall forthwith be conformed to by the owner
of the property.



   (B)   (1)   The owner may appeal to the Commissioner within ten
days following receipt of the order. The Commissioner shall, within 20 days,
review the order and file his or her decision.



      (2)   The order shall remain in full force until it is revoked
or modified by the Commissioner.



(1991 Code, § 4-93)  (Ord. 979-39, passed 3-26-1979)



§ 151.63  FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ORDER; REMEDIAL ACTION BY CITY.



   (A)   If any owner fails to comply with an order issued pursuant to
§ 151.62 of this chapter or with any order as modified on appeal to the
Commissioner, the officer may cause the property to be repaired, or removed
if repair is not feasible, and all fire hazard conditions remedied, at the
expense of the owner.



   (B)   Such expense may be enforced against any property of such
owner and the officer and those employed to do the work or who furnish
materials or equipment therefor shall have a lien for such expense on the
real estate or property involved.



(1991 Code, § 4-94)  (Ord. 979-39, passed 3-26-1979)



§ 151.64  DUTY OF OWNERS.



   (A)   No owner shall fail to furnish and use reasonable adequate
protection and safeguards against fire loss or fail to adopt and use
processes and methods reasonably adequate to render such places safe from
fire loss.



   (B)   No owner shall require or allow the public or any employee to
go into or be in any property under his or her control which is not
reasonably safe from the fire loss.



(1991 Code, § 4-95)  (Ord. 979-39, passed 3-26-1979)  Penalty, see §
151.99



§ 151.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   (1)   Anyone willfully violating the provisions of §
151.06 of this chapter shall incur a civil penalty if the citation is not
contested of $75 for a first offense, $150 for a second offense, and $300 for
a third or greater offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each
day on which a violation occurs or continues.



      (2)   If the citation is contested, the maximum civil penalty
for a first offense is $150, for a second offense $300, and $600 for a third
or greater offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day on
which a violation occurs or continues.



   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of § 151.07(D) of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than
$10, or more than $500, for each offense.



   (D)   Failure of any party to obtain any permit required under §§
151.20 through 151.25 of this chapter shall be punishable by a criminal fine
equal to the amount of the required permit cost. Each day a violation of §
151.25 of this chapter occurs shall be construed to be a separate offense.



(1991 Code, § 4-47)



   (E)   Any person who violates any provision of §§ 151.60 through
151.64 of this chapter shall be subject to a fine in an amount not less than
$10, nor more than $100, or imprisonment for not more than 50 days, or both.



(1991 Code, § 4-96)



(Ord. 979-39, passed 3-26-1979; Ord. 982-86, passed 3-22-1982; Ord. 986-144,
passed 11-10-1986; Ord. 004-630, passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 014-167, passed
10-13-2014; Ord. 018-263, passed 7-9-2018)



CHAPTER 152:  STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES



Section



General Provisions



   152.01   Encroaching upon, damaging drainage ditches or other city
property



   152.02   Minimum requirements for construction



   152.03   Driveways



   152.04   Excavations



Names and Numbers



   152.15   Definitions



   152.16   Number chart; name index



   152.17   Enforcement



   152.18   Administration of grid system



   152.19   Appeals



   152.20   Tract locating system



   152.21   Tract number required; display



   152.22   Road names



Fire Hydrants, Fire Lanes and Access Roads



   152.35   Definitions



   152.36   Construction requirements



   152.37   Fire hydrants



   152.38   Fire lanes



   152.39   Certificate of occupancy



   152.40   Continuing maintenance



   152.41   Enforcement



 



   152.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Building Regulations; Construction, see Ch. 151



   Parades, see Ch. 90



   Traffic Code, see Title VII



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 152.01  ENCROACHING UPON, DAMAGING DRAINAGE DITCHES OR OTHER CITY
PROPERTY.



   No person shall encroach upon, damage or alter any drainage ditch on
any street or public alley in the city, nor damage, deface or mutilate any
property owned by the city.



(1991 Code, § 11-26)  (Ord. 620.2, passed --)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.02  MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR CONSTRUCTION.



   The minimum requirements for roadways in the city which will be taken
over by the city for perpetual maintenance are as follows.



   (A)   The base of the roadway must be four inches of compacted dense
grade aggregate.



   (B)   Four-tenths of one gallon tack coat (per square yard) between
the base and the asphalt coat.



   (C)   The asphalt on top of the base shall be one and one-half
inches of Class I, surface mixture.



   (D)   All asphalt streets turned over to the city for perpetual
maintenance must have a width from edge of asphalt to edge of asphalt of 20
feet.



(1991 Code, § 11-41)  (Ord. 620.7, passed --)



§ 152.03  DRIVEWAYS.



   Where driveways cross open ditches, culverts shall be installed or the
driveway shall be constructed in such a manner so as not to impede the normal
flow of water in the ditch. Culverts shall be of such size and shall be
constructed that in no instance shall the size of opening be less than
contained by a 15-inch diameter pipe. All driveways constructed or
reconstructed over, across or upon any public street in the city shall be
kept and maintained at all times in accordance with the provisions hereof by
the person so constructing, reconstructing or using the same as an adjunct or
appurtenant to lands or properties immediately adjacent thereto.



(1991 Code, § 11-42)  (Ord. 620.6, passed --)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.04  EXCAVATIONS.



   (A)   Permit required. No person shall disturb, remove or damage any
part of the subsurface, surface or pavement of any city-maintained street in
the city without first obtaining a permit to do so, signed by the City Clerk.



(1991 Code, § 11-56)



   (B)   Application, issuance. The City Clerk shall issue a permit to
any person desiring to remove, ditch or excavate in, through or under any
city-maintained street in the city only upon the satisfaction of the
following requirements.



      (1)   The applicant shall file a request for such permit with
the Clerk upon a form provided by the Clerk, stating therein the work
proposed to be done, the necessity therefor, the specific manner in which the
applicant will replace the surface or pavement, an estimate of the cost of
replacing the surface or pavement to its original condition and the
applicant’s pledge that the surface or pavement will be replaced in
substantially the same condition as before the purposed ditching or
excavating.



      (2)   The Clerk shall present the application to the City
Council for approval or disapproval.



      (3)   If so directed by the Council, the Clerk shall issue a
permit for the applicant to proceed with the work proposed, but the Clerk
shall not issue the permit until the applicant has made bond with sufficient
surety, approved by the Clerk, that the pavement, surface and subsurface
materials will be replaced in substantially their original condition, in an
amount sufficient to cover the cost of the work, indemnifying the city in the
event of the failure of the applicant to replace the pavement or surface
within 15 days after the date of the permit, or within such time as is
designated by the Council, when, and if, the application for permit is
approved.



(1991 Code, § 11-57)



   (C)   Scope of permit approval. The decision of the City Council in
approving or disapproving an application for a permit under this section
shall be final and this section shall not be construed to prevent the City
Council from imposing additional requirements other than those set out in
division (B) above upon the applicant.



(1991 Code, § 11-58)



(Ord. 620.2, passed --)



NAMES AND NUMBERS



§ 152.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADMINISTRATOR. The person duly appointed by the Fiscal Court to
administer the county planning and zoning regulations under KRS Ch. 100 or
any other person designated by order of the Fiscal Court to administer this
subchapter.



   BASE LINES. A general north and south line and a general east and west
line which pass through a reference point located at the center of the
intersection of State Highway 61 and State Highway 44 as located within the
city limits on 10-1-1985.



   COMMISSION. The county’s Planning Commission.



   FISCAL COURT. The county’s Fiscal Court.



   GRID SYSTEM. The system of tract location employing parallel lines
running generally east and west and north and south dividing the whole of the
county into points of common reference from base lines. Number line
designated by compass location and hundreds are assigned to the parallel grid
lines. Grid lines are related to base lines and are generally located
parallel thereto. The system is designed to assign whole numbers to each
50-foot wide tract in the county but may assign whole numbers to larger or
smaller tracts.



   IMPROVEMENT. Any building requiring a number under this subchapter.



   NUMBER. The identifying number assigned to each tract of land by the
Administrator. When displayed, the component numbers shall each be at least
one and one-fourth inches wide and two inches high.



   ROAD. A street or road.



   TRACT. Each platted and recorded lot, building used for residential,
business, commercial, industrial or governmental purpose or lot of land
otherwise identifiable upon sight.



(1991 Code, § 11-71)  (Ord. 985-132, passed 11-25-1985)



§ 152.16  NUMBER CHART; NAME INDEX.



   (A)   The Administrator shall keep a chart showing the proper street
number of every tract in the county or city and an alphabetical index of road
names which shall be open to public inspection.



   (B)   No duplicate street or road names shall be permitted for new
developments or roads.



   (C)   The index shall locate the street at its beginning and ending
point by reference to the grid system.



   (D)   The beginning of a street shall be that point nearest the base
line intersection.



(1991 Code, § 11-72)  (Ord. 985-132, passed 11-25-1985)



§ 152.17  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Administrator shall, by citation or complaint to the county’s
District Court, institute an action against any person who fails to comply
with this subchapter.



(1991 Code, § 11-73)  (Ord. 985-132, passed 11-25-1985)



§ 152.18  ADMINISTRATION OF GRID SYSTEM.



   (A)   The Commission shall be responsible for assigning numbers to
tracts in accordance with the grid system. The Administrator is delegated the
authority to administer this subchapter and shall begin when the grid system
is in place having been accepted by the Fiscal Court. Thereafter, at the time
of the issuance of a building permit, the person requesting the permit shall
provide to the Administrator a site plan for such building indicating:



      (1)   The exact location of the improvement;



      (2)   The exact location of the access road or driveway
serving the improvement; and



      (3)   The distance in feet from the front of each building to
the nearest county road serving the tract access road or driveway.



   (B)   Upon being informed of the exact existing or proposed location
of an improvement, the Administrator shall designate in writing to the owner
the correct number and record that information in the Commission records. He
or she shall designate in writing any refusal to issue a number or accept a
road name and shall state in full his or her reason for refusal. The
Administrator shall maintain a current set of reproducible maps covering all
of the county showing the numbers assigned to all tracts and a current index
of road names. Copies of such maps and road index may be purchased by persons
at a cost fixed by the Fiscal Court.



(1991 Code, § 11-75)  (Ord. 985-132, passed 11-25-1985)



§ 152.19  APPEALS.



   (A)   Any decision of the Administrator concerning his or her
administrative action in assigning or refusing to assign street names or
numbers may be appealed to the Commission. Any person aggrieved by the
Administrator’s decision may appeal by filing written notice of his or her
appeal with the Commission. Such notice shall state in full the reason for
the appeal, may not be enlarged thereafter and shall be filed within ten days
of the Administrator’s written action. The Commission shall have no
jurisdiction to hear any appeal not timely filed. The Commission shall have
full authority to reverse the Administrator’s decision and to grant
appropriate relief. Any person aggrieved by the Commission decision may
appeal to the Fiscal Court or City Council by filing written notice of his or
her appeal with the Fiscal Court or City Council. Such notice shall state in
full the reason for the appeal, not be enlarged from the first appeal and
shall be filed within ten days of the Commission action. The Fiscal Court or
City Council shall have no jurisdiction to hear any appeal not timely filed.
The Fiscal Court or City Council shall have full authority to reverse the
Administrator’s or Commission’s decision and to grant appropriate relief.



   (B)   The decision of the Fiscal Court or City Council shall be
final.



(1991 Code, § 11-76)  (Ord. 985-132, passed 11-25-1985)



§ 152.20  TRACT LOCATING SYSTEM.



   (A)   The grid system with base lines is hereby adopted as the tract
locating system in the county.



   (B)   All tracts shall be consistently and consecutively numbered
from the appropriate base line. Each tract located on or having an access
road or driveway intersecting a road shall be assigned a north or south
number with reference to its distance north or south and east or west of the
base line. Each tract located on or having an access road or driveway
intersecting a road designated as an east-west road shall be assigned an east
or west number with reference to its distance east or west and north or south
of the base line. Even numbers shall be assigned to tracts located on the
north side of an east-west road or the east side of a north-south road. Odd
numbers shall be assigned to tracts located on the south side of an east-west
road or on the west side of a north-south road.



(1991 Code, § 11-77)  (Ord. 985-132, passed 11-25-1985)



§ 152.21  TRACT NUMBER REQUIRED; DISPLAY.



   (A)   All tracts located in the county including those located
within the municipal boundaries of the city shall be numbered and identified
in accordance with the grid system using base lines.



(1991 Code, § 11-78)



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the owner of numbered improved tracts
to have the number displayed thereon in a place visible from the road. If the
improvement is 200 feet or more from a road, the assigned number shall be
displayed at the entrance to the access road or driveway to such building.
The owners of unimproved tracts are not required to display numbers.



(1991 Code, § 11-79)



(Ord. 985-132, passed 11-25-1985)



§ 152.22  ROAD NAMES.



   The Fiscal Court shall have final authority for the approval of any
name or name change for county roads. The City Council shall have final
authority for the approval of any name or name change in city roads.



(1991 Code, § 11-80)  (Ord. 985-132, passed 11-25-1985)



FIRE HYDRANTS, FIRE LANES AND ACCESS ROADS



§ 152.35  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ADEQUATE WATER SUPPLY. Public water supply or water supply
consistent with National Fire Protection Association guidelines.



      ASSEMBLY, BUSINESS, EDUCATIONAL, FACTORY HIGH HAZARD INDUSTRIAL,
INSTITUTIONAL, MERCANTILE AND RESIDENTIAL STORAGE AND MISCELLANEOUS USES. The
same meanings as defined in the currently adopted edition of the Kentucky
Building Code and Kentucky Residential Code.



      FIRE CHIEF. The head of the Fire Department appointed or
empowered in accordance with KRS Ch. 75, 95, 227 and/or KRS 67C.105 to carry
out the expressed or implied statutory authority granted to the Fire
Department.



      FIRE HAZARD. Any thing or act which increases, or will cause an
increase, of the hazard or menace of fire to a greater degree than
customarily recognized by persons in the public service who are regularly
engaged in preventing, suppressing or extinguishing fire, or that which will
obstruct, delay, hinder or interfere with the operation of fire protection
personnel, or with the egress of occupants in the event of fire.



      FIRE LANE. A permanent passageway developed to allow the passage
of fire apparatus through congested areas.



      FIRE MARSHAL. Department of the city’s Fire Department.



      MODIFIED URBAN WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM. A water system designed to
deliver a minimum of 500 gallons per minute at 20 pounds per square inch
residual pressure (as defined by the local water utility) above 550 feet sea
level.



      MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING. A building containing more than two
complete independent living facilities (i.e., apartments, condominiums).



      SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING. A building containing one unit providing
a complete independent living facility and not connected to any other
building or unit. This definition shall also include detached condominium
units meeting this description.



      TEMPORARY ACCESS ROAD. A temporary roadway required during the
combustible phase of construction capable of supporting a 30-ton, and at
least 13-foot wide, fire apparatus.



      TWO-FAMILY DWELLING. A building containing two complete
independent living facilities (i.e., a duplex).



      URBAN WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM. A water system designed to deliver a
minimum of 750 gallons per minute at 20 pounds per square inch residual
pressure (as defined by the local water utility) below 550 feet sea level,
with commercial areas being designed to deliver 1,000 gallons per minute at
20 pounds per square inch residual pressure (as defined by the local water
utility), and which is intended to service public fire hydrants that are
spaced not farther than 1,000 feet apart.



      WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM. Consists of the urban and modified urban
water supply systems, as set forth below. The area served by each system is
determined by the local water utility having jurisdiction.



   (B)   Referenced codes and regulations. Any documents that comprise
types of laws, regulations, ordinances or policies, as set forth herein,
shall refer to the most recently-adopted version at the time of application
of the provisions contained herein.



(Ord. 016-218, passed 6-28-2016)



§ 152.36  CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Applicability.



      (1)   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply only to
new building construction of 1,000 square feet or more of assembly, business,
educational, factory, high hazard, industrial, institutional, mercantile,
residential (includes single-, two-family and multi-family dwellings,
residential subdivisions and mobile home park occupancies), storage or
miscellaneous use.



      (2)   This subchapter shall not apply to single-family
residential construction unless it is part of a new subdivision development
consisting of three or more structures and two or more lots. New building
construction on lots of existing subdivisions approved prior to the enactment
of this subchapter is specifically excluded from the requirements set forth
herein. New construction of structures, alterations or additions for the
purpose of an “agricultural use”, as defined by KRS 100.111(2), including
provision for dwellings for persons and their families who are engaged in the
agricultural use on the tract, is specifically excluded from the requirements
set forth herein. Structures, alterations or additions erected prior to the
enactment of this subchapter are specifically excluded from the requirements
set forth herein.



   (B)   Fire protection plan review. Plans shall be submitted for fire
protection review to the Fire Marshal or Fire Chief prior to the beginning of
any construction. All plan submittals shall include the location and
placement of any fire hydrants (proposed and/or previously existing), fire
lanes, sources of water supply and access roads on both public and private
property as required by this subchapter. The Fire Marshal shall forward his
or her recommendation(s) to the City Engineer within seven calendar days of
receipt of plans. Final approval of plans by the Fire Marshal is required
prior to the beginning of any construction.



   (C)   Temporary access road requirements during construction. No
person shall start the combustible stage of the construction of any type of
building other than one single-family dwelling in each phase of a new
subdivision development that shall be used for display purposes only, until
an all-weather temporary access road is provided of at least crushed stone
rock construction not less than 16 feet in width with an overhead clearance
of all obstructions not less than 12 feet and is available for the use and
operation of fire protection apparatus. Such temporary access road shall be
approved by the Fire Marshal in cooperation with the Fire Chief. The
temporary access road shall be maintained throughout the combustible phase of
construction. If it will be utilized beyond this point, it must be converted
to a hard surface road and comply with all applicable regulations therewith.



(Ord. 016-218, passed 6-28-2016)



§ 152.37  FIRE HYDRANTS.



   (A)   Provision of adequate water supply. Prior to any commercial,
industrial or multi-family development or prior to the combustible phase of
any construction for any new single-family residential subdivision
development consisting of three or more structures and two or more lots, an
adequate water supply shall be provided for firefighting purposes. Said
adequate water supply shall be approved by the Fire Marshal in cooperation
with the Fire Chief with the only exception being the construction of one
single-family dwelling in each phase of a new subdivision development to be
used for display purposes only, on condition that no utilities are connected
to the structure before an adequate water supply is provided for firefighting
purposes.



   (B)   Fire hydrant and main specifications.



      (1)   Definitions. For the purpose of this division (B), the
following definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires
a different meaning.



         DRY HYDRANT. A pre-piped water way installed to an approved
static water source equipped with one draft outlet with outlet diameter and
thread specifications as designated by the Fire Department.



         FIRE HYDRANTS or HYDRANTS. Pumper-type hydrants that are
equipped with outlet and/or outlets placed for the purpose of and intended
for supplying water to Fire Department pumpers. FIRE HYDRANTS installed in
urban systems shall be equipped with not less than two four-inch large pumper
outlets. FIRE HYDRANTS installed in modified urban systems shall be equipped
with not less than one four-inch large pumper outlet.



         PRIVATE HYDRANT. All other hydrants not otherwise defined
herein.



         PUBLIC HYDRANT. Hydrants owned and operated by the local
water utility.



         YARD HYDRANT. Hydrants that are equipped with not less than
two two and one-half inch outlets and are supplied with water from a Siamese
connection. YARD HYDRANTS may have larger outlets as designated by the Fire
Department. YARD HYDRANTS with larger outlets should be marked as a YARD
HYDRANT as designated by the local Fire Department.



      (2)   Hydrant specifications.



         (a)   All fire hydrants shall meet the minimum
specifications and be installed in conformity with the standards and
requirements of the local water utility for hydrant type and thread
specifications, and with any applicable standards of the National Fire
Protection Association and shall be constructed and maintained so as to have
the capability of supplying adequate water flow according to the standards of
the local water utility and the applicable standards of the National Fire
Protection Association.



         (b)   Within the urban water supply system area, fire
hydrants shall be able to deliver 750 gallons per minute with a friction loss
of not more than five pounds per square inch between the street main and the
outlet. This provision is applicable to the design of the hydrants only, and
is not to be utilized in the determination of the proper and/or necessary
water flow requirements.



         (c)   Within the modified urban water supply system
area, fire hydrants shall be able to deliver 500 gallons per minute with a
friction loss of not more than five pounds per square inch between the street
main and the outlet. This provision is applicable to the design of the
hydrants only, and is not to be utilized in the determination of the proper
and/or necessary water flow requirements.



         (d)   All hydrants that are replaced shall be equipped
with the number of outlets, outlet diameter and thread specifications as set
forth in divisions (B)(2)(a) and (B)(2)(b) above.



         (e)   A gate valve must be installed at the hydrant
between the hydrant and the street water main.



         (f)   Hydrants may be tested periodically for proper
functioning in accordance with the policy of the Fire Department having
jurisdiction. The local water utility supplying water shall be notified prior
to testing.



      (3)   Water main specifications.



         (a)   New water mains that have hydrants installed on
them shall not be less than six inches in diameter, including fire hydrant
branch connections installed in conformity with the minimum requirements of
the local water utility. Where size and physical characteristics indicate,
the Fire Marshal may require the developer install water mains of a larger
diameter.



         (b)   The distribution system shall be equipped with a
sufficient number of valves so located that breakage or other interruption
will not cause the shutdown of any substantial portion of a main. Whenever a
fire service is installed in conjunction with fire hydrants, said service
shall be of the fire protection type and at least six inches in diameter.



         (c)   All piping and materials installed as a fire
protection service shall have UL or FM listing with a minimum rating of 150
pounds per square inch in order to comply with the provisions herein.



   (C)   Location of hydrants and water supply requirements.



      (1)   Single-family and two-family dwellings.



         (a)   In single-family residential subdivisions, fire
hydrants shall be placed at an average spacing of 1,000 feet, as measured
over hard surfaces easily accessible to fire protection apparatus. Any
single-family residential property boundary must be within 500 feet of a fire
hydrant, as measured over hard surfaces easily accessible to fire protection
apparatus.



         (b)   Closer spacing may be required by the enforcement
agencies set out herein where special circumstances require such closer
spacing. The enforcement agency requiring the closer spacing shall document
the potential safety hazard that would exist without such closer spacing.



         (c)   Fire hydrants in residential urban water supply
systems shall deliver a minimum of 750 gallons per minute projected to 20
pounds per square inch residual pressure.



         (d)   Fire hydrants in residential modified urban water
supply systems shall deliver a minimum of 500 gallons per minute projected to
20 pounds per square inch residual pressure.



      (2)   Multi-family dwellings.



         (a)   In multi-family residential areas in which all
residential buildings are sprinklered in accordance with the National Fire
Protection Association (NFPA) Pamphlet 13, 1991 (Standard for the
Installation of Sprinkler Systems) or in accordance with NFPA Pamphlet 13-D,
1991 (Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One- and
Two-Family Dwellings and Mobile Homes) or in accordance with NFPA Pamphlet
13-R, 1991 (Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in Residential
Occupancies up to Four Stories in Height), fire hydrants shall be placed at
an average spacing of 500 feet, and no exterior portion of a building is to
be more than 500 feet from a hydrant measured over hard surfaces easily
accessible to fire protection apparatus.



         (b)   Fire hydrants in multi-family residential urban
water supply systems shall deliver a minimum of 750 gallons per minute,
projected to 20 pounds per square inch residual pressure.



         (c)   Fire hydrants in multi-family residential modified
urban water supply systems shall deliver a minimum of 500 gallons per minute,
projected to 20 pounds per square inch residual pressure.



         (d)   No property containing a non-sprinklered building
and non-residential occupancy of more than 2,000 square feet in total area is
to be more than 500 feet from a fire hydrant with one additional fire hydrant
within 500 feet measured over hard surfaces easily accessible to fire
protection apparatus. This provision shall not apply to agricultural
structures such as barns, stables and sheds.



         (e)   Residential buildings that are required to be
sprinklered by the Kentucky Building Code shall comply with NFPA Pamphlet 24
as referenced by the current edition of the Kentucky Building Code.



      (3)   Other uses.



         (a)   In all other uses, including commercial,
industrial, mercantile, educational, institutional, assembly, hotel and
motel, fire hydrants shall be located so that there will be at least one fire
hydrant within 500 feet of the building and one additional fire hydrant
within 1,000 feet of the building. The distances shall be measured over hard
surfaces easily accessible to fire protection apparatus.



         (b)   No commercial building shall be farther than 500
feet from a fire hydrant measured over hard surfaces easily accessible to
fire protection apparatus. The Fire Chief may approve fire hydrants to be
farther away from the building.



         (c)   Farther spacing may be approved by the Fire Chief
where special circumstances may require farther spacing. The Fire Chief shall
document the reason for the farther spacing.



      (4)   General conditions/requirements.



         (a)   Any changes in occupancy as defined in the 2002
edition of the Kentucky Building Code will require the owner to comply with
the provisions of this subchapter.



         (b)   Commercial buildings that have sprinkler systems
shall comply with National Fire Protection Pamphlet 13 and National Fire
Protection Association Pamphlet 24 as referenced by the 2002 edition of the
Kentucky Building.



         (c)   Private hydrant systems in buildings not
sprinklered shall be designed to provide the minimum fire flow as computed in
division (D) below, by recognized standards, from the point of connection to
the public water system.



         (d)   All hydrants must be located at least 25 feet from
any exterior wall of a masonry building and at least 50 feet from any
exterior wall of a frame building or a building of equivalent construction,
including brick or stone veneer.



         (e)   All hydrants shall be located so as to be easily
accessible to fire protection apparatus from an approved hard surface.
Hydrants shall be located not more than 15 feet from the edge of an approved
hard surface easily accessible to fire protection apparatus unless otherwise
specifically exempted herein. In locations where the hydrant must remain
within the water easement, the hydrant shall be placed within one foot of the
line between the easement and the road right-of-way and be no more than 25
feet from the road edge. The center of the hydrant nozzle shall be not less
than 18 inches or more than 30 inches above ground level (final grade).



         (f)   Where fire hydrants are installed along a roadway,
parking within ten feet of either side of a point at the road edge nearest
the hydrant is prohibited. Where fire hydrants are installed in parking
areas, parking shall be designated and maintained to allow ten feet clear
access to the hose connection side of the hydrant, and a four-foot minimum
clear radius around the hydrant.



         (g)   All hydrants shall be kept clear of weeds, rubbish
and all other obstructions by the abutting property owner(s). Landscaping or
decorations shall not be used to obstruct or hide the fire hydrant from clear
view, nor prohibit access to the hydrant for use or maintenance. Damage
caused to landscaping within a 15-foot radius of the hydrant due to periodic
maintenance, use or testing of a fire hydrant shall be the responsibility of
the owner of the landscaping.



         (h)   Dumpsters or mobile obstructions shall not be
located within ten feet of a fire hydrant.



         (i)   Fire hydrants shall not be painted or changed in
any other way by anyone other than the Fire Department or the local water
utility.



         (j)   Fire hydrants shall not be permitted to supply
irrigation systems. Any use of a fire hydrant for purpose other than fire
protection or authorized periodic inspection must utilize a temporary water
meter with appropriate back-flow protection. The temporary meter must be
requested from the local water utility.



         (k)   The main pumper outlet of the hydrant shall be
positioned so that it faces the hard surface roadway. When the hydrant at or
near intersections, or there are other physical factors that would affect the
positioning, the main pumper outlet shall be positioned at the direction of
the Fire Department.



         (l)   No fire hydrants that utilize metered service for
their source of water shall be considered in fulfilling the provisions of
this subchapter. This does not include water delivered to one water district
from another water district through a master meter. Fire hydrants installed
on a fire service tap from the local water utility may use a fire service
meter or leak detector meter of the size and type specified by the local
water utility. Fire service meters shall be capable of delivering the full
capacity of the size of fire service installed.



         (m)   The owner of any private water system or private
fire protection system shall notify the Fire Department when the system is
installed.



         (n)   The owner of any private water system or private
fire protection system shall notify the Fire Department when the system is
out of service and when service has been restored. The owner of the system is
responsible for prompt repair of the water supply system.



         (o)   The Fire Hydrant testing methods used to measure
flow capacity shall be in accordance with the National Fire Protection
Association’s Handbook for Area Flow Test, the Insurance Services
Office’s Fire Flow Test Booklet and/or a procedure approved by the local
water utility.



   (D)   Total water supply delivery. The National Fire Protection
Association (NFPA) Pamphlet 1142, 2001, Standard on Water Supplies for
Suburban and Rural Fire Fighting, is hereby adopted by reference, as modified
by the provisions of this division (D) set forth herein.



      (1)   The total water supply should be achieved within 20
minutes, by flowing all fire hydrants within 1,000 feet of the property.



      (2)   Fire hydrants in non-residential urban water supply
systems should deliver a minimum of 1,000 gallons per minute, projected by 20
pounds per square inch residual pressure regardless of the total water supply.



      (3)   Fire hydrants in non-residential modified urban water
supply systems should deliver a minimum of 500 gallons per minute, projected
to 20 pounds per square inch residual pressure regardless of the total water
supply.



(Ord. 016-218, passed 6-28-2016)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.38  FIRE LANES.



   (A)   No person, firm or corporation in charge of, occupying or the
owner of any site for commercial, industrial, mercantile, educational,
institutional, assembly, hotel, motel, multi-family or mobile home park
occupancy shall occupy, operate, utilize or otherwise enjoy the site unless
and until a properly marked fire lane not less than 18 feet in width with at
least 13-foot six-inch vertical clearance is provided and maintained as
approved by the Fire Marshal in cooperation with the recommendations of the
Fire Chief and in accordance with the specifications set out herein.



   (B)   The marking of fire lanes on private property devoted to the
public use shall be approved by the Fire Marshal, in cooperation with the
recommendations of the Fire Chief, and shall be marked as follows.



      (1)   A four-inch stripe of traffic yellow paint shall be
placed on the vertical and horizontal planes of curb or street marking the
boundaries of the fire lane.



      (2)   (a)   In addition to the markings above, “NO
PARKING FIRE LANE” signs shall be placed at heights not less than 36 inches
or greater than 96 inches, as measured from the bottom of the sign, and
positioned at intervals not greater that 60 feet.



         (b)   Where the placement of signs is not possible due
to safety or other considerations, and upon the prior approval of the Fire
Marshal, in cooperation with the recommendations of the Fire Chief, the fire
lane may be marked as follows: “NO PARKING FIRE LANE” painted on the
street with traffic yellow paint at intervals of not greater than 50 feet.



         (c)   The letters shall be a minimum of 18 inches in
height and have a two-inch or greater body stripe.



   (C)   Parking of motor vehicles obstructing fire lanes is prohibited
at all times.



   (D)   Fire lanes and driveways shall be located so that all
buildings served by them are accessible to the fire equipment.



   (E)   Dumpsters or other mobile obstructions shall not be located
within ten feet of either side of a fire hydrant or Fire Department
connection to a building.



   (F)   Fire lanes required by this subchapter shall not be required
for sites whose structures total less than 5,000 square feet, unless the Fire
Marshal, in cooperation with the recommendations of the Fire Chief,
determines that a fire hazard exists.



(Ord. 016-218, passed 6-28-2016)



§ 152.39  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.



   The Fire Marshal, in cooperation with the recommendations of the Fire
Chief, shall not issue a certificate of occupancy for the construction or
alteration of, or addition to any building covered under this subchapter
unless and until the Fire Marshal has determined that there has been
compliance with the provisions contained herein.



(Ord. 016-218, passed 6-28-2016)



§ 152.40  CONTINUING MAINTENANCE.



   Upon the completion of the construction phase of any building(s)
covered under this subchapter, and the issuance of a certificate of occupancy
by the city, it shall be the duty of the owner and/or operator of the
property to provide for the paving and continuing maintenance and repair of
any and all fire lanes that have been required, and the continuing
maintenance, repair and operating capabilities of any and all private fire
hydrants, private sprinkler systems or other private water facilities as
required pursuant to this subchapter.



(Ord. 016-218, passed 6-28-2016)



§ 152.41  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The Fire Marshal, in cooperation with the recommendations of
the Fire Chief, is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the requirements
of this subchapter.



   (B)   The final determination concerning compliance herewith shall
be the sole discretion of the Fire Chief.



   (C)   (1)   Upon the presentation of official credentials, any
enforcement officer authorized above may enter upon any premises covered by
this subchapter to perform the duties prescribed herein, in accordance with
all applicable state and local laws and regulations.



      (2)   Failure to allow entry and/or provide access may result
in a stop-work order from the city and the denial of a certificate of
occupancy.



(Ord. 016-218, passed 6-28-2016)



§ 152.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   Any person who violates §§ 152.01 or 152.04(A) of this
chapter shall be fined not less than $10, nor more than $100.



(1991 Code, § 11-27)



   (C)   Any person who violates any provisions of § 152.03 of this
chapter shall be subject to a fine in an amount not less than $10, nor more
than $50.



(1991 Code, § 11-42)



   (D)   The owner of any tract failing to number any improvement in
conformity with §§ 152.15 through 152.22 of this chapter shall be fined,
upon conviction, no less than $25, and no more than $100, for each offense.
Each day the condition exists shall constitute a separate offense.



(1991 Code, § 11-74)



   (E)   (1)   Criminal penalties. Any person violating any of the
provisions of §§ 152.35 through 152.41 of this chapter, or neglecting to
comply with any order issued pursuant to any section hereof, shall, upon
conviction thereof, be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor and shall be fined in
an amount not to exceed $250 or shall be imprisoned for a term not to exceed
90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day a particular violation
occurs shall constitute a separate offense.



      (2)   Civil penalties. In addition to the criminal penalties
set forth above, any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of
§§ 152.35 through 152.41 of this chapter shall be liable to the city for a
civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $1,000 for each offense. Each day a
particular violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. Said civil
penalty may be assessed and imposed by the county’s District Court,
pursuant to KRS 24A.120.



(Ord. 620.2, passed --; Ord. 620.6, passed --; Ord. 985-132, passed
11-25-1985; Ord. 016-218, passed 6-28-2016)



CHAPTER 153:  MOBILE AND MANUFACTURED HOMES



Section



   153.01   Storm shelters in mobile home parks, recreational vehicle
parks



   153.02   Placement of single-family manufactured home



   153.03   Replacement mobile homes



 



   153.99   Penalty



§ 153.01  STORM SHELTERS IN MOBILE HOME PARKS, RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to maintain or operate a mobile home park
or recreational vehicle park without providing shelters for its inhabitants
after 9-1-2004.



   (B)   Mobile home parks and recreational vehicle parks shall be
defined as having five or more spaces for rent or occupancy.



   (C)   General requirements of shelters shall be as follows.



      (1)   Requirements for above-grade or below-grade storm
shelters. Every mobile home park or recreational vehicle park, of five or
more mobile home spaces, which is constructed after 9-1-2004 (all mobile home
parks in operation before 9-1-2004 are grandfathered in), shall provide
above-grade or below-grade storm shelters which shall:



         (a)   Have a minimum floor area of ten square feet for
each mobile home space in said mobile home park;



         (b)   Be designed by a licensed structural engineer or
architect and built in accordance with plans signed by said structural
engineer or architect;



         (c)   Be designed and constructed to meet all Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) requirements and guidelines, if the
shelter is located in a floodplain;



         (d)   Be designed and constructed to meet the minimum
lighting, ventilation and exiting requirements of the city’s currently
adopted editions of the Uniform Building Code, Uniform Mechanical Code,
Uniform Plumbing Code and National Electrical Code where applicable;



         (e)   Be designed and constructed to meet all applicable
requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA);



         (f)   Be located no farther than 1,320 linear feet from
the furthest mobile home space in the mobile home park;



         (g)   Be designed with a perimeter drainage tile system
and sub-pump to remove water from the storm shelter (below grade shelter
only); and



         (h)   Be designed with an electrical service for
lighting with emergency lights. All 125-volt electrical receptacles shall
have ground fault circuit interrupter protection, except single outlet
receptacles for sump pump or specified equipment are not required to have
ground fault circuit interrupter protection.



      (2)   Additions to existing parks.



         (a)   For any addition of five or more mobile home
spaces to any existing mobile home park, a storm shelter that complies with
the general requirements of division (C)(1) above shall be provided to serve
such additional spaces.



         (b)   For any addition of fewer than five mobile home
spaces to an existing mobile home park which otherwise complies with the
requirements of divisions (C)(1)(a) through (C)(1)(h) above, there is no
requirement that an additional shelter be provided to serve such additional
spaces. However, when two or more additions of fewer than five mobile home
spaces results in a cumulative addition of five or more mobile home spaces to
a mobile home park, which otherwise complies with the requirements of
divisions (C)(1)(a) through (C)(1)(h) above, a storm shelter which complies
with the general requirements of division (C)(1) above shall be provided to
serve such additional spaces.



      (3)   Restroom facilities. Restroom facilities in required
storm shelters shall be optional. Toilets may be either flush-type operating
from normal water supply, chemical or other types as approved by the
county’s Health Department.



      (4)   Access to shelters. The mobile home park owner, or such
owner’s designated agent or representative, shall be responsible for making
the storm shelter accessible and usable in times of need. It is unlawful for
any required storm shelter to be used for storage purposes if such storage
reduces the minimum floor area available for shelter of persons below the
requirements of division (C)(1) above.



      (5)   Existing non-conforming mobile home parks. Any mobile
home park of five or more mobile home spaces which has an existing
above-grade or below-grade storm shelter as of 9-1-2004, which does not
conform with the requirements of this section shall be deemed a
non-conforming mobile home park with regard to the requirements for storm
shelters and may continue to exist as a non-conforming mobile home park for
so long as said existing shelter remains in place and usable; provided,
however, that, any mobile home spaces added to such park after 9-1-2004,
shall require storm shelters as provided in divisions (C)(1)(a) through
(C)(1)(h) above.



      (6)   Registration of existing shelters. By 1-1-2005, every
owner or operator of any mobile home park or recreational vehicle park of
five or more spaces shall submit a site plan and a written statement setting
out the number of mobile home spaces in such park and a description of any
storm shelters which existed on-site prior to 1-1-2005. This submission shall
be made on forms provided by the office of the Mayor and shall be annually
updated with the mobile home park license renewal to show changes in the
number of mobile home spaces and a description of any storm shelters
constructed to serve such park.



(Ord. 004-637, passed --2004)  Penalty, see § 153.99



§ 153.02  PLACEMENT OF SINGLE-FAMILY MANUFACTURED HOME.



   (A)   Definition. A MANUFACTURED HOME is a building or structure
designed and intended for occupancy by a single family and fabricated in
whole or part in an off-site manufacturing facility and transported by truck
for installation or assembly at the building site as a permanent structure
with installation required to be moored to a permanent foundation in
compliance with all the standards contained in the Kentucky Building Code, as
well as the installation and appearance standards, and, once installed, can
only be moved as a conventional home.



   (B)   Installation standards.



      (1)   The home shall be permanently attached and installed on
a permanent foundation with the manufacturer’s installation specifications
as approved by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.



      (2)   The home shall be anchored in the ground in accordance
with the manufacturer’s specifications or state law, whichever is stricter.



      (3)   All wheel, trailer tongue and hitch assemblies shall be
removed upon installation.



      (4)   The home shall meet all requirements for lot, yard,
building and other requirements for the district in which it is located.



      (5)   All stairs, porches, entrances, platforms and other
means of entrance and exit to the home shall be installed and constructed in
conformance with the Kentucky Building Code.



      (6)   All utilities shall be permanently connected to a public
utility system in accordance with all city codes and all public health
requirements governing plumbing installations.



   (C)   Appearance standards.



      (1)   A poured concrete or masonry wall shall be constructed
beneath and along the entire perimeter of the manufactured home, including
the perimeter of the front steps and front porch, even if the wall is not
structurally required by manufactured installation specifications. Venting
and access requirements shall be in accordance with the Kentucky Building
Code.



      (2)   The home shall be a minimum width of 26 feet as measured
across the narrowest portion and a minimum length of 48 feet exclusive of the
tongue and hitch assemblies.



      (3)   The home shall be placed so that the main egress is
parallel to the street. Main egress shall be considered the principal access
for the home as constructed off-site.



      (4)   The manufactured home shall either be oriented so that:



         (a)   Its long axis is parallel with the street; or



         (b)   If the narrow dimension of the unit is located
parallel to the street, it shall be no less than 50% of the unit’s long
dimension.



      (5)   The home shall have a minimum roof pitch of four feet
rise for every 12 feet of horizontal run. The roof shall be covered with
material that is residential in appearance, including, but not limited to,
approved wood, asphalt composition shingles, standing seam metal or
fiberglass, but excluding corrugated aluminum, corrugated fiberglass or other
metal roofs.



      (6)   Exterior siding cannot have a high-gloss finish and must
be residential in appearance, including, but not limited to, clapboards,
simulated clapboards such as conventional vinyl or metal siding, wood
shingles, “glossy” shakes or similar material but excluding smooth,
ribbed or corrugated metal or plastic panels.



      (7)   An adequate guttering and roof drainage system shall be
installed.



      (8)   The home shall have eaves with a minimum of six-inch
overhang.



   (D)   Location. The manufactured home may be placed in accord with
the joint zoning regulations of Shepherdsville/Bullitt County upon ten acres
of agriculturally zoned land all of which lies within the city limits.



   (E)   Inspections. The Building Inspector shall make or cause to be
made such inspections as are necessary to see to the enforcement of the
provisions of this section, and to make any tests or examinations of
materials or methods to be used for the purpose of seeing that they comply
with the provisions of this section or any related ordinance.



(Ord. 002-564, passed 10-16-2002)  Penalty, see § 153.99



§ 153.03  REPLACEMENT MOBILE HOMES.



   (A)   There shall not be permitted to be located within the
municipal boundaries of the city a mobile home located outside the confines
of an approved mobile home park; except, when a property owner wishes to
replace a mobile home used as his or her residence with a more modern mobile
home. In this situation, the owner may remove the existing mobile home and
replace it with a more modern mobile home within 30 days of the removal of
the existing mobile home. Installation of a newer model mobile home more than
30 days after removal of the existing mobile home shall not be permitted.



   (B)   Any replacement mobile home must be located in a properly
zoned area.



(Ord. 991-232, passed 2-11-1991)  Penalty, see § 153.99



§ 153.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   Criminal penalties for the violation of § 153.01 of this
chapter shall be a fine not to exceed $250 per day, but not less than $10 per
day. Each day shall constitute a separate violation.



   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provision in § 153.02 of this
chapter, any person who shall violate a provision of the Kentucky Building
Code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof, or who
shall erect, construct or alter, or repair a building or structure in
violation of an approved plan or proper direction of the Building Official,
shall be subject to such penalties as are provided in KRS 198B.990 and other
applicable law.



(Ord. 002-564, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 004-637, passed --2004)



CHAPTER 154:  POST-CONSTRUCTION STORM WATER RUNOFF



Section



General Provisions



   154.001   Authority



   154.002   Purpose and scope



   154.003   Definitions



   154.004   Performance security



   154.005   Interpretation and application



Management Measures



   154.020   Applicability



   154.021   Site plan submittal



   154.022   Waterway buffer



Design Criteria and Methods



   154.035   Design storms



   154.036   Runoff calculation methods



   154.037   Rational Method



   154.038   Soil Conservation Service Method



Storm Sewer Design



   154.050   Purpose



   154.051   Peak discharge calculations



   154.052   Design methodology; design storm



   154.053   Minimum pipe sizing



   154.054   Pipe velocities



   154.055   Pipe grades



   154.056   Manhole spacing and sizing



   154.057   Hydraulic grade lines



   154.058   Inlet capacity



   154.059   Storm sewer outfalls



   154.060   Culvert and bridge design criteria



Drainage Channel and Ditch Design



   154.075   Purpose



   154.076   Peak flow capacity



   154.077   Design methodology; design storm



   154.078   Channel linings



   154.079   Channel design slopes and velocities



Runoff Control Facility Design



   154.090   Purpose



   154.091   Design methodology; design storm



   154.092   Basin storage volume



   154.093   Basin design standards



   154.094   Storm hydrographs



   154.095   Maintenance responsibilities



Ownership and Maintenance Responsibilities of Storm Water Facilities



   154.110   Operation and maintenance



   154.111   Maintenance agreements



   154.112   Maintenance easement



   154.113   Maintenance and repair plan



   154.114   Maintenance covenants



   154.115   Inspection of storm water facilities



   154.116   Right of entry for inspections



   154.117   Failure to maintain



   154.118   As-built plans



 



   154.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 154.001  AUTHORITY.



   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the powers granted and limitations
imposed by state laws, including the statutory authority granted to Kentucky
cities in Kentucky Constitution § 156(b). This chapter is adopted pursuant
to requirements of the national pollutant discharge elimination system and
the state’s pollutant discharge elimination system storm water Phase II
general permit.



(Ord. 012-118, passed 10-8-2012)



§ 154.002  PURPOSE AND SCOPE.



   The requirements and procedures set forth in this chapter are intended
to protect the general health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the
city, and more specifically:



   (A)   To protect and enhance the municipal separate storm sewer
system of the city;



   (B)   To maintain after development, as nearly as possible, the
pre-development runoff characteristics, and to reduce stream channel erosion,
pollution, siltation and sedimentation and local flooding;



   (C)   To comply with all applicable provisions of the national
pollutant discharge elimination system and the state’s pollutant discharge
elimination system storm water general permit for Phase II communities; and



   (D)   To establish legal authority and procedures for the
implementation and enforcement of the post-development maintenance and
erosion reduction measures necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter.



(Ord. 012-118, passed 10-8-2012)



§ 154.003  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPROVING AGENCY. The county’s Department of Code Enforcement.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). Techniques or series of techniques
which are proven to be effective in controlling runoff, erosion and
sedimentation, and in mitigating flooding.



   BLUE LINE STREAM. A natural surface drainage structure shown on U.S.
Geological Survey topographic maps as a solid blue line. Also, it is
classified by the state’s Division of Water as a natural drainage structure
having a continuous flow during normal weather conditions.



   CHANNEL. A natural stream that conveys water or a ditch excavated for
the natural flow of water.



   COMMON PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT OR SALE. A contiguous area where multiple
separate and distinct construction activities are planned to occur at
different times on different schedules under one plan.



   DETENTION BASIN. A temporary or permanent, natural or human-made
structure that provides for the temporary storage of storm water, runoff
designed to prevent the permanent pooling of water.



   DEVELOPER. Any person, firm, corporation, sole proprietorship,
partnership, state agency or political subdivision thereof engaged in a
land-disturbance activity.



   DITCH. An excavation, either dug human-made or natural, for the purpose
of drainage or irrigation and having intermittent flow.



   DRAINAGE AREA. An area enclosed by a topographic feature that
contributes runoff to a single point that is measurable in a horizontal plane.



   EROSION. The wearing away of ground surface as a result of the movement
of wind, water, ice and/or land-disturbance activity.



   EXTENDED DETENTION. A storm water design feature that provides gradual
release of a volume of water in order to increase settling of pollutants and
to protect downstream channels from frequent storm events.



   FEDERAL CLEAN WATER ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.).



   FIFTY-YEAR STORM. A storm that is capable of producing rainfall
expected to be equaled or exceeded on the average of once in 50 years. It may
also be expressed as a storm having the probability of a 2% chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.



   FLOW ATTENUATION. Prolonging the flow time of runoff to reduce the peak
discharge.



   IMPERVIOUS COVER. Any surface that cannot effectively absorb or allow
water to infiltrate. This may include roads, streets, parking lots, rooftops
and sidewalks.



   INFILTRATION. The passage or movement of water into the soil surface.



   LAND-DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY.



      (1)   Any construction-related land change that may result in
soil erosion from wind, water and/or ice, and the movement of sediments into
or upon waters, lands or rights-of-way within city, including, but not
limited to, construction, demolition, clearing and grubbing, grading,
excavating, transporting and filling of land.



      (2)   LAND-DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY does not include the following:



         (a)   Minor land-disturbance activities, including, but
not limited to, underground utility repairs, replacement of existing
utilities, home gardens and landscaping, minor repairs and maintenance work;



         (b)   Installation of fence, sign, telephone and
electric poles and other kinds of posts or poles;



         (c)   Cemetery graves;



         (d)   “Agricultural use”, as defined under KRS
100.111;



         (e)   Resource extraction activity pursuant to the
state’s pollutant discharge elimination system general permit or a facility
specific individual KPDES permit; or



         (f)   Site investigations, such as geotechnical
explorations, clearing, for surveying work, monitoring wells and
archaeological explorations, that are undertaken prior to submittal of an
application for preliminary subdivision platting; and emergency work to
protect life, limb or property and emergency repairs. If the LAND-DISTURBANCE
ACTIVITY would have required an approved EPSC permit, except for the
emergency, then the land area disturbed shall be shaped and stabilized in
accordance with the requirements of applicable ordinances and regulations.



   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4). A conveyance, or system of
conveyances including roads with drainage systems, municipal and county
maintained roadways, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, human-made
channels and storm drains designed or used for collecting and/or conveying
storm water. Sanitary and combined sewers are not included in the definition
of a MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM.



   ONE HUNDRED-YEAR (100) STORM. A storm that is capable of producing
rainfall expected to be equaled or exceeded on the average of once in 100
years. It may also be expressed as a storm having the probability of a 1%
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.



   OUTFALL. The point of discharge to any watercourse from a public or
private storm water drainage facility.



   POST-DEVELOPMENT. The conditions which exist following the completion
of the land- disturbance activity in terms of topography, vegetation, land
use and runoff rate, volume or direction.



   PRE-DEVELOPMENT. The conditions which existed prior to the initiation
of the land-disturbance activity in terms of topography, vegetation, land use
and runoff rate, volume or direction.



   REDEVELOPMENT. Any construction, alteration or improvement involving
land-disturbance activity performed on sites where existing land use is
commercial, industrial, institutional or multi-family residential.



   RETENTION BASIN. A temporary or permanent natural or human-made
structure that provides for the storage of storm water runoff by means of a
permanent pool of water.



   RETROFITTING. Construction of a structural best management practice in
a previously developed area, modification of an existing structural best
management practice or implementation of a non- structural best management
practice to improve water quality over current conditions.



   RUNOFF. Any water flowing over ground surface, including, but not
limited to, rainfall, snowmelt or irrigation water.



   SEDIMENT. Soils or other superficial materials transported or deposited
by surface water as a product of erosion.



   SHEET FLOW. Water runoff in a thin uniform layer or rills and which is
of a small enough quantity to be treated by sediment barriers.



   SITE PLAN. A plan or set of plans showing the details of any
land-disturbance activity of a site, including, but not limited to, the
construction of structures, open and enclosed drainage facilities, storm
water management facilities, parking lots, driveways, curbs, pavements,
sidewalks, bike paths, recreational facilities, ground covers, plantings and
landscaping.



   SIX-MONTH STORM. A storm that is capable or producing rainfall expected
to be equaled or exceeded on the average of twice every year.



   SOIL CONSERVATION SERVICE (SCS). The federal agency now titled the
“Natural Resources Conservation Service” (“NCRS”) and is an agency of
the United States Department of Agriculture.



   SOIL CONSERVATION SERVICE TECHNICAL RELEASE 55 (TR-55). A document
titled Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, which contains simplified
procedures to calculate storm runoff volume, peak rates of discharge,
hydrographs and storage volumes required for storm water control facilities.



   STORM WATER CONVEYANCE SYSTEM. All storm sewers, channels, streams,
ponds, lakes or other conveyances used for conveying concentrated storm water
runoff or for storing storm water runoff.



   STORM WATER DESIGN STANDARDS. The standards set forth in the state’s
Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control Field Guide, as published by the
state’s Division of Water.



   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT.



      (1)   QUALITATIVE CONTROL. A system of vegetative, structural
and other measures that reduce or eliminate pollutants that might otherwise
be carried by surface runoff.



      (2)   QUANTITATIVE CONTROL. A system of vegetative and
structural measures that control the increased volume and rate of surface
runoff caused by human-made changes to the land.



   STREAM. A body of water running or flowing on the earth’s surface, or
a channel in which such flow, which may be intermittent, occurs.



   TEN-YEAR STORM. A storm that is capable of producing rainfall expected
to be equaled or exceeded on the average of once in ten years. It may also be
expressed as a storm having the probability of a 10% chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year.



   TWENTY-FIVE-YEAR STORM. A storm that is capable of producing rainfall
expected to be equaled or exceeded on the average of once in 25 years. It may
also be expressed as a storm having the probability of a 4% chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.



   TWO-YEAR STORM. A storm that is capable of producing rainfall expected
to be equaled or exceeded on the average of once in two years. It may also be
expressed as a storm having the probability of a 50% chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year.



   WATERCOURSE. Any natural or improved stream, river, creek, ditch,
channel, canal, conduit, gutter, culvert, drain, gully, swale or wash in
which waters flow either continuously or intermittently.



   WATERSHED. A region draining to a specific river, river system or body
of water.



   WATERWAY BUFFER. A defined area adjacent to a watercourse where
land-disturbance activities may be permitted, but construction of any new
building or structure shall not be permitted.



   WETLANDS. Low land areas such as marshes that are saturated with
moisture as defined in § 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1987.



(Ord. 012-118, passed 10-8-2012)



§ 154.004  PERFORMANCE SECURITY.



   (A)   Any property owner or developer engaging in land-disturbance
activity subject to this chapter shall be required to submit a performance
security prior to the issuance of any permit prescribed herein to ensure the
proper installation of any storm water control facilities pursuant to an
approved storm water management plan. The performance security shall be in an
amount equal to the total estimated construction cost of the storm water
control facilities approved under the plan, plus 10% of such cost. The
performance security shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure to
satisfactorily complete the facilities as required by the plan.



   (B)   The performance security shall be released in full only upon
submission of “as-built plans” and a written certification by a
registered professional engineer that all facilities have been installed and
are operating in accordance with the approved plan and any other applicable
provisions of this chapter. The approving agency shall make a final
inspection of the storm water facilities to ensure that they are in
compliance with the approved plan prior to release of the performance
security. Provision for a partial, pro-rata release of the performance
security based upon completion of various development stages may be approved
at the discretion of the approving agency.



(Ord. 012-118, passed 10-8-2012)



§ 154.005  INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION.



   This chapter shall be interpreted, construed and applied to ensure
consistency with the requirements of state law, the Federal Clean Water Act
and all amendments thereto, and any state pollutant discharge elimination
system and/or national pollutant discharge elimination system permits.
Compliance with this chapter does not relieve a person of responsibility from
compliance with the state’s Division of Water notice of intent process.



(Ord. 012-118, passed 10-8-2012)



MANAGEMENT MEASURES



§ 154.020  APPLICABILITY.



   This chapter shall apply to any new construction or redevelopment
land-disturbance activity of one acre or more or any land-disturbance
activity on any individual lot(s) or parcel(s) of less than one acre when
said land-disturbance activity is associated with a common plan of
development of one acre or more. This chapter shall apply to the design of
drainage facilities in both the local and through drainage systems, except
where facilities have significant and immediate impact upon state or federal
property along highways. In those cases, the most restrictive of state or
federal standards shall govern. Unless otherwise excepted under this chapter,
detention and/or retention basins shall be required for all applicable land
uses within the county.



(Ord. 012-118, passed 10-8-2012)



§ 154.021  SITE PLAN SUBMITTAL.



   (A)   Any person or developer to whom this chapter applies shall
submit site plans as set forth below prepared and approved by a certified
engineer to the approving agency. The submittal shall be accompanied by the
appropriate fees for plan review, inspections and administrative costs as
established by a fee schedule approved by the county’s Fiscal Court and the
city.



   (B)   (1)   Preliminary site plan submittal. A preliminary site
plan setting forth the proposed storm water measures and facilities as
required by this chapter shall be submitted to the approving agency for
review and approval prior to the initiation of any land-disturbance activity.



      (2)   Final/as-built site plan submittal. A final site plan
setting forth the as-built, field surveyed storm water measures and
facilities shall be submitted to the approving agency upon completion of the
land-disturbance activity.



(Ord. 012-118, passed 10-8-2012)



§ 154.022  WATERWAY BUFFER.



   (A)   A waterway buffer shall be applied to any area where the
floodplain is not defined.



   (B)   Said buffer shall be measured perpendicular to the stream as
shown on a U.S. Geological Survey topographical map according to the
distances as follows:



      (1)   A minimum of 30 feet from the top of the bank on
unnamed, intermittent streams;



      (2)   A minimum of 50 feet from the top of the bank on blue
line streams; and



      (3)   A minimum of 100 feet from the top of the bank, on named
branches, streams or rivers.



(Ord. 012-118, passed 10-8-2012)



DESIGN CRITERIA AND METHODS



§ 154.035  DESIGN STORMS.



   (A)   The selection of a design storm is the basis for all runoff
calculations and facility design for a project site. The storm water
conveyance system shall be designed to adequately handle the runoff from
storms having various frequencies of occurrence from different types of
development in accordance with the general categories set forth below in this
section.



   (B)   To ensure the adequacy of the storm water conveyance system,
the following minimum design storms shall be used, where applicable.



      (1)   The ten-year storm shall be used for all public storm
sewer inlets and closed pipe systems. The ten-year storm shall also be used
for all channels and ditches, which should be capable of conveying the
ten-year storm flow within their banks.



      (2)   The 100-year storm shall be used as a check storm for
sewer systems designed for a ten- year storm to confine containment at levels
below the rim opening to prevent surcharging.



      (3)   The two-year storm, ten-year storm, 25-year storm and
100-year storm shall be used to calculate pre-development runoff from a site
for detention, retention and sediment control basins.



      (4)   The two-year storm, ten-year storm, 25-year storm and
100-year storm shall be used to calculate post-development runoff from a site
for detention, retention and sediment control basins.



      (5)   The 100-year storm shall be used for all detention,
retention or sediment control basins as a check storm to ensure against
flooding or surcharging.



      (6)   The 100-year storm shall be used in the design of flood
control facilities. The post-development peak flow rates shall be less than
or equal to the pre-development peak flow rates for the two year storm,
10-year storm, 25-year storm and 100-year storm events.



      (7)   The 100-year Storm shall be used in comparison with
established flood elevations from property owners, observations, state’s
Department of Transportation drainage folder data, Federal Emergency
Management Agency maps and other applicable records to minimize the impacts
of flooding.



      (8)   Additional controls or localized restrictions may be
placed on specific sites, such as deemed necessary by the approving agency.



(Ord. 012-118, passed 10-8-2012)



§ 154.036  RUNOFF CALCULATION METHODS.



   The peak runoff calculation procedures to be utilized depend upon the
size of the proposed development or project as follows.



   (A)   If the total tributary area to an existing or proposed storm
water facility on the project site is 50 acres or less, then the method of
peak runoff calculation shall be the Rational Method as set forth in §
154.037 of this chapter or the soil conservation service hydrologic methods
set forth in § 154.038 of this chapter.



   (B)   If the total project drainage area is greater than 50 acres,
then the soil conservation service hydrologic methods set forth in § 154.038
of this chapter must be used for calculations unless another method is
approved by the approving agency.



(Ord. 012-118, passed 10-8-2012)



§ 154.037  RATIONAL METHOD.



   (A)   The Rational Method may only be used to calculate peak
discharge rates for drainage areas of 50 acres or less. The Rational Method
shall not be used to calculate the volume of storm water runoff or develop
runoff hydrographs.



   (B)   The Rational Method shall be performed as follows:



      Q=CIA



      where:



      Q = peak runoff quantity in cubic feet per second;



      C = runoff coefficient, varying with the amount of imperviousness
and other characteristics of the drainage area;



      I = average intensity of precipitation in inches per hour,
varying with frequency of storm occurrence, duration or concentration time,
and area of the tributary watershed; and



      A = area in acres of the tributary watershed.



   (C)   The runoff coefficient (C) must represent a composite of the
surface condition tributary to the point under consideration. To determine
the composite C-factor for the entire project site, a weighted average must
be calculated based upon the percentages of the areas with different
C-factors. The runoff coefficient is dependent upon the soil type and land
use. The type and condition of the soil determines its ability to absorb
precipitation. Reference may be made to the Louisville Metropolitan Sewer
District Design Manual for a list of Rational Method runoff coefficients.



   (D)   (1)   Rainfall intensity is the average rainfall rate in
inches per hour, and is selected on the basis of design rainfall duration and
design frequency of occurrence. The rainfall intensity should be obtained
from rainfall intensity-duration-frequency (IDF) curves for the appropriate
design storm.



      (2)   Since IDF curves have not been specifically developed
for the city, then the IDF curves developed for Metro Louisville shall be
used and may be referenced in the Louisville Metropolitan Sewer District
Design Manual. The design duration is equal to the time of concentration (Tc)
for the drainage area under consideration.



   (E)   The time of concentration (Tc) shall be determined by
calculating the time for a particle of water to travel from the most
hydrological remote point of the project area to the point of interest. The
time of concentration to any point in a storm drainage system is a
combination of the sheet flow (overland), the shallow concentrated flow, and
the channel flow, which includes storm sewers. The Soil Conservation Service
TR-55 Method for calculating the time of concentration shall be used. The
minimum time of concentration shall not be less than ten minutes. Manning’s
Equation should be used to estimate any in-pipe or channel travel.



(Ord. 012-118, passed 10-8-2012)



§ 154.038  SOIL CONSERVATION SERVICE METHOD.



   (A)   The Soil Conservation Service (SCS) Method may be used for the
following: to calculate storm runoff volume; to calculate peak rate of
discharge; to develop runoff hydrographs for basins and sub basins; and to
calculate the required storage volume for storm water control facilities.



   (B)   The SCS Method is the preferred method for performing
hydrologic analysis. The SCS Method shall utilize the formulas, constants and
data as currently provided by the Soil Conservation Service. The SCS Method
utilizes a 24-hour storm duration, which is considered to be acceptable for
the county. When the SCS Method is used, the Type II rainfall distribution
shall be used. The rainfall depths for the 24-hour storm are found in the
Weather Bureau Technical Paper 40 or the Rainfall Frequency Values for
Kentucky, Engineering Memorandum No. 2, 6-1-1979, and are included in Table 1
below:



 

Table 1 - 24-Hour Storm Rainfall Depths


Storm Frequency
 
24-Hour Rainfall Depth (In Inches)


2-year
 
3.20


10-year
 
4.50


25-year
 
5.20


50-year
 
5.70


100-year
 
6.30



 



   (C)   The curve number (CN) needed for SCS computations is similar
to the runoff coefficient used in the Rational Method in that it is based on
the surface conditions of the project site. The CN can be determined from
tables in SCS TR-55 or in the Louisville Metropolitan Sewer District Design
Manual. Soil Conservation Service publications may be used for detailed
information.



(Ord. 012-118, passed 10-8-2012)



STORM SEWER DESIGN



§ 154.050  PURPOSE.



   Storm sewer systems are designed to collect and convey storm water
runoff from street inlets, runoff control structures and other locations
where the accumulation of storm water is undesirable. The objective is to
remove runoff from an area fast enough to avoid unacceptable a mounts of
ponding damage and inconvenience while preventing adverse off-site impacts.



(Ord. 012-118, passed 10-8-2012)



§ 154.051  PEAK DISCHARGE CALCULATIONS.



   The method of runoff calculation for determining peak discharge (Q) for
a drainage area shall be the methods described in §§ 154.035 through
154.038 of this chapter.



(Ord. 012-118, passed 10-8-2012)



§ 154.052  DESIGN METHODOLOGY; DESIGN STORM.



   Public storm sewer pipes shall be designed to carry peak flows as
determined by the methods previously described herein. All storm sewers shall
be designed for the ten-year storm event. The 100-year storm shall be used as
a check storm to confirm storm water containment at levels below the rim
opening to prevent surcharging. Manning’s Equation shall be used to
calculate pipe flow and velocity. A listing of the Manning’s Equation
roughness coefficients for various pipe materials may be found in the
Kentucky Department of Highways Design Manual or the Louisville Metropolitan
Sewer District Design Manual.



(Ord. 012-118, passed 10-8-2012)



§ 154.053  MINIMUM PIPE SIZING.



   The minimum diameter for public storm sewer pipes shall be 15 inches
for inlet headwalls and 12 inches for systems with a catch basin at the
initial point. Driveway entrance pipes shall be a minimum of 12 inches.
Smaller pipe sizes may be approved by the approving agency for detention
basin outlets on a case-by-case basis. Such pipes shall not be smaller than
six inches in order to prevent clogging.



(Ord. 012-118, passed 10-8-2012)



§ 154.054  PIPE VELOCITIES.



   Public storm sewer pipes shall be designed with a minimum velocity of
three feet per second at full flow, or a minimum velocity of two feet per
second at design flow, whichever requires the greater slope. The maximum
velocity for public storm sewer pipes shall not be greater than 25 feet per
second. Excessive velocities may result in hydraulic grade line problems and
may increase the potential for erosion where the system outfalls. Velocities
shall be designed to be non-erosive at the re-entry into the natural stream
or downstream channel. An outlet velocity of six feet per second or less is
generally considered to be non-erosive. The downstream receiving channel or
stream may still need stabilization if site soil conditions require in order
to prevent scour or erosion. In cases where the outlet velocity is greater
than six feet per second, the downstream receiving channel or stream must
receive adequate protection against erosion through the use of erosion
prevention practices or energy dissipation devices. Velocities for all pipes
and structures shall be included in the drainage calculations for both public
storm sewer systems and private storm sewer systems.



(Ord. 012-118, passed 10-8-2012)



§ 154.055  PIPE GRADES.



   (A)   Storm sewers shall have a minimum slope of 0.5%. A slope of
less than 0.5% may only be permitted upon prior review and approval by the
approving agency.



   (B)   Sewers on 20% slopes or greater shall be anchored securely
with concrete anchors or equal- spaced as follows:



      (1)   Not over 32 feet center to center on grades 20% and up
to 35%;



      (2)   Not over 24 feet center to center on grades 35% and up
to 50%; and



      (3)   Not over 16 feet center to center on grades 50% and over.



(Ord. 012-118, passed 10-8-2012)



§ 154.056  MANHOLE SPACING AND SIZING.



   Storm sewer manholes should have a maximum spacing and sizing as
follows.



   (A)   The minimum diameter of manholes shall be 48 inches, while
larger diameters are preferable for larger diameter sewers.



   (B)   For storm sewers less than or equal to 48 inches in diameter,
maximum spacing of manholes shall be 400 feet.



   (C)   For storm sewers greater than 48 inches in diameter, maximum
spacing of manholes shall be 600 feet.



(Ord. 012-118, passed 10-8-2012)



§ 154.057  HYDRAULIC GRADE LINES.



   (A)   To ensure against surface ponding or street flooding, the
hydraulic grade line (“HGL”) in any public inlet, catch basin or manhole
must be below the rim elevation of the structure for the 100-year check
storm. The headwater and tailwater elevations for the ten-year storm and
100-year check storm and outlet velocities shall be shown on all profiles of
the public storm water system on the plans or on storm sewer profiles
included with drainage calculations.



   (B)   To ensure proper conveyance of storm water runoff to a control
facility on private property, the submittal must include information
verifying that the headwater elevation for the 100-year storm in any inlet or
manhole is not higher than the inlet grate. The headwater and tailwater
elevations for the ten-year storm and 100-year check storm shall be shown on
all profiles of the private storm water system on the plans or on storm sewer
profiles included with the drainage calculations and outlet velocities shall
be included in the drainage calculations.



   (C)   The maximum allowable headwater shall not exceed 1.2 times the
structure rise unless specifically approved by the approving agency on a
case-by-case basis.



(Ord. 012-118, passed 10-8-2012)



§ 154.058  INLET CAPACITY.



   The capacity of on-street inlets on storm sewer systems shall not be
less than the quantity of flow tributary to the inlet for the design storm.
Inlets at low points or sags shall have extra capacity as a safeguard for
street flooding from flows overtopping the street curb. Curb openings or
combination inlets shall be used for overflows in the event that the grate is
clogged. Special inlets may be required for streets with steep gradients to
provide the extra capacity such situations require. The ten-year storm shall
be used to design storm water inlets. Inlet capacity shall be checked for the
100-year design storm at site boundary points to ensure that the intent of
the overall storm water management plan is being met. Design methodology
utilized shall be similar to those presented in manuals produced by the
state’s Transportation Cabinet.



(Ord. 012-118, passed 10-8-2012)



§ 154.059  STORM SEWER OUTFALLS.



   When a storm sewer system outfalls into a floodplain of any major
watercourse, the outfall should not be subject to frequent floods or
backwaters to the maximum extent practicable. Standard headwalls and/or
headwalls with wingwalls shall be constructed for all outfalls and include
rock channel protection and aprons as erosion control as required. Suitable
baffles or other energy dissipaters shall be provided if necessary to prevent
erosion. The invert of the first storm sewer appurtenance upstream of the
outfall structure should be above the elevation of the calculated 100-year
floodplain at the receiving body if practicable.



(Ord. 012-118, passed 10-8-2012)



§ 154.060  CULVERT AND BRIDGE DESIGN CRITERIA.



   Culverts and bridges, including proper backfill, shall be designed in
accordance with the methods given in the Drainage Guidance Manual published
by the state’s Transportation Cabinet, Department of Highways, or other
applicable State Transportation Cabinet manual as approved by the approving
agency. The maximum allowable headwater should not exceed 1.2 times the
structure rise unless specifically approved by the approving agency on a
case-by-case basis.



(Ord. 012-118, passed 10-8-2012)



DRAINAGE CHANNEL AND DITCH DESIGN



§ 154.075  PURPOSE.



   This subchapter sets forth the technical criteria necessary to design
storm water channels and ditches using conventional design procedures. These
procedures shall be applied to roadside and rear yard ditches and highly
urbanized channels. Open channels provide many advantages in the management
and control of storm water runoff. Such channels provide for natural
infiltration of storm water into the ground water supply and extend the time
of concentration (Tc), helping to maintain the runoff rate nearer to that
which existed prior to development. The objective of open channel flow design
is: to determine a channel slope and size that will have sufficient capacity
to prevent undue flooding damage during the anticipated peak runoff period;
and to determine the degree of protection based on stream velocity to prevent
erosion in the drainage channel.



(Ord. 012-118, passed 10-8-2012)



§ 154.076  PEAK FLOW CAPACITY.



   Each portion of the storm water system of drainage channels and ditches
shall be capable of handling the peak flows as determined by the proper
method previously described in §§ 154.035 through 154.038 of this chapter.
Manning’s Equation is recommended to calculate the flow rates. Typical
roughness coefficients may be found in the Louisville Metropolitan Sewer
District Design Manual.



(Ord. 012-118, passed 10-8-2012)



§ 154.077  DESIGN METHODOLOGY; DESIGN STORM.



   For all developments, channels and ditches shall be capable of
conveying the ten-year storm flow within their banks. Through drainage
structures or main flood control channels, such as detention basins, shall be
designed to collect and transport the post-development rate of runoff for the
100-year storm. In all cases, the 100-year discharge elevation must be
checked to ensure that adjacent structures do not suffer flood damage.



(Ord. 012-118, passed 10-8-2012)



§ 154.078  CHANNEL LININGS.



   When open drainage channels require various lining types to attain
ultimate design capacity, the earth sections of the drainage channel and its
structures shall be designed and constructed to the ultimate design required.
Preference shall be given to vegetated and natural channel design. Hardened
channel linings such as riprap and concrete shall be specified only in cases
where vegetated linings or reinforced vegetative linings are not practicable.



(Ord. 012-118, passed 10-8-2012)



§ 154.079  CHANNEL DESIGN SLOPES AND VELOCITIES.



   (A)   Erosion shall be controlled by limiting velocities, changing
the channel lining or reshaping the channel to spread the flow of runoff.
Methods of controlling erosion in open channels, include the following: grass
covers or sod; aggregate channel lining; gee-textile turf reinforcement mats
(“TRMs”) and rolled erosion control products (“RECPs”); reinforced
concrete or pre-cast paving; and bioengineering practices. Design velocities
should generally be greater than one and one-half feet per second to avoid
excessive deposition of sediments. When flat slopes are unavoidable, concrete
paving shall be used to accelerate runoff.



   (B)   Channel linings shall be designed to control erosive flows
resulting from the ten-year storm. The design of channel linings shall meet
both the velocity and shear stress requirements.



   (C)   Consideration shall be given for the construction of other
methods of lining for erosion control, including check dams, drop structures,
gabions or other methods subject to approval of the approving agency.



   (D)   For vegetated or natural channels, 2% slopes are preferred,
but the minimum slope shall be 1%. For hardened concrete channels, the
minimum slope shall be 0.5% unless otherwise specifically approved by the
approving agency on a case-by-case basis.



(Ord. 012-118, passed 10-8-2012)



RUNOFF CONTROL FACILITY DESIGN



§ 154.090  PURPOSE.



   (A)   (1)   Storm water runoff control facilities are required
for all land uses, including, but not limited to, single- and multi-family
residential, mobile home parks, urban and rural commercial, shopping centers,
professional office, planned unit development, mixed land use, research
parks, institutional, industrial and public uses. Such facilities are also
required for other activities that include impervious surfaces that generate
increased runoff requiring storage in accord with this chapter.



      (2)   These facilities may be designed for each individual
site, but the use of regional facilities is encouraged.



   (B)   Runoff control facilities shall be designed so that no
standing water will remain in detention basins during dry weather or that
standing water in retention basins shall not be allowed to stagnate and
present health hazards. The use of other methods of controlling peak
discharge rates, such as bio- retention swales and structures and/or created
wetlands, may be used if approved by the approving agency. The amount of
water to be detained shall be determined by the methods described herein
using the design criteria as set forth in §§ 154.035 through 154.038 of
this chapter.



   (C)   Based upon location in the contributing watershed, alternative
storm water management practices may be required by the approving agency if
it is determined or can be demonstrated that detention of runoff will be
detrimental to the overall hydrologic response of the watershed.



(Ord. 012-118, passed 10-8-2012)



§ 154.091  DESIGN METHODOLOGY; DESIGN STORM.



   (A)   As set forth in § 154.036 of this chapter, runoff
calculations shall be required for both the pre- development and
post-development conditions of the site.



   (B)   The following design storms shall be used when calculating
runoff.



      (1)   The pre-development site runoff rate shall be calculated
for the two-year, ten-year, 25-year and 100-year storm frequency. The entire
acreage contributing to the runoff shall be included in the calculations.



      (2)   The post-development site runoff rate shall be
calculated for the two-year, ten-year, 25-year and 100-year storm frequency.
The entire acreage contributing to the runoff shall be included in the
calculations.



(Ord. 012-118, passed 10-8-2012)



§ 154.092  BASIN STORAGE VOLUME.



   The basin storage volume shall be sized to maintain the
post-development discharge rates at the same level as the pre-development
discharge rates for the full range of prescribed design storm events. If
warranted by the conditions present, such as inadequate capacity of existing
culverts and drainage systems immediately downstream of the site proposed for
development, additional storm water management measures and/or off-site
drainage improvements may be required at the discretion of the approving
agency. If the basin is to be located directly on a portion of the through
drainage system, volume calculations must also consider the total system flow
reaching the basin from the contributing watershed, both on-site and off-site.



(Ord. 012-118, passed 10-8-2012)



§ 154.093  BASIN DESIGN STANDARDS.



   The following conditions are required for storm water runoff control
facilities.



   (A)   The peak discharge from the detention/retention basin shall be
controlled by a release outlet structure and shall not be greater than a
pre-development peak runoff rate based on a two-year, ten-year, 25-year and
100-year storm frequency at the discharge point.



   (B)   The outlet structure shall be sized to accommodate flow equal
to the 100-year storm post-development discharge. The routing of the outlet
structure shall be shown based on a 100-year storm frequency.



   (C)   The emergency spillway shall be designed to prevent flowing
during a 100-year storm event, unless the principle spillway has become
blocked. Erosion protection and any necessary energy dissipation shall be
provided for spillways and any receiving watercourse. Spillways shall not be
placed over a dam. Vegetated emergency spillways shall be embedded in in-situ
soils.



   (D)   The dam elevation shall not be less than one foot above the
100-year storm storage and overflow elevation.



   (E)   Detention basins shall be fully discharged within 36 hours
after the storm event.



   (F)   (1)   The detention basin shall be the first item of
construction and shall be designed to function  as a sediment basin
throughout construction.



      (2)   The basin design must be checked for capacity due to
additional runoff generated by disturbed site conditions.



   (G)   (1)   The detention basin shall be easily accessible for
maintenance.



      (2)   All basins shall be designed and constructed with side
slopes no greater than 3:1 (three feet horizontal per on foot vertical).



      (3)   Fencing may be required by the approving agency when
warranted by the location of the detention basin.



(Ord. 012-118, passed 10-8-2012)



§ 154.094  STORM HYDROGRAPHS.



   Hydrographs for the two-year, ten-year, 25-year and 100-year storm
events shall be routed through the proposed storm water management facilities
using the Modified Puis Method or another method approved by the approving
agency.



(Ord. 012-118, passed 10-8-2012)



§ 154.095  MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITIES.



   (A)   The owner of a storm water runoff control facility and/or the
developer of each subdivision shall be responsible for properly maintaining
each storm water runoff control facility in order for such facility to
function according to its design and purpose.



   (B)   Maintenance provisions for each facility shall be noted on the
submittal plans, including suitable access as approved by the approving
agency.



   (C)   Operation and maintenance of storm water control facilities is
set forth in more detail in §§ 154.110 through 154.118 of this chapter.



(Ord. 012-118, passed 10-8-2012)



OWNERSHIP AND MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITIES OF STORM WATER FACILITIES



§ 154.110  OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.



   The owner or developer responsible for maintenance shall perform or
cause to be performed preventative maintenance of all completed storm water
management facilities to ensure proper functioning.



(Ord. 012-118, passed 10-8-2012)



§ 154.111  MAINTENANCE AGREEMENTS.



   All storm water facilities shall be covered by an enforceable operation
and maintenance agreement to ensure the system functions as designed. This
agreement shall include any and all maintenance easements required to access
and inspect the storm water facilities and to allow for routine maintenance
as necessary to ensure proper functioning of the facilities. In addition, a
legally binding and enforceable covenant specifying the party(ies)
responsible for the proper maintenance of all storm water facilities subject
to the agreement shall be secured prior to issuance of any permits for
land-disturbance activities.



(Ord. 012-118, passed 10-8-2012)



§ 154.112  MAINTENANCE EASEMENT.



   Prior to the issuance of any permit pursuant to a plan that includes
any storm water facilities, the applicant/owner shall execute a maintenance
easement agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of land
served by the storm water facilities. The agreement shall provide for access
to the facilities at any time for inspection by the approving agency, and for
regular or special assessments of property owners to ensure the facilities
are maintained in proper working conditions to meet design standards and any
other provisions of this chapter. The easement agreement shall be filed with
the approving agency and recorded in the office of the county’s Clerk.



(Ord. 012-118, passed 10-8-2012)



§ 154.113  MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR PLAN.



   (A)   Plan submittals for all storm water management facilities
shall include detailed maintenance and repair procedures to ensure their
continual proper functioning. These plans and procedures shall identify all
parts and components of the facilities that require maintenance, as well as
any equipment, training and skills necessary for said maintenance.



   (B)   Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the
effectiveness of the maintenance procedures and the need for any revisions or
additional procedures shall be included in the plan.



(Ord. 012-118, passed 10-8-2012)



§ 154.114  MAINTENANCE COVENANTS.



   (A)   Maintenance of all storm water management facilities shall be
ensured through the creation of a formal maintenance covenant that must be
approved by the approving agency and recorded in the office of the county’s
Clerk prior to final plan approval. The covenant shall include a schedule for
proper and periodic maintenance to ensure proper functioning of all storm
water facilities subject thereto.



   (B)   The maintenance covenant shall also provide for the following:



      (1)   An annual self-inspection to review and document
maintenance and repair needs and to ensure compliance with the requirements
of this chapter;



      (2)   Periodic self-inspections to ensure proper performance
between scheduled maintenance;



      (3)   Any maintenance schedule shall include provisions for
the removal of silt, litter and other debris from all catch basins, inlets
and drainage pipes, for grass cutting and vegetation removal and for
necessary replacement of any landscape vegetation;



      (4)   All maintenance needs shall be documented and addressed
in a timely manner to ensure proper functioning of the facilities;



      (5)   Self-inspection reports shall be maintained and made
available to the approving agency upon request; and



      (6)   The approving agency may require additional inspections
and maintenance as deemed necessary to ensure proper functioning of the storm
water facilities and compliance with this chapter and the approved plan.



(Ord. 012-118, passed 10-8-2012)



§ 154.115  INSPECTION OF STORM WATER FACILITIES.



   The approving agency is hereby granted the authority to conduct
inspections of storm water facilities approved pursuant to this chapter on a
routine basis, random basis or based upon a complaint of other notice of
violation. The approving agency may inspect drainage basins or areas
identified as higher than typical sources of sediment or other contaminants
or pollutants, businesses or industries of a type associated with higher than
usual discharges of contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type
which are more likely to cause violations of state or federal water or
sediment quality standards or the NPDES storm water permit, and it may
conduct joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental
or safety laws. Said inspections may include, but are not limited to, the
following: review of maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges,
surface water, ground water and material or water in drainage control
facilities; and evaluation of the condition of drainage control facilities
and other storm water treatment practices.



(Ord. 012-118, passed 10-8-2012)



§ 154.116  RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTIONS.



   Upon installation of a new storm water control facility on private
property, or a new connection between private property and a public drainage
control system, sanitary sewer or combined sewer, the property owner shall
grant the approving agency the right to enter the property at all reasonable
times and in a reasonable manner for purpose of conducting required and
authorized inspections. This right includes the right to enter when a
reasonable basis has been established to believe that a violation of this
chapter is occurring or has occurred.



(Ord. 012-118, passed 10-8-2012)



§ 154.117  FAILURE TO MAINTAIN.



   (A)   If a responsible party fails or refuses to meet the
requirements of the approved plan and maintenance covenant, then the
approving agency, or its designated agent, after reasonable notice as set
forth herein, may enter upon the property and correct any violation by
performing all necessary work to place the storm water facility in proper
working condition. In the event the storm water facility is in a state that
poses an immediate danger to public safety or health in the determination of
the approving agency, then the approving agency, or its designated agent, may
enter upon the property immediately without notice to correct and perform all
work necessary to remediate the immediate danger.



   (B)   (1)   Absent an immediate danger, the approving agency
shall provide the responsible party with written notice of any failure to
maintain. The responsible party shall have a minimum of 15 days to respond
with a plan to affect maintenance and repair to address the failure in a
manner and time that is acceptable to the approving agency. If the
responsible party fails to respond to the written notice or fails to respond
with an approved plan, then the approving agency, or its designate agent, may
enter upon the property and correct any violation by performing any work
necessary as set forth above.



      (2)   The approving agency shall have the authority to assess
the owner(s) of the property for the full cost, including administrative
costs, for any and all work performed and may place a lien on the property to
be recorded in the office of the county’s Clerk.



      (3)   Said lien may be enforced by the approving agency
through appropriate legal action, including foreclosure and judicial sale of
the property.



(Ord. 012-118, passed 10-8-2012)



§ 154.118  AS-BUILT PLANS.



   All applicants shall submit a set of “as-built” plans for any storm
water facilities to the approving agency in a form acceptable to the
approving agency after final construction is complete. The plans shall
demonstrate the final design specifications for all storm water management
facilities and must be certified by a professional engineer. A final
inspection by the approving agency shall be required before the full release
of any posted performance security.



(Ord. 012-118, passed 10-8-2012)



§ 154.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor and shall
be fined in an amount not to exceed $250, or shall be imprisoned for a term
not to exceed 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day a
particular violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.



   (B)   In addition to the criminal penalties set forth above, any
person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
liable to the city for a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $4,000 for
each offense. Each day a particular violation occurs shall constitute a
separate offense. Said civil penalty may be assessed and imposed by the
county’s District Court, pursuant to KRS 24A.120.



(Ord. 012-118, passed 10-8-2012)



CHAPTER 155:  STORM WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT



Section



General Provisions



   155.01   Title, purpose and jurisdiction



   155.02   Definitions and acronyms



   155.03   Program objectives



   155.04   General approach



   155.05   Authority and right of entry



   155.06   Storm water quality management plan permit application
process



   155.07   Permit inspections



   155.08   Qualified professionals



   155.09   Permit termination



   155.10   Mediation process for plan acceptance



Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination



   155.25   Illegal discharges; prohibition



   155.26   Allowable discharges



   155.27   Accidental discharges



Construction Site Runoff Management



   155.40   Perimeter control plan



   155.41   Perimeter and outfall inspections



   155.42   Other inspections



   155.43   Storm water quality management plan permit



   155.44   Post-construction storm water management



Administration and Enforcement



   155.55   Responsibility



   155.56   Disconnection of illicit discharges



   155.57   Liability of expenses incurred



   155.58   Enforcement actions



   155.59   Appeals



   155.60   Notice



 



   155.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 155.01  TITLE, PURPOSE AND JURISDICTION.



   (A)   (1)   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the powers
granted and limitations imposed by state laws, including the statutory
authority granted to state municipal corporations pursuant to the Kentucky
Revised Statues.



      (2)   This chapter is adopted pursuant to requirements of the
national pollutant discharge elimination system and the state’s pollutant
discharge elimination system storm water phase II.



   (B)   (1)   This chapter shall be known as the “Storm Water
Quality Management Ordinance” for the city, and may be so cited.



      (2)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide regulations
and measures that will address storm water quality in the city and to
establish procedures by which these requirements are to be administered and
enforced.



   (C)   (1)   The laws of the commonwealth shall apply to this
chapter.



      (2)   This chapter shall govern all properties within the
jurisdictional boundaries of the city.



      (3)   This chapter is applicable to all new development and
redevelopment activities that result in the disturbance of one or mores acres
of land including disturbance of less than one acre as part of a larger
common plan.



   (D)   The following activities are exempt from the provisions of
this chapter:



      (1)   Agricultural and silviculture (woodland production)
operations according to an agricultural water quality plan approved by the
city’s Conservation District or approved as required in the state’s 
Agricultural Water Quality Plan developed in accordance with the state’s
Agricultural Water Quality Authority; and



      (2)   Land reclamation projects regulated by the state’s
Department for surface mining reclamation and enforcement.



(Ord. 012-100, passed 4-9-2012)



§ 155.02  DEFINITIONS AND ACRONYMS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE. A discharge of spills and dumping or any disposal
of materials other than storm water into the system.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). Those measures described in the
latest edition of the National Menu of Best Management Practices,
Post-Construction Storm water Management in New Development and
Redevelopment, found at http://cfpub.epa.gov/NPDES/storm
water/menuofbmps/index.cfm as published by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency (USEPA), Kentucky Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control
Field Guide, as published by the Kentucky Division of Water, and Best
Management Practices for Construction Activities, as published by the
state’s Division of Conservation and Division of Water. This shall also
include related documents published and distributed by the city.



   BUILDER. A person, partnership, contractor or corporation constructing
one or more buildings for occupancy or any other use.



   CERTIFICATION. A signed, written statement that specific constructions,
inspections or tests (when required) have been performed and that such comply
with the applicable requirements of this subtitle.



   CITY. A representative or designee of the city government to include
persons from the city representative’s office.



   CITY REPRESENTATIVE. The person or persons currently designated by the
Mayor to Administer the Storm Water Program and any related permit activities.



   CLEAN WATER ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§§ 1251 et seq.).



   CONTRACTOR. A person who contracts with the permittee, landowner,
builder, developer or another contractor to undertake any or all of the
land-disturbing activities covered by this chapter.



   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Land-disturbance activities subject to state
KPDES General construction permits or local permits. Such activities include,
but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating and
demolition.



   CONSTRUCTION WEATHER DAYS. Days in which a needed activity could occur.



   DETENTION BASIN. A drainage facility constructed to restrict the runoff
of storm water to a prescribed maximum rate and to detain for a specified
period of time the excess waters that accumulate upstream from the outlet
structure.



   DEVELOPMENT. The planning or construction project involving substantial
property improvement and, usually, a change of land-use character within the
site; the act of using land for building purposes.



   DIRECTLY CONNECTED IMPERVIOUS AREA (DCIA). Surface area that
drains/discharges to an outfall without passing through a BMP.



   DRAINAGE AREA. The surface area from which water drains to a point of
consideration.



   ENGINEER. A person licensed as a professional engineer in the
commonwealth in accordance with KRS Ch. 322.



   EROSION PREVENTION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL (EPSC) MEASURE. The practice,
or a combination of practices, to prevent erosion and to abate the resulting
off-site sedimentation.



   FEMA. The Federal Emergency Management Agency.



   FINAL STABILIZATION.



      (1)   All soil disturbing activities at the site have been
completed;



      (2)   There are no areas of active erosion evident; and



      (3)   A uniform perennial vegetative cover with a density of
70% of the cover for the area has been established or equivalent measures
(i.e., mulches or geotextile fabrics, have been employed).



   FLOODPLAIN. Any area inundated by a 100-year flood or as determined by
the FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) or an engineering study.



   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
floodplain adjoining the channel that are required to carry and discharge the
peak flow of the regulatory flood of any river or stream. The FLOODWAY is
where the water is likely to be fastest and not include the channel and the
portion of the adjacent floodplain.



   ILLICIT DISCHARGE. Any discharge to a municipal separate storm sewer
system (MS4) that is not composed entirely of storm water exempted by this
chapter or managed pursuant to a state pollution discharge elimination system
permit (other than the city’s KPDES storm water permit) or otherwise
defined by this chapter.



   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. Activities subject to KPDES industrial permits as
defined in 40 C.F.R. § 122.26(b)(14).



   KDOW. The Kentucky Division of Water.



   KENTUCKY POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (KPDES) STORM WATER
DISCHARGE PERMIT. A permit issued by the Kentucky Division of Water (KDOW)
under designated authority by the United States Environmental Protection
Agency (USEPA), whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group or
general area-wide basis.



   LAND-DISTURBING ACTIVITY. All clearing and grubbing, clear cutting,
construction, reconstruction, grading, modification, extension or expansion
of structures or parking areas, placement of fill and dumping that change the
natural cover or topography, thereby creating the potential for erosion and
contribution of sediment.



   LANDOWNER. A person holding legal title who directly or indirectly
allows the land-disturbing activity or who benefits from it.



   LAND SURVEYOR. A person licensed as a professional land surveyor in the
commonwealth, according to KRS Ch. 322.



   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4). A conveyance or system of
conveyances, including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch
basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, human-made channels or storm drains, that is
designed or used for collecting or conveying storm water; not privately
owned; not a combined sewer; and not part of a publicly owned treatment works
(POTW).



   NOI. Notice of intent.



   NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGE. Any discharge to the storm drainage system
that is not composed entirely of storm water or otherwise allowed by this
chapter.



   NOT. Notice of termination.



   OUTFALL. The point or location where storm water runoff discharges from
a BMP, conduit, stream or drain, storm sewer, channel or detention/retention
facility.



   PERIMETER OUTFALL. The locations from which storm water flow(s) from
the project site/disturbed area.



   PERIMETER CONTROL PLAN (PCP). A component of the Storm Water Quality
Management Plan that documents how sediment is controlled from leaving the
project site.



   PERMITTEE. The person responsible for the land-disturbing activity; who
must have ownership interest in the property and is designated on an approved
SWQMP permit.



   PERSON. Except to the extent exempted from this chapter, any
individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private
corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution,
utility, cooperative, city, town or other political subdivision of the state,
any interstate body or any other legal entity conducting land-disturbing
activities subject to this chapter.



   POLLUTANT. Any thing of a chemical component or nature which causes or
contributes to pollution.



   POLLUTION. The contamination or other alteration of any water’s
physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of a constituent.



   POST-CONSTRUCTION STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (P-SWPPP). A
component of the Storm Water Quality Management Plan that illustrates how the
pollutants or pollution will be prevented, treated and otherwise managed in
the long term, beyond that of construction phases.



   PREMISES. Any building, lot, parcel of land or portion of land whether
improved or unimproved.



   PROJECT SITE. The area of land-disturbing activity.



   QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL. An individual who is trained and experienced in
storm water treatment techniques and related fields as may be demonstrated by
state registration, professional certification, experience or completion of
coursework, as accepted according to this chapter, that enable the individual
to make sound, professional judgments regarding storm water control or
treatment and monitoring, pollutant fate and transport, and drainage planning.



   RETENTION BASIN. A drainage facility constructed to contain the runoff
of storm water to a prescribed maximum rate/volume to pass into the ground
water system without discharging the retained volume to surface waters,
except through an emergency bypass under conditions beyond the designed
capacity.



   SITE. The entire area or project site of the land-disturbing activity
as proposed in the permit application.



   STOP-WORK ORDER. An order by the city directing a permittee to suspend
all construction and/or operations, except for work related to remediation of
the violation.



   STORM SEWER. Channel, ditch, catch basin, inlet pipe, culvert, conduit
or other conveyance used for the purposes of collecting and conveying storm
water.



   STORM WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN (SWQMP). Illustration and
documentation of how sediment and other pollutants are managed on the project
site during and after the construction phase. This is composed of three
primary elements:



      (1)   The Perimeter Control Plan;



      (2)   The Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan; and



      (3)   The Post-Construction Storm Water Pollution Prevention
Plan.



   STORM WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN (SWQMP) PERMIT. A legal document
that allows the permit holder to break ground or disturb soil on a site
within the provisions of a SWQMP.



   STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP). A component of the Storm
Water Quality Management Plan that illustrates how the suspension of sediment
and other construction pollutants will be prevented.



   WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH. Any and all rivers, streams, creeks,
branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells and
other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying
within or forming a part of the boundaries of the commonwealth which are not
entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single
person.



(Ord. 012-100, passed 4-9-2012)



§ 155.03  PROGRAM OBJECTIVES.



   (A)   The program’s objectives are the protection of the
short-term and long-term public health, safety and general welfare.



   (B)   This objective will be achieved by the following:



      (1)   Providing for regulation and management of the city’s
storm water system, including public and private facilities in the city’s
service area;



      (2)   Protecting, and preserving storm water quality and
thereby fish and wildlife habitat within the city and in downstream receiving
waters; and



      (3)   Protecting those downstream and adjacent properties from
storm water quality impairment.



   (C)   Compliance with state and federal storm water regulations
developed pursuant to the Clean Water Act Amendments of 1987 and subsequent
amendments. This objective will be achieved by the following:



      (1)   Benefitting storm water quality to a level of
“designated use” as defined by the Clean Water Act §§ 3.03(d) and
3.5(b) and minimizing the impacts from new development and/or areas of
significant redevelopment.



      (2)   Managing the quality of storm water discharged to the
MS4 by controlling the contribution of pollutants associated with new
development and redevelopment;



      (3)   Prohibiting illicit discharges to storm water;



      (4)   Managing the discharge of spills and dumping or any
disposal of materials other than storm water into the system;



      (5)   Managing storm water pollution caused by the suspension
and transport of soils, sediment and other construction pollutants;



      (6)   Minimizing damage to public facilities and utilities;



      (7)   Managing the use of the public and private storm
water/drainage system that will not result in excessive maintenance costs;



      (8)   Encouraging the use of natural and
aesthetically-pleasing designs that maximize the preservation of natural
areas;



      (9)   Guiding the construction of storm water management
facilities by developing comprehensive master plans that address storm water
quantity, quality, design, operation and maintenance;



      (10)   Encouraging the preservation of floodplains, floodways
and open spaces to protect and benefit the community’s quality of life and
natural resources; and



      (11)   Encourage the planning for and use of regional BMPs,
general approach for development.



(Ord. 012-100, passed 4-9-2012)



§ 155.04  GENERAL APPROACH.



   (A)   To most effectively achieve the program objectives, the city
promotes an approach that encourages the consideration and use of:



      (1)   Regional BMPs;



      (2)   Low-impact development design principles;



      (3)   Waterway buffers;



      (4)   Low maintenance on-site BMPs; and



      (5)   A series of multiple BMP treatment systems.



   (B)   The city will encourage a primary preference for regional BMPs
through:



      (1)   Enabling and facilitating private partnerships where
on-site storm water quantity and/or quality requirements may be achieved or
offset by watershed based solutions; and



      (2)   Enabling and supporting private to public partnerships,
offsets and regional BMP banking, and in-lieu fee funds.



   (C)   In support of this approach, the city integrates into the
planning and construction plan review processes, when and where available,
the use of:



      (1)   City Council adopted watershed studies;



      (2)   City Council adopted master plans;



      (3)   FEMA floodplain delineations; and



      (4)   USEPA, KDOW 303(d) reports.



(Ord. 012-100, passed 4-9-2012)



§ 155.05  AUTHORITY AND RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   Upon written request to the person, the city shall have safe and easy
access to the areas to be inspected and/or monitored.



   (A)   The city shall have the right of entry on or upon the project
site. The city shall be provided access to all parts of the premises subject
to this chapter for the purposes of inspection, monitoring, sampling and for
the performance of other duties necessary to determine compliance with this
chapter.



   (B)   Where a project site has security measures in place which
require proper identification and clearance of individuals before entry into
its premises, the person shall make necessary arrangements with its security
personnel so that, upon presentation of suitable identification and written
request, the city will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes
of performing specific responsibilities.



   (C)   The city shall have the right to set up on a project site such
devices necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the storm water
operations or discharges.



   (D)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access
to the areas to be inspected and/or monitored that can reasonably be moved
shall be removed promptly by the person at the written or verbal request of
the city. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the person.



   (E)   The city or its designated representative may inspect the
facilities of any user in order to ensure compliance with this chapter. Such
inspections shall be made with the consent of the owner, manager or signatory
official. If such consent is refused, denied or not promptly addressed, the
city may seek issuance of a search warrant.



   (F)   The city has the right to determine and impose inspection
schedules necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Inspections
may include, but are not limited to, the following:



      (1)   An initial inspection prior to storm water management
plan approval;



      (2)   An inspection prior to burial of any underground
drainage structures;



      (3)   Erosion control inspections as necessary to determine
effective control of sediment prior to discharge to the municipal separate
storm sewer system;



      (4)   A finish or closeout inspection when all work, including
installation of storm management facilities, has been completed; and



      (5)   An inspection to determine the effectiveness or
operational viability of a permanent or long-term storm water quality
management practice(s).



(Ord. 012-100, passed 4-9-2012)



§ 155.06  STORM WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN PERMIT APPLICATION PROCESS.



   (A)   The landowner shall obtain from the city a SWQMP permit prior
to the initiation of any land-disturbing activities that result in the
disturbance of one acre or more of land.



   (B)   This Storm Water Quality Management Plan permit (SWQMP) alone
does not authorize or grant permission to begin development or redevelopment
on subject property. It does not supersede other permits required by the
city, state and federal governments.



   (C)   Project site owners, as applicable in division (A) above,
shall submit an application for a SWQMP on forms provided by the city.



   (D)   Applications must include a notice of intent (NOI), perimeter
control plan (PCP), Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP),
Post-Construction Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (P-SWPPP) and any
other necessary information or documentation requested by the city. The NOI
requirements are included in § 155.09(E) of this chapter.



   (E)   The PCP and SWPPP are components of the SWQMP. While both
plans may be approved simultaneously, the provisions of a PCP shall be
implemented, inspected and accepted by the city prior to implementing the
SWPPP and P-SWPPP and before other construction proceeds.



   (F)   The landowner must notify the city and the commonwealth’s
Division of Water (KDOW) within 48 hours prior to the commencement of
construction activities through the submittal of an updated NOI.



      (1)   Submittal for a SWQMP permit application shall include a
NOI letter, as required by 401 KAR 5:055 and 401 KAR 5:060, with proof of
publication of a public notice, construction plans, a Perimeter Control Plan,
a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan, Post-Construction Storm Water
Pollution Prevention Plan and any other necessary information or
documentation requested by the city.



      (2)   The NOI letter, proof of publication of public notice
and construction plans for the SWQMP permit shall be submitted to the city.



   (G)   Upon completion of construction activities, stabilization of
the project site and removal of all temporary erosion protection and sediment
control measures, the applicant shall submit a NOT. They, or its designated
representative, shall inspect the project site to verify that the
requirements of the NOT have been met.



   (H)   The city reserves the right to require a checklist of
necessary items to be completed and included with the SWQMP permit
application submittal. Upon submittal, the SWQMP application shall be
rejected in its entirety should any item on the checklist be incomplete.



   (I)   The city reserves the right to collect fees associated with
SWQMP permit application, plan review and inspections from the applicant.



(Ord. 012-100, passed 4-9-2012)



§ 155.07  PERMIT INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Permittee performed inspections.



      (1)   Permittee performed inspections (self inspections) shall
be performed by a qualified professional.



      (2)   The city shall develop standards and a checklist to be
used by the permittee for the inspections.



      (3)   Documentation of owner performed inspections and
inspection findings shall be kept on site, if appropriate facilities are
available.



      (4)   Documentation of owner performed inspections and
inspection findings shall be made available within two business days for
construction and seven days for post-construction of a request by the city or
designated representative. Failure to timely submit documentation, as
requested, will be assumed to indicate that inspections were not performed
and may result in corresponding enforcement procedures.



      (5)   Maintenance inspections shall be performed at control
measures at least every seven regular calendar days and within 24 hours of a
one-half inch rain event. The permittee shall begin repair actions within
seven calendar days after deficiencies or failures have been identified.



      (6)   Inspection and maintenance shall be performed at storm
water quality BMPs on at least an annual basis and as otherwise determined in
the long-term operation and maintenance agreement.



   (B)   Oversight inspections.



      (1)   (a)   The city, or the city’s designated
representative, has the authority to periodically inspect the storm water
quality BMPs.



         (b)   The city may make inspections of the site at its
discretion and shall either approve the condition of the BMP or shall notify
the permittee wherein the condition fails to comply with the approved SWQMP.



      (2)   The city’s, or its designated representative’s,
inspections and findings will be presented and reviewed with the permittee at
the time of inspection (as available to site personnel), and be available in
the city public records within seven normal business days.



      (3)   The city shall identify in writing any measures with
deficiencies or that are not in compliance with the objectives of this
chapter and the SWQMP permit.



      (4)   The city is authorized to negotiate with the permittee
to develop and implement an action plan that exceeds the SWQMP permit
provisions, but is necessary to prevent storm water pollution from leaving
the site.



(Ord. 012-100, passed 4-9-2012)



§ 155.08  QUALIFIED PROFESSIONALS.



   (A)   A qualified professional is required to perform construction
and post-construction inspections and to direct and/or supervise maintenance
activities to ensure that the SWQMP permit and long-term operation and
maintenance agreement provisions are being implemented properly.



   (B)   (1)   Effect. This section became effective and enforceable
on 7-1-2012.



      (2)   Registration.



         (a)   Qualified professionals performing inspections or
overseeing maintenance activities under this chapter must be registered by
the city prior to execution of those actions.



         (b)   All applicants must file an application with the
city.



      (3)   Construction qualified professional prerequisites.



         (a)   Applicants must demonstrate knowledge and
experience in the following areas:



            1.   Construction practices;



            2.   Operational standards;



            3.   Cause and failure indicators; and



            4.   Maintenance measures used to prevent and
correct failures.



         (b)   Until the city develops a testing policy,
applicants who can demonstrate one or more of the following will be
considered for registration:



            1.   Successful completion and passage of the
state’s Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control course and examination
through the University of Kentucky Transportation Center;



            2.   A professional engineer license in good
standing in the commonwealth with demonstrated experience in erosion
prevention and sediment control on construction sites;



            3.   A professional land surveyor license in good
standing in the commonwealth with demonstrated experience in erosion
prevention and sediment control on construction sites;



            4.   A landscape architect license in good
standing in the commonwealth with demonstrated experience in erosion
prevention and sediment control on construction sites;



            5.   A professional in erosion and sediment
control certification in good standing;



            6.   EPSC inspector certification in good standing
from the Louisville and Jefferson County Metropolitan Sewer District; and



            7.   Similar qualification or certification of any
other similar program in the commonwealth or in the United States, so long as
that program required a test and the applicant passed the test.



         (c)   Documentation demonstrating the above will be
required by the city before registration will be granted.



      (4)   Post-construction qualified professional prerequisites.



         (a)   Until the city develops a testing policy,
applicants must demonstrate knowledge and experience in the following areas:



            1.   Storm water quality treatment practices;



            2.   Operational standards;



            3.   Cause and failure indicators; and



            4.   Maintenance measures used to prevent and
correct failures.



         (b)   Until the city develops a testing policy,
applicants who can demonstrate one or more of the following will be
considered for registration:



            1.   A professional engineer license in good
standing in the commonwealth with demonstrated experience in storm water
quality treatment BMPs;



            2.   A professional land surveyor license in good
standing in the commonwealth with demonstrated experience in storm water
quality treatment BMPs;



            3.   A landscape architect license in good
standing in the commonwealth with demonstrated experience in storm water
quality treatment BMPs;



            4.   A professional in storm water quality
certification in good standing; and



            5.   Similar qualification or certification of any
other similar program in the commonwealth or in the United States so long as
that program required a test and the applicant passed the test.



   (C)   (1)   The city may report to the appropriate licensing,
certification or qualification authority for activities not consistent with
the policies and procedures identified in this chapter.



      (2)   This may include reporting activities that include, but
are not limited to, the submittal of false or misleading information or for
repeated incompetence or negligent actions by the registrant.



(Ord. 012-100, passed 4-9-2012)



§ 155.09  PERMIT TERMINATION.



   (A)   The permittee shall submit a notice of termination (NOT) of
permit letter to the city.



   (B)   Written acceptance of site conditions shall be made by the
city based upon an inspection.



   (C)   The city shall consider whether conditions are sufficient,
appropriate and consistent with the SWQMP.



   (D)   A permit shall be considered open and active until the city
accepts the site conditions, a long-term operation and maintenance agreement
has been accepted, and after the following as-built requirements have been
completed:



      (1)   Temporary erosion and sediment control measures have
been removed;



      (2)   The remaining, undeveloped acreage that was subject to
the permit does not exceed five acres;



      (3)   The designed public utilities are installed and have
been inspected by the appropriate agencies;



      (4)   The road(s) have been constructed and the binder course
of pavement has been placed in accordance with the standards in the
subdivision regulations;



      (5)   The remaining undeveloped acreage that was subject to
the permit does not pose a significant threat to the integrity of the
infrastructure, adjacent properties or storm water quality;



      (6)   Permanent storm water quality BMPs and other measures
have been implemented and are operational at the designed levels;



      (7)   Pipes, channels, catch basins, storm water quality
treatment devices and other drainage features are clear of sediment,
obstructions and debris, and are operating as designed and appropriate for
final site conditions;



      (8)   Disturbed slopes are stabilized;



      (9)   Detention and retention basins are stabilized at
designed volumes and conditions; and



      (10)   The city shall have 21 normal business days to perform
an inspection and respond to the request. If the city does not respond within
the 21 normal business days, then the request shall be granted automatic
approval.



   (E)   (1)   Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy,
recording of the final plat or final release of bond, the as-built condition
(including: invert elevations; size; shape; and location) of critical storm
water management features must be identified, approved and provided in a
electronic form to the city representative.



      (2)   The volume, slopes, configuration, condition and
topographic information of all detention, retention and water quality
practices shall be certified by a professional engineer or land surveyor, as
appropriate, licensed in the commonwealth. This information shall be provided
to the city, in the form of an as-built drawing or other electronic form
accepted by the city. The as-built certification shall indicate if final
conditions are consistent with, or exceed, the SWQMP provisions.



      (3)   If it is determined that information provided in the
as-built drawing, certification, inspection or survey of the site does not
meet or exceed the SWQMP provisions, the city reserves the right to withhold
certification of occupancy or final bond release. Furthermore, other
enforcement mechanisms may be applied to the permittee or persons making
certifying statements.



      (4)   The requirements of this division (E) do not apply for
individual residential lot development.



(Ord. 012-100, passed 4-9-2012)



§ 155.10  MEDIATION PROCESS FOR PLAN ACCEPTANCE.



   (A)   In such cases when the city representative and the owner’s
engineer are not able to reach agreement on construction plans to meet the
requirements of this chapter, then the owner’s engineer may request binding
arbitration.



      (1)   Upon request for mediation, the city representative and
the owner’s engineer shall discuss and attempt to agree on selection of a
third party licensed professional engineer in the technical area of concern
that will be used to mediate the points of difference.



      (2)   If the city representative and the owner’s engineer
are unable to agree upon a mediator and/or to resolve the differences in
mediation, either party may then seek a legal remedy.



   (B)   The time and related expenses of the mediating engineer shall
be borne by the owner’s engineer.



   (C)   The mediating engineer shall document and transmit his or her
opinions and/or discussion results to both the city representative and the
owner’s engineer upon completion of the mediation process regardless of
outcome.



   (D)   Pending resolution, the disputed enforcement action shall
remain in effect.



(Ord. 012-100, passed 4-9-2012)



ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION AND ELIMINATION



§ 155.25  ILLEGAL DISCHARGES; PROHIBITION.



   (A)   (1)   Pursuant to the Kentucky Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (KPDES) Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4)
Program, illicit discharges to the MS4 are defined as illegal.



      (2)   Except as hereinafter provided, all non-storm water
discharges into the MS4 are prohibited and declared to be unlawful.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to connect any pipe, open
channel or any other conveyance system that discharges anything, except storm
water or unpolluted water, which is approved by the city based on exemptions
listed in § 155.26 of this chapter, to the storm water system.



   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to discharge waters from
residential construction activities that are not complying with the Standard
of Practice for Residential Construction Storm Water Management as approved
and advertised by the city.



   (D)   In addition to illicit discharges, the discharge of spills and
the dumping and/or disposal of materials other than storm water, including,
but not limited to, unpermitted (KPDES) industrial and commercial wastes,
commercial car wash wastes, sanitary sewage, garbage, yard waste, trash,
petroleum products, including used motor vehicle fluids, as well as leaf
litter, grass clippings, and animal wastes into the MS4, whether directly or
indirectly, are prohibited, unless authorized under a KPDES permit.



(Ord. 012-100, passed 4-9-2012)  Penalty, see § 155.99



§ 155.26  ALLOWABLE DISCHARGES.



   Unless the city has identified a discharge as an unacceptable source of
pollutants to the waters of the commonwealth, the following non-storm water
discharges into the MS4 are lawful:



   (A)   Discharges from emergency firefighting activities;



   (B)   Diverted stream flows;



   (C)   Rising ground waters;



   (D)   Uncontaminated ground water infiltration to separate storm
sewer systems (as defined by 40 C.F.R. § 35.2005(20);



   (E)   Uncontaminated pumped ground water;



   (F)   Discharges from potable water sources as required for system
maintenance;



   (G)   Drinking water line flushing;



   (H)   Air conditioning condensate;



   (I)   Uncontaminated landscape irrigation;



   (J)   Uncontaminated irrigation water;



   (K)   Lawn watering;



   (L)   Uncontaminated springs;



   (M)   Uncontaminated water from crawl space pumps;



   (N)   Uncontaminated water from footing drains and pumps;



   (O)   Individual residential car washing;



   (P)   Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;



   (Q)   Swimming pool discharges dechlorinated through city accepted
BMPs;



   (R)   Controlled flushing storm water conveyances (contained and
treated by appropriate BMPs);



   (S)   Discharges within the constraints of a Kentucky Pollutant
Discharges Elimination System (KPDES) permit from the Kentucky Division of
Water (KDOW); and



   (T)   Discharges approved at the discretion of the city
representative.



(Ord. 012-100, passed 4-9-2012)



§ 155.27  ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES.



   (A)   In the event of any discharge of a hazardous substance in
amounts that could cause a threat to public drinking supplies, a spill having
a significant adverse impact as defined by the USEPA and state law, or any
other discharge that could constitute a threat to human health or the
environment, as may be asserted by the city, the owner or operator of the
facility shall give notice to the city and the KDOW as soon as practicable,
but in no event later than four hours after discovery of the accidental
discharge or the discharger becomes aware of the circumstances.



   (B)   (1)   If an emergency response by governmental agencies is
needed, the owner or operator should call 911 immediately to report the
discharge.



      (2)   A written report must be provided to the city within
five days of the time the discharger becomes aware of the circumstances,
unless this requirement is waived by the city for good cause shown as
determined by the city or its designee on a case-by-case basis, containing
the following information:



         (a)   A description of the discharge including volumes
and concentrations;



         (b)   The exact dates and times of discharge; and



         (c)   Steps being taken to eliminate and prevent
recurrence of the discharge.



   (C)   (1)   The discharger shall take all reasonable steps to
minimize any adverse impact to the MS4 or the waters of state, including
accelerated or additional monitoring necessary to determine the nature and
impact of the discharge.



      (2)   It shall not be a defense, for the discharger in an
enforcement action, to claim that it would have been necessary to halt or
reduce the business or activity of the facility in order to maintain storm
water quality and minimize any adverse impact that the discharge may cause.



(Ord. 012-100, passed 4-9-2012)



CONSTRUCTION SITE RUNOFF MANAGEMENT



§ 155.40  PERIMETER CONTROL PLAN.



   The permittee shall secure the perimeter prior to any land disturbance
to decrease off-site sedimentation once construction begins.



   (A)   Control plan objectives.



      (1)   Focus on downstream points and outfall areas and does
not necessitate protection of the entire site boundary;



      (2)   Protect adjacent properties by the use of vegetated
strips along lower perimeters, sediment barriers, filters, diversion berms,
sediment basins or other means acceptable to the city;



      (3)   Protect all points of discharge from outlets such as
pipes, drains, culverts, conduits and channels;



      (4)   Minimize erosion and control sedimentation; and



      (5)   Reduce the velocity of flows from the project site.



   (B)   Control plan requirements.



      (1)   The permittee shall utilize sediment control measures
that consider the type of flow, site terrain, soil type and other relevant
factors;



      (2)   Buffer strips may only be utilized for sheet flow;



      (3)   Supplemental control measures shall be utilized when a
single control device or measure proves ineffective; and



      (4)   Location and description of construction entrances and
exits that comply, or exceed, with BMP minimum standards.



(Ord. 012-100, passed 4-9-2012)



§ 155.41  PERIMETER AND OUTFALL INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   The perimeter and outfall protection inspection must be
performed prior to the permittee’s breaking ground or disturbing soil with
exception for installation of sediment control practices at the hydrologic
perimeter and outfall(s) of a construction site. The inspection shall include
participation by the city, the permittee and the permittee’s contractor.



   (B)   The perimeter and outfall protection inspection may only be
performed after the review and acceptance by the city of a Perimeter Control
Plan.



   (C)   Clearing, except that necessary to establish perimeter
sediment control devices, shall not begin until perimeter and outfall
sediment control devices have been installed and have been stabilized.
Activities necessary to establish the perimeter controls are exempt from
initial inspection.



   (D)   The city shall inspect the proposed construction site within
seven normal business days after the submittal of the plan and installation
of the perimeter protection devices.



      (1)   The inspector shall in writing either approve the
portion of work completed or notify the permittee where the work fails to
comply with the approved perimeter protection plan.



      (2)   Failure by the city to perform the inspection within
seven normal business days will allow the permittee to begin land-disturbing
activities, but may be subject to subsequent inspections by the city and
revisions in the Perimeter Protection Plan.



      (3)   Inspection of perimeter and outfall protection measures
shall consist of a written checklist for each type of protective measure to
ensure that it was installed according to the approved plan and site-specific
conditions.



      (4)   Measures shown on the plan may be modified at the time
of inspection pursuant to agreement between the city and the permittee’s
engineer or qualified professional.



(Ord. 012-100, passed 4-9-2012)



§ 155.42  OTHER INSPECTIONS.



   The city may inspect a permitted construction site in order to
determine compliance with this chapter. The city may determine and establish
inspection schedules necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter
within access provided in § 155.05 of this chapter.



(Ord. 012-100, passed 4-9-2012)



§ 155.43  STORM WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN PERMIT.



   (A)   By accepting the permit, the permittee automatically
acknowledges and accepts that the city has the right to perform inspections
of the project site.



   (B)   The permittee shall complete a permit application that
includes a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP), Perimeter Control
Plan (PCP) and Post-Construction Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan
(P-SWPPP) to be completed, sealed and signed by a licensed professional
engineer and/or land surveyor as appropriate and submitted to the city
representative.



   (C)   The plan shall include and/or address the following elements:



      (1)   Area vicinity map showing current zoning, adjoining
property owners and street lines within 100 feet of the project boundaries
all drawn at a scale not greater than one inch equals 2,000 feet;



      (2)   North arrow and its basis;



      (3)   Legend explaining symbols and abbreviations used on the
plan;



      (4)   “Do not disturb limits” for construction activity
indicated by a heavy dashed line and labeled as such;



      (5)   Boundary of site defined by bearings and distances and
indicated by a heavy solid line;



      (6)   Drawing(s) at a scale not greater than one inch equals
100 feet. In the case of an unusually large development, a scale of one inch
equals 200 feet may be acceptable;



      (7)   Acreage of the total site and acreage of the project
site (if different);



      (8)   Directly connected impervious area (DCIA);



      (9)   Impervious areas as measured in square feet;



      (10)   Benchmark location(s), description(s) and elevation(s)
at sea level;



      (11)   Basis of elevation datum;



      (12)   Name, address and telephone number of the owner,
developer, permittee and project engineer;



      (13)   Existing and proposed topography at two-foot contour
intervals;



      (14)   Mapping accuracy shall conform to national standards of
mapping;



      (15)   Location of sinkholes, streams, steep slopes, known
springs and watercourses;



      (16)   Location of any existing buildings or structures;



      (17)   Location of any pertinent utilities, sanitary sewers,
water and storm water facilities on the property or within 50 feet of the
site;



      (18)   Elevations, dimensions, locations and the extent of all
planned grading indicated with proposed contours;



      (19)   A grading plan for borrow pits, quarries and
material-processing facilities based on the findings of soil site
investigations;



      (20)   Design details of temporary and permanent structural
controls;



      (21)   Approximate location of the 100-year floodplain or a
statement by a professional engineer or professional land surveyor that the
site is not located in an area subject to flooding. The basis for this
determination shall be shown;



      (22)   A detailed quantity estimate for storm water management
controls and measures;



      (23)   Identification of perimeter controls at outfalls and
areas where construction site drainage leaves the property boundary or
disturbed area(s);



      (24)   Arrows indicating drainage flow patterns;



      (25)   Location, dimensions, detailed specifications and
construction details of all temporary and permanent storm water quality
measures;



      (26)   Temporary stabilization plans and sequence of
implementation;



      (27)   Permanent stabilization plans and sequence of
implementation;



      (28)   Anticipated construction sequence describing the
relationship between implementation of storm water quality measures and
stages of construction activities;



      (29)   Anticipated inspection and maintenance requirements for
permanent and temporary measures. This shall include the expected frequency
of routine inspections and maintenance activities such as removal of sediment
and waste concrete;



      (30)   Management practices or other controls to address the
following:



         (a)   Waste concrete management;



         (b)   Material delivery, handling and storage;



         (c)   Sanitary/septic waste management;



         (d)   Solid waste/trash and debris management;



         (e)   Vehicle and equipment cleaning, fueling and
maintenance;



         (f)   Sensitive and vegetated area preservation;



         (g)   Pit and channel dewatering operations;



         (h)   Contaminated soil management as defined and
approved by the state’s Divisions of Water and Waste Management;



         (i)   Hazardous materials and waste management as
defined and approved by the state’s Divisions of Water and Waste Management;



         (j)   Pesticides, herbicides and fertilizer use; and



         (k)   Long-term storm water quality treatment.



      (31)   Per KDOW’s KYR100000, Storm Water Discharges
Associated with Construction Activities, additional measures may be necessary
in the plan if discharges to any of the following occur: water
classifications including cold water aquatic habitats, exceptional waters,
outstanding natural resource waters, and outstanding state resource waters;
waters with an approved total maximum daily load; waters on the § 303(d)
list of impaired waters; and



      (32)   Per the discretion of the city, additional measures may
be required in order to adequately protect water quality and provide
consistency with state and federal requirements.



   (D)   The permittee shall notify the city in writing of any
substantial field changes made to the approved Storm Water Quality Management
Plan. Changes made to the Plan must be approved by the city representative.



   (E)   The city shall review the SWPPP within a reasonable time
frame, typically 30 calendar days, from date of submission and issue or deny
the requested permit. Failure to do so will allow the person to proceed with
land-disturbing activities in accordance with BMPs and the submitted SWPPP.
However, the city still reserves the right to review and require changes it
determines appropriate.



   (F)   (1)   Although a separate storm water permit is not
required for individual lots disturbing less than one acre within a larger
permitted project, a building permit is required.



      (2)   All storm water management measures necessary to comply
with this chapter must be implemented in accordance with the permitted plan
for the larger project and adhere to the general standard or those of a
common area plan.



      (3)   The individual permittee is responsible for the
installation and maintenance of all erosion prevention and sediment control
measures until the site is stabilized.



      (4)   The permittee, whether owning the property or acting as
the representative of the property owner, shall submit to the city the
following information for review and approval prior to the issuance of a
building permit:



         (a)   Dimensions, elevations, drainage patterns and
swales, and location of existing buildings and natural features that are
pertinent to this chapter;



         (b)   Proposed drainage patterns;



         (c)   Location of the construction access to the site;
and



         (d)   Location of perimeter erosion and sediment control
measures prior to land disturbance.



      (5)   Temporary erosion prevention and sediment control
measures may be removed for completion of the finish grade. Permanent
stabilization to include either sod or mulched-seeding as appropriate for
seasonal conditions shall be completed within 14 days prior to removal of
temporary erosion prevention and sediment control measures.



(Ord. 012-100, passed 4-9-2012)



§ 155.44  POST-CONSTRUCTION STORM WATER MANAGEMENT.



   (A)   Storm water quality management. The permittee shall complete a
permit application that includes a Post-Construction Storm Water Pollution
Prevention Plan (P-SWPPP) to be completed, sealed and signed by a licensed
professional engineer and/or land surveyor as appropriate and submitted to
the city representative.



   (B)   Post-construction storm water pollution prevention plan. A
SWQMP permit requires a review and submittal of a Post-Construction Storm
Water Pollution Prevention Plan (P-SWPPP). The Post-Construction SWPPP shall
include the following information:



      (1)   A description of the proposed land use including amount
of impervious area, directly connected impervious area and nature of the
development;



      (2)   Location, dimensions, detailed specifications and
construction details of all post- construction storm water quality Best
Management Practices (BMPs), as defined in the city guidance documents;



      (3)   A sequence describing when each post-construction storm
water quality BMP will be installed;



      (4)   A long-term operation and maintenance agreement
containing maintenance guidelines for all post-construction storm water
quality measures to facilitate their proper long-term function. This
agreement shall be made available to future parties, including property
owners, who will assume responsibility for the operation and maintenance of
the post construction storm water quality measures;



      (5)   The P-SWPPP shall include provisions for buffers.



         (a)   The waterway buffer will be used to define areas
where land-disturbance activities shall be permitted, but construction of any
building or structure shall not be permitted.



         (b)   A waterway buffer shall be applied to all
waterways serving more than 25 acres of tributary area or presented on a U.S.
Geological Survey map as a blue line stream.



         (c)   The waterway buffer shall be defined as the
greater of:



            1.   Area contained within a boundary established
by the floodplain boundary as defined by FEMA or city master planning; or



            2.   Where a floodplain is not defined or
calculated, the buffer will be 25 feet on each side from the top of waterway
bank as defined by geomorphic shape (not by the current water surface
elevation).



         (d)   The waterway buffer and floodplain may be used for
application of storm water quality devices. This may only be permitted if
erosion prevention and sediment control, water quality and cut list fill
policies are adequately addressed as determined by the city according to the
provisions of this chapter.



         (e)   Exemptions are granted so long as, erosion
prevention and sediment control, water quality and cut-fill policies are
adequately addressed. Exemptions shall be granted for:



            1.   Roads and utilities crossing waterways;



            2.   Pedestrian trails and walkways proximate to
waterways; and



            3.   Other exemptions may be made at the
discretion of the city representative.



      (6)   A licensed professional engineer in the commonwealth
shall stamp all construction plans and long-term maintenance documentation.
This shall include all proposed improvements or modifications to existing or
new storm water infrastructure and other related improvements or
modifications; and



      (7)   The city may require the posting of a maintenance bond
to secure the structural integrity of said facilities as well as the
functioning of said facilities in accordance with the approved
Post-Construction SWPPP for a term of 24 months from the date of acceptance
of dedication. An irrevocable letter of credit can be used as the financial
assurance in lieu of a maintenance bond although the contribution shall be
equivalent to the amount that would be estimated for the maintenance bond.
The maintenance bond shall be calculated as 20% of the estimated construction
cost and may be reduced to 10% after 12 months if there are no concerns by
the city representative.



   (C)   BMP design requirements and criteria.



      (1)   The city reserves the right to develop or adopt other
guidance documents to serve as design and implementation standards. Other
guidance documents distributed by the city should be reviewed and considered
when preparing the Post-Construction SWPPP. These documents may be applied as
standards by which designs are to be prepared and controls implemented.



      (2)   The city shall have authority to implement this chapter
by appropriate regulations, guidance or other related materials. In this
regard, technical, administrative or procedural matters may be modified as
needed to meet the objectives defined herein, so long as such modifications
as to technical, administrative or procedural matters are not contrary or
beyond the intent of the objectives defined above.



         (a)   Regulations, guidance or other related materials
that may be given authority by this chapter may include, but are not limited
to: best management practice (BMP) manuals; design regulations and
requirements; submittal checklists; review checklists; inspection checklists;
certifications; storm water management manuals; and operation and maintenance
manuals.



         (b)   Materials may include information deemed
appropriate by the city including guidance and specifications for the
preparation of grading plans, selecting environmentally sound practices for
managing storm water, minimum specifications and requirements, more complete
definitions and performance standards.



         (c)   The above referenced documents may restrict or
prevent the use of specific products, techniques or management practices
(that are to be accepted by the public or are deemed to have a negative
impact on public infrastructure or the MS4) that have been identified as
unacceptable for performance, maintenance or other technically based reasons.



         (d)   Documents referenced above may be updated
periodically to reflect the most current and effective practices and shall be
made available to the public. However, the failure to update the manual shall
not relieve any applicant from the obligation to comply with this chapter,
and shall not prevent the city from imposing the most current and effective
practices.



      (3)   The P-SWPPP shall include provisions for storm water
quality BMPs functioning independently or in combination. Acceptable storm
water quality BMPs shall be defined by policy and guidance documents as
approved by the Storm Water Board.



      (4)   The P-SWPPP shall include provisions for storm water
quality BMPs that are designed to treat, filter, flocculate, infiltrate,
screen, evapotranspirate, harvest cool and reuse storm water runoff, or
otherwise manage the quality of storm water runoff from an eightieth
percentile precipitation event or 0.61 inches of precipitation.



         (a)   The P-SWPPP shall identify pollutants of concern,
based on land use. Post-construction land use examples may include, but are
not limited to, single-family and multi-family residential properties, gas
and refueling stations, truck stops and vehicle service stations, vehicle
washing facilities, commercial business, parking facilities, waste transfer
stations, industrial sites, uncovered material storage areas, soil stockpile
and compost processing facilities and the like.



         (b)   The P-SWPPP shall demonstrate that target
pollutants have been identified as well as treatment solutions for those
pollutants. Target pollutants to be considered based on land use may include
heavy metals, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), hydrocarbons,
nutrients, temperature, pathogens, sediment (TSS), trash, chemicals, organic
debris and other materials on site that could adversely impact water quality.



         (c)   All runoff generated up to and including the
eightieth percentile storm event shall be routed through appropriately sized
water quality treatment devices, which intercept and collect target
pollutants to prevent them from leaving the site.



         (d)   Storm water detention/retention facilities shall
be designed to address the rate at which flow is released over the entire
runoff discharge period and the volume of discharge over the critical
design-storm period if defined by city storm water master plans. The outlet
structure shall be designed as a v-notch weir or other multiple stage
configurations capable of controlling the discharge rates for the first
flush, two-, ten- and 25-year design-storm events. The outlet structure shall
be designed to safely bypass the 100-year storm event.



         (e)   Additional requirements may be necessary per
KYG200000 for discharges to waters with an approved total maximum daily load
(TMDL) or waters in § 155.04’s list of impaired waters.



      (5)   Soil bioengineering, “green” and other “soft”
slope and stream bank stabilization methods shall receive preference over rip
rap, concrete and other hard armoring techniques.



      (6)   Supportive data must be submitted to justify the type of
facility selected. If the facility is designed to retain (volume control) all
or a significant portion of runoff (as opposed to temporarily detain), then
appropriate soils analyses findings shall be submitted to the city. This
submission shall also discuss the impacts the facility will have on local
karst topography as found through a geotechnical investigation of the site.
The facility may be designed to infiltrate runoff to groundwater rather than
transmit it downstream under conditions up to a ten-year storm event. It must
be able to bypass all other storms including 100-year event with a discharge
rate equivalent to or less than pre-development conditions without negatively
impacting the 100-year floodplain above or below the site. If data indicates
that the facility cannot retain a significant portion of the runoff (95%)
then the facility must be designed to detain runoff.



      (7)   If available, each P-SWPPP shall be evaluated for
consistency with the storm water master plan or watershed study for the major
watershed or watersheds within which the project site is located. The
individual project evaluation will determine if storm water quantity and
quality management practices can adequately serve the property and limit
impacts to downstream public and private properties. The presence of a
regional facility(s) will be considered in determining the extent to which
storm water quantity and/or quality controls will be necessary.



      (8)   The city reserves the right to require superseding or
additional treatment criteria or objectives for specific pollutant(s) as
necessary to meet overall storm water quality management program objectives
or directives under a watershed improvement or total maximum daily load
(TMDL) program as administered by the USEPA or the commonwealth.



      (9)   (a)   All properties are expected to implement
on-site storm water quality control measures, but the extent of application
may be reduced given the availability, proximity and nature of regional storm
water quality BMPs.



         (b)   The extent and type of on-site storm water quality
management practices implemented shall be proportionate to the land use, and
proximity to regional storm water quality management practices.



   (D)   BMP ownership and easements.



      (1)   Any storm water management facility or BMP which
services individual property owners shall be privately owned. General routine
maintenance (controlling vegetative growth and removing debris) shall be
provided by the owner(s). The owner shall maintain a perpetual, non-exclusive
easement that allows for access for inspection and emergency maintenance by
the city. The city has the right, but not the duty, to enter premises for
emergency repairs.



      (2)   Any storm water management facility or BMP which
services an individual residential subdivision in which the facility or BMP
is within designated open areas or serves as an amenity with an established
homeowners association shall be privately owned and maintained consistent
with provisions of this chapter. The owner shall maintain a perpetual,
non-exclusive easement which allows access for inspection and emergency
maintenance by the city. The city has the right, but not the duty, to enter
premises for emergency repairs.



      (3)   Any storm water management facility or BMP which
services commercial and industrial development shall be privately owned and
maintained. The owner shall maintain a perpetual, non- exclusive easement
which allows access for inspection and emergency maintenance by the city. The
city has the right, but not the duty, to enter premises for emergency repairs.



      (4)   All regional storm water management control facilities
proposed by the owners, if approved and accepted by the city for dedication
as a public regional facility, shall be publicly owned and/or maintained. All
other storm water management control facilities and BMPs shall be privately
owned and/or maintained unless accepted for maintenance by the city.



      (5)   The city may require dedication of privately owned storm
water facilities, which discharge to the city storm water system. This shall
be at the approval of the City Council.



   (E)   Regional facilities management.



      (1)   The objective of a regional storm water management
facility, pond or other device, is to address the storm water management
concerns in a given watershed with greater economy and efficiency than
possible through individual facilities. The intended result is fewer storm
water management facilities to maintain in the affected watershed while
sustaining efficiency.



      (2)   The city encourages regional storm water quantity and/or
quality management practices, serving 25 to 250 acres of tributary area,
which may be consistently and efficiently managed and maintained. These types
of practices will be encouraged in order to replace or reduce the
implementation of on-site storm water quantity and/or quality management
practices, as determined to be appropriate by the city.



      (3)   Where a regional storm water management facility has
been established by one or more local governments, or by an authority
operating on behalf of one or more local governments, a development or
property may participate in said program in lieu of runoff control required
by this chapter. This may be permitted; provided that:



         (a)   Runoff from the development drains to an approved
existing or proposed public regional storm water management facility that
will be operational within one year;



         (b)   Participation in the form of contribution of
funds, contribution of land, contribution of storm water management facility
construction work, or a combination of these, the total value of which shall
be in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by the city;



         (c)   The city finds that the storm water quality
management plans are in compliance with all other applicable requirements and
ordinances; and



         (d)   Each fiscal or in-kind contribution from a
development owner participating in a regional storm water quality management
facility shall be used for acquisition, design, construction or maintenance
of one or more such facilities in the same watershed in which the development
is located.



      (4)   Detention facilities may, and are encouraged to, be
designed to serve multiple purposes. For example, runoff may be detained
under wet-weather conditions, but also serve as common or recreational areas
during dry weather conditions. Where multi-purpose facilities are provided,
or where flat grades or poorly draining soils are encountered, provisions for
adequate low-flow storm water management system may be required. Where the
retention/detention facility is planned to be used as a lake, pond or storm
water quality management practice with a permanent pool, water budget
calculations shall be performed and submitted to demonstrate that an adequate
permanent pool depth is expected during dry summer months.



   (F)   Long-term operation and maintenance agreements.



      (1)   Long-term operation and maintenance agreements shall
include a maintenance plan for all storm water quality BMPs in new
development or redevelopment that require more than general maintenance
(e.g., periodic mowing).



         (a)   The plan will be developed to ensure that the
storm water quality BMP(s) is (are) kept functional. The maintenance
agreement will specify minimum operation and maintenance requirements and
intervals to be performed by the property owner.



         (b)   The plan shall address schedules for inspections
and techniques for operation and maintenance including vegetation clearing or
mowing and removing accumulated trash, debris, sediment pollutants and other
forms of pollution.



         (c)   The agreement shall be noted on the final plat
with the appropriate notation on the particular lot(s).



         (d)   The agreement shall be included with property
ownership title documents and shall be binding on the owner, its
administrators, executors, assigns, heirs and any other successors in
interest.



         (e)   The format for the long-term operational and
maintenance agreement shall be provided through example by the city or
through guidance documents.



         (f)   Care must be taken to ensure that any required
facilities do not become nuisances or health hazards. Detention and retention
facilities should be designed to require minimal maintenance, and maintenance
expectations must be clearly stated in the long-term operation and
maintenance agreement.



         (g)   When a storm water quality BMP serves more than
parcel, a home or property owners’ association or binding contract for the
purpose of operation and maintenance is required. The owners’ association
shall be responsible for operation and maintenance as directed by this
chapter.



      (2)   Where the permanent storm water runoff control
facilities are designed to manage runoff from property in a single entity
ownership, the maintenance responsibility for the storm water control
facilities shall be with the single entity owner.



         (a)   A SINGLE ENTITY shall be defined as an
association, public or private corporation, partnership firm, trust, estate
or any other legal entity allowed to own real estate exclusive of an
individual lot owner.



         (b)   The stated responsibilities of the entity shall be
documented in the long-term operation and maintenance agreement. Terms
including owning, operating and maintaining the facilities shall be submitted
with plans in application for a SWQMP permit for an adequacy determination.
Approval of a SWQMP shall be conditioned upon the approval of these terms.
These terms shall be in writing, shall be in recordable form, and shall, in
addition to any other terms deemed necessary by the city, contain a provision
permitting inspection at any reasonable time by the city of all facilities
deemed critical in the public welfare.



         (c)   Upon approval of the storm water quality BMPs by
the city, the facility owner(s) shall demonstrate the ability to guarantee
and apply the financial resources necessary for long-term maintenance
requirements. The funding mechanism shall be in a form approved by the city.
The city will only approve funding mechanism(s) for long-term maintenance
responsibilities that can be demonstrated to be permanent or transferable to
another entity with equivalent longevity.



         (d)   In the event that proposed funding is through an
owners’ association, then it must be demonstrated that the association may
not dissolve unless long-term operation and maintenance activities are
accepted by another entity with equivalent longevity and adequate funding.
Furthermore, the owners association’s responsibility must be stated in the
association’s declaration, covenants or by-laws, as appropriate.



         (e)   Unless made specifically clear in the preliminary
stages of the site design and construction plan review procedure, it will be
assumed that all storm water detention, retention, treatment or storage
facilities and/or devices shall be owned, operated and maintained by a single
entity as defined above.



      (3)   Where the city has accepted an offer of dedication of
the permanent storm water quality BMPs, the city shall be responsible for
operation and maintenance.



(Ord. 012-100, passed 4-9-2012)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 155.55  RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   It will be the responsibility of the permittee to ensure
compliance with this chapter and implementation of the SWQMP permit and
long-term operation and maintenance agreement.



   (B)   However, all responsible persons, regardless of ownership,
must comply with the requirements of this chapter and may be held accountable
to the enforcement provisions herein.



(Ord. 012-100, passed 4-9-2012; Ord. 017-227, passed 4-10-2017)



§ 155.56  DISCONNECTION OF ILLICIT DISCHARGES.



   The person responsible for any connection in violation of §§ 155.25
through 155.27 of this chapter, with regard to illicit discharges, shall
immediately cause the illegal connection to be disconnected and redirected,
if necessary, to the appropriate sanitary sewer system upon approval by the
operating body of said sanitary sewer system and the Kentucky Division of
Water.



(Ord. 012-100, passed 4-9-2012; Ord. 017-227, passed 4-10-2017)



§ 155.57  LIABILITY OF EXPENSES INCURRED.



   Any person responsible for illicit discharges or noncompliance with
BMPs at industrial and/or construction sites, and who fails to correct any
prohibited condition or discontinue any prohibited activity at the order of
the city, shall be liable to the city for expenses incurred in abating
pollution. This may include expenses incurred in testing, measuring,
sampling, collecting, removing, treating, and disposing of the polluting
materials and preventing further noncompliance and/or illicit discharges.



(Ord. 012-100, passed 4-9-2012; Ord. 017-227, passed 4-10-2017)



§ 155.58  ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS.



   (A)   (1)   The city shall institute appropriate actions or
proceedings by law or equity for the enforcement of this chapter within the
areas of jurisdiction previously described. Any court of competent
jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or
permanent injunctions, and other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.



      (2)   Each day of noncompliance is considered a separate
offense; and nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such
other lawful action as necessary to prevent or remedy any violation,
including application for injunctive relief.



   (B)   Any of the enforcement remedies and penalties, provided in
this chapter are available to be applied independently or in a sequence
deemed necessary, shall be available to the city in response to violations of
this chapter. If the person, property or facility has or is required to have
a storm water discharge permit from the KDOW, the city may alert the
appropriate state authorities of the violation.



   (C)   Notice of deficiency (NOD).



      (1)   In instances when the city, based on observations or
investigations, has reasonable cause to believe that a deficiency of this
chapter has occurred, the city is authorized to notify the permittee in
writing of the following items:



         (a)   Date and location of site observation(s) or
investigation(s);



         (b)   An itemized list of any deficiencies or failures;



         (c)   A deadline in which the deficiencies are to be
eliminated; and



         (d)   The written notice of deficiency shall be hand
delivered and/or sent by certified mail to the permittee.



      (2)   It will be the responsibility of the permittee to
determine what corrective actions are needed. If the deadline for eliminating
the deficiency is not met, it is the responsibility of the permittee to
document that the deadline has not been met and request an extension to be
evaluated by the city on a case by case basis.



   (D)   Permit denial. At the discretion of the city representative or
designated agent, it may withhold or delay any permit application, inspection
requests, appeals, or other plan approvals from person(s) that have
unresolved enforcement matters.



   (E)   Notice of violation (NOV). Whenever the city or its designated
representative finds that any person owning or occupying a premise has
violated or is violating this chapter or order issued hereunder, the
enforcement official may serve, by personal service, or by registered or
certified mail, upon said Person a written NOV. Within 30 days of the receipt
of this notice, or shorter period as may be prescribed in the NOV, an
explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and
prevention thereof, which shall include specific required actions, must be
submitted to the city or its designated representative. Submission of this
plan shall in no way relieve liabilities for violations occurring before or
after receipt of the NOV.



   (F)   Stop work order.



      (1)   In the event compliance cannot be achieved within the
terms of a notice of deficiency, notice of violation, permit suspension or
permit revocation, the city may proceed with a stop work order. In the event
the city representative perceives that there is an immediate adverse impact
or blatant disregard for the requirements, it may issue a stop work order
without first administering a notice of deficiency, notice of violation,
permit suspension or permit revocation.



      (2)   No construction activities, other than those required to
address deficiencies/violations, are allowed on a project site when a stop
work order has been issued.



      (3)   The written stop work order shall be sent by certified
mail to the permittee.



      (4)   The written stop work order shall specify deficiencies
and violations that must be corrected prior to a city inspection for
consideration of removing the stop work order.



      (5)   The permittee shall notify the city in writing of the
anticipated date for completion of the corrective action(s) and provide at
least two normal business days’ notice for the city to perform a compliance
inspection.



      (6)   When a stop work order is removed, the city shall
provide written notice to the permittee.



   (G)   Permit suspension or revocation.



      (1)   In the event compliance cannot be achieved within the
terms of a notice of deficiency and/or notice of violation, the city may
proceed with permit suspension or revocation.



      (2)   Land-disturbing activities are not allowed on a project
site when a permit has been suspended or revoked other than those required to
address deficiencies/violations.



      (3)   The written permit suspension or revocation shall be
hand delivered and/or sent by certified mail to the permittee.



      (4)   A permit suspension requires that the permittee submit a
revised portion of SWQMP as indicated by the city for review and acceptance
by the city of the specific issue of contention. When a permit suspension is
removed, the city shall provide written notice to the permittee.



      (5)   When a permit is revoked, the permittee must reapply for
a permit through the process of requesting a new permit.



      (6)   A permit revocation requires that the permittee resubmit
a SWQMP for a full review and acceptance by the city representative.



   (H)   Compliance order. If a person violates the provisions of this
chapter, the city or its designated representative, may give notice to the
owner or to any person in responsible charge of the subject property ordering
that unlawful conditions existing thereupon be abated within a schedule
defined from the date of such notice.



      (1)   The enforcement official shall have the authority to
establish elements of a compliance SWQMP and require the owner implement such
a plan as may be reasonably necessary to fulfill the purposes of this
chapter. The enforcement official may establish the requirements of BMPs.



      (2)   The notice and order may be given, provided that if in
the opinion of the city or its designated representative, the unlawful
condition is such that it is of imminent danger or peril to the public, then
the city or its designated representative shall, with or without notice,
proceed to abate the same, and the cost thereof shall be charged against the
property. The city, as described further in this division, may recover the
cost of such actions from the property owner.



(Ord. 012-100, passed 4-9-2012; Ord. 017-227, passed 4-10-2017)  Penalty,
see § 155.99



§ 155.59  APPEALS.



   (A)   In order to have an appeal considered, the applicant shall
submit a written request within 15 calendar days of the decision made by the
city representative to the City of Shepherdsville.



   (B)   A hearing date shall be set within 30 calendar days from
receipt of the appeal.



   (C)   A written, final decision shall be rendered no more than five
business days after the hearing in writing.



(Ord. 012-100, passed 4-9-2012; Ord. 017-227, passed 4-10-2017)



§ 155.60  NOTICE.



   Notice shall be delivered to the last known address of the property
owner on record at the Property Valuation Administrator’s Office. Notice
shall be deemed served by certified mail, return receipt requested.



(Ord. 012-100, passed 4-9-2012; Ord. 017-227, passed 4-10-2017)



§ 155.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Fines. A person that has been found to have been in violation
of any provision of this chapter, may be assessed a civil penalty not to
exceed the amount presented in this section.



      (1)   The penalty shall increase by 25% of the previous
penalty amount for every subsequent, but separate offense made by the same
person. The penalty shall be in addition to other enforcement actions of this
section.



      (2)   The penalty may be assessed for each day, beyond
schedules applied in compliance orders or other schedules issued to the
property owner or other person responsible, for unauthorized activity defined
in this section.



      (3)   In determining the amount of the penalty a penalty
schedule may be developed by the city representative with confirmation by
resolution of the City Council that shall consider the following:



         (a)   The degree and extent of the harm to the natural
resources, to the public health, or to the public or private property
resulting from the violation;



         (b)   The duration and gravity of the violation;



         (c)   The effect on ground or surface water quality;



         (d)   The cost of rectifying the damage;



         (e)   The amount of money saved by noncompliance;



         (f)   Whether the violation was committed willfully or
intentionally;



         (g)   The cumulative effect of other enforcement actions
applied for the same offense;



         (h)   The prior record of the violator in complying or
failing to comply with the storm water quality management program; and



         (i)   The costs of enforcement to the city.



      (4)   The maximum fines will be determined by the type of
offense. This indicates the maximum that may be imposed for a first offense
and does not reflect the increases described above for repeat offenses.



         (a)   Development without or inconsistent with permit.
Up to $7,500. To engage in any development, use, construction, remodeling or
other activity of any nature in any way without all required permits
inconsistent with any approved plan, permit, certificate or other form of
authorization granted for such activity.



         (b)   Violation by act or omission. Up to $5,000. To
violate, by act or omission, any term, variance, modification, condition or
qualification placed by the city or its designated representative upon any
required permit, certificate, or other form of authorization of the use,
development, or other activity upon land or improvements thereon.



         (c)   Illicit discharge. Up to $5,000. Any person who is
found to have improperly disposed of any substance defined as an illicit
discharge, not an allowable discharge or causes the city to be in
noncompliance with any applicable environmental permit.



         (d)   Household products. Up to $500. Any person who is
found to have improperly disposed of any substance not included in § 155.26
that was purchased over-the-counter for household use, in quantities
considered normal for household purposes, which upon discharge to the MS4 or
drainage network would have an adverse impact on water quality or cause the
city to be in noncompliance with any applicable environmental permit.



      (5)   In the event there are penalties assessed by the state
against the city caused by a person, said person shall be assessed the
equivalent amount of civil penalty. This shall include, but is not limited
to, penalties for improper disposal or illegal dumping, or illicit connection
into the MS4.



   (B)   Administrative fee. Any person who undertakes any development
activity requiring a storm water management plan hereunder without first
submitting the plan for review and approval shall pay to the city, in
addition to any permit or inspection fee, an administrative fee which
reflects the actual cost of the corrective action.



   (C)   Order to clean and abate/restore. Any violator may be required
to clean and/or restore land to its condition prior to the violation.



   (D)   Cost recovery. If corrective action is not taken in the time
specified the city may take the corrective action. The cost of the corrective
action abatement and/or restoration shall be borne by the property owner. If
the invoice is not paid within 90 calendar days, the enforcement official
shall have the authority to place a lien upon and against the property.
Alternatively, if the invoice is not satisfied within 90 calendar days, the
enforcement official is authorized to take all legal measures available to
enforce the lien as a judgment, including, without limitation, enforcing the
lien in an action brought for a money judgment, by delivery to the assessor
or a special assessment against the property.



   (E)   Injunctions and/or proceedings at law or in equity.



      (1)   Any violation of this chapter or of any condition,
order, requirement, or remedy adopted pursuant hereto may be restrained,
corrected, abated, mandated, or enjoined by other appropriate proceeding
pursuant to state law.



      (2)   The city shall pursue, through a court of component
jurisdiction, any penalties that are not paid in full.



   (F)   Fee or utility credit revocation or adjustment. This
enforcement tool is intended to be available or used if there are, at any
time, provisions for a property stormwater utility user fee funding mechanism
managed by the city. This enforcement tool permits that credits (reductions),
adjustments (increases) or other measures to modify fees or utility charges
may be revoked or added, in full or in part, if any provisions of this
chapter are violated. The city representative will develop and periodically
revise an adjustment/credit schedule for adoption by resolution of the City
Council.



   (G)   Civil actions. In addition to any other remedies provided in
this chapter, any violation of this chapter may be enforced by civil action
brought by the city’s attorney. Monies recovered under this division shall
be paid to the city to be used exclusively for costs associated with
implementing or enforcing the provisions of this ordinance and the storm
water quality program. In any such action, the city may seek, as appropriate,
any or all of the following remedies:



      (1)   A temporary and/or permanent injunction;



      (2)   Assessment of the violator for the costs of any
investigation, inspection or monitoring survey which lead to the
establishment of the violation, and for the reasonable costs of preparing and
bringing legal action under this division;



      (3)   Costs incurred in removing, correcting or terminating
the adverse effects resulting from the violation; and



      (4)   Compensatory damages for loss or destruction to water
quality, wildlife, fish and aquatic life.



   (H)   Emergency orders and abatements. The enforcement official may
order the abatement of any discharge from any source to the storm water
conveyance system when, in the opinion of the enforcement official, the
discharge causes or threatens to cause a condition that presents an imminent
danger to the public health, safety, or welfare of the environment or a
violation of a KPDES permit. In emergency situations where the property owner
or other responsible party is unavailable and time constraints are such that
service of a notice and order to abate cannot be effected without presenting
an immediate danger to the public health, safety, or welfare of the
environment or a violation of a KPDES permit, the city may perform or cause
to be performed such work as shall be necessary to abate said threat or
danger. The costs of any such abatement shall be borne by the owner and shall
be collectable in accordance with the provisions of this division.



   (I)   Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the
enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or
permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a
threat to public health, safety, welfare and environment and is declared and
deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief
as provided by state and local law.



   (J)   Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this chapter
are not exclusive of any remedies available under any applicable federal,
state or local law and the city may seek cumulative remedies.



(Ord. 012-100, passed 4-9-2012; Ord. 017-227, passed 4-10-2017)



CHAPTER 156:  FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION



Section



General Provisions



   156.01   Statutory authorization



   156.02   Findings of fact



   156.03   Statement of purpose



   156.04   Objectives



   156.05   Definitions



   156.06   Lands to which chapter applies



   156.07   Basis for establishing special flood hazard areas



   156.08   Development permit



   156.09   Compliance



   156.10   Abrogation and greater restrictions



   156.11   Interpretation



   156.12   Warning and disclaimer of liability



   156.13   Local Administrator



   156.14   Appeals and variance procedures



Flood Hazard Reduction



   156.25   General construction standards



   156.26   Specific standards



   156.27   Standards for streams without established base flood
elevation and/or floodways



   156.28   Standards for shallow flooding zones



   156.29   Standards for subdivision proposals



   156.30   Standards for accessory structures in all zones beginning
with the letter “A”



   156.31   Critical facilities



 



   156.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Building Regulations; Construction, see Ch. 151



   Post-Construction Storm Water Runoff, see Ch. 154



   Storm Water Quality Management, see Ch. 155



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 156.01  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.



   The legislature of the commonwealth has, in KRS 67.084 et seq.,
delegated to local government units the authority to adopt regulations
designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the city hereby adopts the following floodplain
management ordinance, as follows.



(Ord. 016-211, passed 5-16-2016)



§ 156.02  FINDINGS OF FACT.



   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic
inundations which result in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the
tax base, all which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare.



   (B)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains causing increased flood height and velocity, and
by the location in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods or
hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed or
otherwise protected from flood damage.



(Ord. 016-211, passed 5-16-2016)



§ 156.03  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety
and general welfare and to minimize public and private loss due to flooding
by provisions designed to:



   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health,
safety and property due to water erosion hazards, or which result in damaging
increases in erosion or in flood height or velocity;



   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;



   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels
and natural protective barriers which accommodate or channel flood waters;



   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which
may increase erosion or flood damage; and



   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to
other areas.



(Ord. 016-211, passed 5-16-2016)



§ 156.04  OBJECTIVES.



   The objectives of this chapter are to:



   (A)   Protect human life and health;



   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;



   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated
with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;



   (D)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;



   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as
water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines; streets and bridges
located in areas of special flood hazard;



   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use
and development of areas of special flood hazard or other flood-prone areas
in such a manner as to minimize future flood blighted areas caused by
flooding;



   (G)   Ensure that potential homebuyers are on notice that property
is in a special flood hazard area; and



   (H)   Ensure that those who occupy a special flood hazard area
assume responsibility for their actions.



(Ord. 016-211, passed 5-16-2016)



§ 156.05  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   A ZONE. Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 1% annual chance
flood (100-year flood). Base flood elevations (BFEs) are not determined.



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE). A structure located on the
same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure. ACCESSORY STRUCTURES should
constitute a minimal initial investment, may not be used for human habitation
and should be designed to have minimal flood damage potential. Examples of
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES are detached garages, carports, storage sheds, pole
barns and hay sheds.



   ACCESSORY USE. A use which is incidental and subordinate to the
principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located.



   ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING STRUCTURE). Any walled and roofed expansion to
the perimeter or height of a structure.



   AE ZONES. Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 1% annual chance
flood (100-year flood). Base flood elevations (BFEs) are determined.



   AH ZONE. An area of 100-year shallow flooding where depths are between
one and three feet (usually shallow ponding). Base flood elevations are
determined.



   AO ZONE. An area of 100-year shallow flooding where water depth is
between one and three feet (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain). Flood
depths are determined.



   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or from the Floodplain
Administrator’s ruling on a request for a variance.



   AR/A1 - A30, AR/AE, AR/AH, AR/AO AND AR/A ZONES. Special flood hazard
areas (SFHAs) that result from the de-certification of a previously
accredited flood protection system that is in the process of being restored
to provide a 100-year or greater level of flood protection. After restoration
is complete, these areas will still experience residual flooding from other
flooding sources.



   A99 ZONE. The part of the SFHA inundated by the 100-year flood which is
to be protected from the 100-year flood by a federal flood protection system
under construction. No base flood elevations are determined.



   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or AH Zone on a community’s
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) where the base flood depths range from one to
three feet, there is no clearly defined channel, the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.



   BASE FLOOD. A flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. (Also called the 100-YEAR FLOOD.) BASE FLOOD is
the term used throughout this chapter.



   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH
and AR/AO that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood
that has a 1% or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year.



   BASEMENT. Any area of a structure having its floor sub-grade (below
ground level) on all sides.



   BUILDING. See definition for STRUCTURE.



   COMMUNITY. A political entity having the authority to adopt and enforce
floodplain ordinances for the area under its jurisdiction.



   COMMUNITY FLOOD HAZARD AREA (CFHA). An area that has been determined by
the Floodplain Administrator (or other delegated, designated or qualified
community official) from available technical studies, historical information
and other available and reliable sources, which may be subject to periodic
inundation by flood waters that can adversely affect the public health,
safety and general welfare. This includes areas downstream from dams.



   COMMUNITY RATING SYSTEM (CRS). A program developed by the Federal
Insurance Administration to provide incentives to those communities in the
regular program to go beyond the minimum floodplain management requirements
to develop extra measures for protection from flooding.



   CRITICAL FACILITY. Any property that, if flooded, would result in
severe consequences to public health and safety or a facility which, if
unusable or unreachable because of flooding, would seriously and adversely
affect the health and safety of the public. CRITICAL FACILITIES include, but
are not limited to: housing likely to contain occupants not sufficiently
mobile to avoid injury or death unaided during a flood; schools, nursing
homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency response installations; vehicle
and equipment storage facilities; emergency operations centers likely to be
called upon before, during and after a flood; public and private utility
facilities important to maintaining or restoring normal services before,
during and after a flood; and those facilities or installations which
produce, use or store volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or
water-reactive materials, hazardous materials or hazardous waste.



   D ZONE. An area in which the flood hazard is undetermined.



   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.



   ELEVATED STRUCTURE. For insurance proposes, a non-basement structure
built to have the lowest floor elevated above ground level by foundation
walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings or columns.



   ELEVATION CERTIFICATE. A statement certified by a registered
professional engineer or surveyor on the FEMA-approved form in effect at the
time of certification that verifies a structure’s elevation and other
related information to verify compliance with this chapter.



   EMERGENCY PROGRAM. The initial phase under which a community
participates in the NFIP, intended to provide a first layer amount of
insurance at subsidized rates on all insurable structures in that community
before the effective date of the initial FIRM.



   ENCLOSURE. The portion of a structure below the lowest floor used
solely for parking of vehicles, limited storage or access to the structure.



   ENCROACHMENT. The physical advance or infringement of uses, plant
growth, fill, excavation, structures or development into a floodplain, which
may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.



   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. Any structure for which the “start of
construction” commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before
1-1-1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. EXISTING CONSTRUCTION may
also be referred to as EXISTING STRUCTURES.



   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed
before the effective date of the first floodplain management ordinance
adopted by a community.



   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).



   FIVE-HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD. The flood that has a 0.2% chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any year. Areas subject to the 500-YEAR FLOOD have a
moderate risk of flooding.



   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:



      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters;



      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source;



      (3)   Mudslides which are proximately caused by flooding and
are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry
land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited
along the path of the current; and



      (4)   The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a
lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by
waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly
caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water,
accompanied by a severe storm or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as
flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and
unforeseeable event which results in flooding.



   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM). A map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated the areas of flood hazards
and the regulatory floodway.



   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). A map on which the boundaries of the
flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and flood-related erosion areas having
special hazards have been designated as Zones A, M and/or E by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). A map on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated special flood hazard areas and risk
premium zones.



   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The report provided by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) containing flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) and/or the Flood Boundary Floodway Map (FBFM), and the water
surface elevation of the base flood.



   FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being
inundated by flood waters from any source.



   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The individual appointed by the community to
administer and enforce the floodplain management ordinances.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving
and enhancing natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited
to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management
ordinances and open space plans.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. This chapter and other zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other
applications of police power, which control development in flood-prone areas.
This term describes federal, state and/or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage
prevention and reduction.



   FLOOD-PROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation
facilities, structures and their contents.



   FLOOD-PROOFING CERTIFICATE. A certification by a registered
professional engineer or architect, the FEMA form in effect at the time of
certification stating that a non-residential structure, together with
attendant utilities and sanitary facilities is water-tight to a specified
design elevation with walls that are substantially impermeable to the passage
of water and all structural components are capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic flood forces, including the effects of buoyancy and
anticipated debris impact forces.



   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also
referred to as the REGULATORY FLOODWAY.



   FLOODWAY FRINGE. The area of the floodplain on either side of the
regulatory floodway.



   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above the BFE,
which is applied for the purposes of floodplain management. It is used to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than those calculated for the base flood. FREEBOARD must be
applied not just to the elevation of the lowest floor or flood-proofing
level, but also to the level of protection provided to all components of the
structure, such as building utilities, HVAC components and the like.



   FRAUD AND VICTIMIZATION. As related in § 156.14 of this chapter, means
that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the
public. In examining this requirement, the city will consider the fact that
every newly constructed structure adds to government responsibilities and
remains a part of the community for 50 to 100 years. Structures that are
permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during
all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners
of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs,
inconvenience, danger and suffering that those increased flood damages may
incur. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it
is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high
flood insurance rates.



   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE FACILITY. A facility, structure or other
development, which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is
located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only a
docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or
passengers, shipbuilding or ship repair. The term does not include long-term
storage, manufacture, sales or service facilities.



   GOVERNING BODY. The local governing unit (i.e., county or municipality)
that is empowered to adopt and implement ordinances to provide for the public
health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.



   HAZARD POTENTIAL. The possible adverse incremental consequences that
result from the release of water or stored contents due to failure of a dam
or miss-operation of a dam or appurtenances. The HAZARD POTENTIAL
classification of a dam does not reflect in any way the current condition of
a dam and its appurtenant structures (e.g., safety, structural integrity,
flood routing capacity).



   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.



   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:



      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;



      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary
of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a
registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;



      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic
places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved
by the Secretary of the Interior; or



      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic
places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:



         (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the
Secretary of the Interior; or



         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in
states without approved programs.



   INCREASED COST OF COMPLIANCE (ICC).



      (1)   Increased cost of compliance coverage means under the
standard flood insurance policy the cost to repair a substantially flood
damaged building that exceeds the minimal repair cost and that is required to
bring a substantially damaged building into compliance with the local flood
damage prevention ordinance. Acceptable mitigation measures are
flood-proofing (non-residential), relocation, elevation, demolition or any
combination thereof.



      (2)   ICC coverage is available on residential and
non-residential buildings (this category includes public or government
buildings, such as schools, libraries and municipal buildings) insured under
the NFTP.



   LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC). An official FEMA determination, by letter,
to amend or revise effective Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Flood Boundary and
Floodway Maps, and Flood Insurance Studies. LOMCs include the following
categories.



      (1)   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). A revision based on
technical data showing that a property was inadvertently included in a
designated SFHA. A LOMA amends the current effective FIRM and establishes
that a specific property is not located in a SFHA.



      (2)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). A revision based on
technical data that, usually due to human-made changes, shows changes to
flood zones, flood elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations and
planimetric features.



      (3)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION - BASED ON FILL (LOMR-F). A
determination that a structure or parcel has been elevated by properly placed
engineered fill above the BFE and is, therefore, excluded from the SHFA.



   LEVEE. A human-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed
and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain,
control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from
temporary flooding.



   LEVEE SYSTEM. A flood protection system that consists of a levee, or
levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices,
which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering
practices.



   LIMITED STORAGE. An area used for storage and intended to be limited to
incidental items which can withstand exposure to the elements and have low
flood damage potential. Such an area must be of flood-resistant material,
void of utilities, except for essential lighting, and cannot be temperature
controlled.



   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE. The lowest elevation of the sidewalk, patio,
attached garage, deck support, basement entryway or grade immediately next to
the structure and after the completion of construction.



   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area including
basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, structure access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a structure’s LOWEST FLOOR; provided that,
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.



   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or
without a permanent foundation when connected or attached to the required
utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers and similar
transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer
and intended to be improved property. The term MANUFACTURED HOME does not
include a “recreational vehicle”. (See RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.)



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels)
of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.



   MAP. The Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) or the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) for a community issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA).



   MAP PANEL NUMBER. The four-digit number on a flood map, followed by a
letter suffix, assigned by FEMA. The first four digits represent the map
panel. The letter suffix represents the number of times the map panel has
been revised. (The letter “A” is not used by FEMA; the letter “B” is
the first revision.)



   MARKET VALUE. The property value (as agreed between a willing buyer and
seller), excluding the value of the land as established by what the local
real estate market will bear. MARKET VALUE of the structure can be
established by independent certified appraisal; replacement cost depreciated
by age of structure (actual cash value) or adjusted assessed values.



   MEAN SEA LEVEL (MSL). The average height of the sea for all stages of
the tide. For the purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the MSL
is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the
floodplain as shown on the community’s FIRM. For purposes of this chapter,
the term is synonymous with either NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD) OF
1929 or NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM (NAVD) OF 1988.



   MITIGATION. Sustained actions taken to reduce or eliminate long-term
risk to people and property from hazards and their effects. The purpose of
MITIGATION is twofold: to protect people and structures; and to minimize the
costs of disaster response and recovery.



   MUDSLIDE (i.e., MUDFLOW). Describes a condition where there is a river,
flow or inundation of liquid mud down a hillside, usually as a result of a
dual condition of loss of brush cover and the subsequent accumulation of
water on the ground, preceded by a period of unusually heavy or sustained
rain. A MUDSLIDE (i.e., MUDFLOW) may occur as a distinct phenomenon while a
landslide is in progress, and will be recognized as such by the Floodplain
Administrator only if the mudflow, and not the landslide, is the proximate
cause of damage that occurs.



   MUDSLIDE (i.e., MUDFLOW) AREA MANAGEMENT. The operation of and overall
program of corrective and preventative measures for reducing mudslide (i.e.,
mudflow) damage, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans,
mudslide control works and floodplain management regulations.



   MUDSLIDE (i.e., MUDFLOW) PRONE AREA. An area with land surfaces and
slopes of unconsolidated material where the history, geology and climate
indicate a potential for mudflow.



   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP). The federal program that makes
flood insurance available to owners of property in participating communities
nationwide through the cooperative efforts of the federal government and the
private insurance industry.



   NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD). As corrected in 1929, a
vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations
within the floodplain. (Generally used as the vertical datum on the older
FIRMs. Refer to FIRM legend panel for correct datum.)



   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management
regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures.



   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum,
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the
effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.



   NON-RESIDENTIAL. Structures that are not designed for human habitation,
including, but is not limited to: small business concerns; churches; schools;
farm structures (including grain bins and silos); pool houses; clubhouses;
recreational structures; mercantile structures; agricultural and industrial
structures; warehouses; and hotels or motels with normal room rentals for
less than six months’ duration.



   NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM (NAVD). As corrected in 1988, a vertical
control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the
floodplain. (Generally used on the newer FIRMs and digitally referenced FIRMs
(DFTRMs). (Refer to FIRM or DFIRM panel legend for correct datum.)



   OBSTRUCTION. Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall,
embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation,
channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, structure, wire, fence, rock,
gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along,
across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or
change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, due to its
location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of
water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream.



   ONE-HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD (100-YEAR FLOOD). (See BASE FLOOD.) The flood
that has a 1% or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year. Any flood zone that begins with the letter “A” is subject to
inundation by the 100-YEAR FLOOD. Over the life of a 30-year loan, there is a
26% chance of experiencing such a flood with the SFHA.



   PARTICIPATING COMMUNITY. A community that voluntarily elects to
participate in the NFIP by adopting and enforcing floodplain management
regulations that are consistent with the standards of the NFIP.



   PRE-FIRM CONSTRUCTION. New construction or substantial improvements for
which start of construction occurred on or before 12-31-1974, or before the
effective date of the initial FIRM of the community, whichever is later.



   POST-FIRM CONSTRUCTION. New construction or substantial improvements
for which start of construction occurred after 12-31-1974, or on or after the
effective date of the initial FIRM of the community, whichever is later.



   PROBATION. A FEMA imposed change in community’s status resulting from
violations and deficiencies in the administration and enforcement of the
local floodplain management regulations.



   PROGRAM DEFICIENCY. A defect in a community’s floodplain management
regulations or administrative procedures that impairs effective
implementation of those floodplain management standards.



   PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE. Anything which is injurious to safety or
health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of
persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary
manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal or basin.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle that is:



      (1)   Built on a single chassis;



      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the
largest horizontal projection;



      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable to
a light duty truck; and



      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling,
but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or
seasonal use.



   REGULAR PROGRAM. The phase of a community’s participation in the NFIP
where more comprehensive floodplain management requirements are imposed and
higher amounts of insurance are available based upon risk zones and flood
elevations determined in the FIS.



   REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
one foot. See BASE FLOOD.



   REMEDY A VIOLATION. The process by which a community brings a structure
or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain
management regulations or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impact of
non-compliance. Reduced impact may include protecting the structure or other
affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement
provisions of the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations,
or reducing state or federal financing exposure with regard to the structure
or other development.



   REPAIR. The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing
structure.



   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds 25% of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.



   REPETITIVE LOSS PROPERTY. Any insurable building for which two or more
claims of more than $1,000 were paid by the National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP) within any rolling ten-year period, since 1978. At least two of the
claims must be more than ten days apart but, within ten years of each other.
A RL PROPERTY may or may not be currently insured by the NFIP.



   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook and the like.



   SECTION 1316. The section of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968,
as amended, which states that no new or renewal flood insurance coverage
shall be provided for any property that the Administrator finds has been
declared by a duly constituted state or local zoning authority or other
authorized public body to be in violation of state or local laws, regulations
or ordinances that are intended to discourage or otherwise restrict land
development or occupancy in flood-prone areas.



   SEVERE REPETITIVE LOSS STRUCTURE.



      (1)   Any insured property that has met at least one of the
following paid flood loss criteria since 1978, regardless of ownership:



         (a)   Four or more separate claim payments of more than
$5,000 each (including building and contents payments); or



         (b)   Two or more separate claim payments (building
payments only) where the total of the payments exceeds the current market
value of the property.



      (2)   In either case, two of the claim payments must have
occurred within ten years of each other. Multiple losses at the same location
within ten days of each other are counted as one loss, with the payment
amounts added together.



   SHEET FLOW AREA. See AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING.



   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). The portion of the floodplain subject
to inundation by the base flood and/or flood-related erosion hazards as shown
on a FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AE, A1-A30, AH, AO or AR.



   START OF CONSTRUCTION. (Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development.) The date a building permit is issued, provided the
actual START of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition placement or other improvement is within 180 days of the permit
date. The actual START means the first placement of permanent construction of
a structure (including manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of
slabs or footings, the installation of piles, construction of columns, or any
work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home
on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation,
such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation
of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; the
installation on the property of accessory structures, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the structure.



   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, including gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.



   SUBDIVISION. Any division, for the purposes of sale, lease or
development, either on the installment plan or upon any and all other plans,
terms and conditions, of any tract or parcel of land into two or more lots or
parcels.



   SUBROGATION. A legal action brought by FEMA to recover insurance money
paid out where all or part of the damage can be attributed to acts or
omissions by a community or other third party.



   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.



      (1)   Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other
improvement of a structure, taking place during a one-year period in which
the cumulative percentage of improvements equals or exceeds 50% of the market
value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial
damage”, regardless of the actual repair work performed.



      (2)   The term does not, however, include either:



         (a)   Any project for improvement of a structure to
correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local Code Enforcement
Official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living
conditions; or



         (b)   Any alteration of a “historic structure”;
provided that, the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued
designation as a “historic structure”.



   SUBSTANTIALLY IMPROVED EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS OR
SUBDIVISIONS. Repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the
streets, utilities and pads equaling or exceeding 50% of the value of the
streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement
commenced.



   SUSPENSION. Removal of a participating community from the NFTP for
failure to enact and/or enforce floodplain management regulations required
for participation in the NFTP.



   UTILITIES. Include, but not limited to, electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment that service the
structure and the site.



   VARIANCE. Relief from some or all of the requirements of this chapter.



   VIOLATION. Failure of a structure or other development to fully comply
with this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation
certificate, other certifications or other evidence of compliance required in
this chapter is presumed to be in VIOLATION until such time as that
documentation is provided.



   WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which water flows at least periodically.



   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of
floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or
riverine areas.



   WATERSHED. All the area within a geographic boundary from which water,
sediments, dissolved materials and other transportable materials drain or are
carried by water to a common outlet, such as a point on a larger stream, lake
or underlying aquifer.



   X (SHADED) AND B ZONES. Areas of the 0.2% annual chance (500-year)
flood that are outside of the SFHA, areas subject to the 100-year flood with
average depths of less than one foot or with contributing drainage area less
than one square mile, and areas protected by levees from the base flood.



   X (UN-SHADED) AND C ZONES. Areas determined to be outside the 500-year
floodplain.



   ZONE. A geographical area shown on a Flood Hazard Boundary Map or a
Flood Insurance Rate Map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in
the area.



(Ord. 016-211, passed 5-16-2016)



§ 156.06  LANDS TO WHICH CHAPTER APPLIES.



   This chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas (SFHA),
areas applicable to KRS 151.250 and, as determined by the Floodplain
Administrator or other delegated, designated or qualified community official
as determined by the city from available technical studies, historical
information and other available and reliable sources, areas within the
jurisdiction of the city, which may be subject to periodic inundation by
flood waters that can adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare of the citizens of the city.



(Ord. 016-211, passed 5-16-2016)



§ 156.07  BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.



   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Bullitt,
dated 4-5-2016, with the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMS),
other supporting data and any subsequent amendments thereto, are hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of these regulations by the
city, and for those land areas acquired by the city through annexation. This
FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this
chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow
implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the City Council
by the Floodplain Administrator and are enacted by City Council pursuant to
statutes governing land use management regulations. The FIS and/or FIRM are
permanent records of the city and are on file and available for review by the
public during regular business hours at the Shepherdsville Government Center,
634 Conestoga Parkway, Shepherdsville, Kentucky 40165.



(Ord. 016-211, passed 5-16-2016)



§ 156.08  DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.



   (A)   (1)   A development permit shall be required in conformance
with the provision of this chapter prior to the commencement of any
development activities in the special flood hazard areas (SFHA). See division
(B) below for instructions and explanation.



      (2)   Application for a development permit shall be made on
forms furnished by the Floodplain Administrator.



   (B)   (1)   A development permit shall be obtained before any
construction or other development begins within any special flood hazard area
established in § 156.07 of this chapter. Application for a development
permit shall be made on forms furnished by Floodplain Administrator prior to
any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the
following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location
of the foregoing. Endorsement of Floodplain Administrator is required before
a state floodplain construction permit can be processed.



      (2)   Specifically, the following information is required.



         (a)   Application stage.



            1.   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea
level (MSL) of the proposed lowest floor (including basement) of all
structures in Zone A and elevation of highest adjacent grade;



            2.   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea
level to which any non-residential structure will be flood-proofed;



            3.   All appropriate certifications from a
registered professional engineer or architect that the non-residential
flood-proofed structure will meet the flood-proofing criteria in §§ 156.26
and 156.28 of this chapter; and



            4.   Description of the extent to which any
watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.



         (b)   Construction stage.



            1.   Upon placement of the lowest floor, and
before construction continues, or flood- proofing by whatever construction
means, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain
Administrator and to the state a certification of the elevation of the lowest
floor or flood-proofed elevation, as built, in relation to mean sea level. In
AE, A1-30, AH and A Zones where the community has adopted a regulatory base
flood elevation, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and
certified by same.



            2.   When flood-proofing is utilized for a
particular structure, said certification shall be prepared by or under the
direct supervision of a certified professional engineer or architect. Any
continued work undertaken prior to the submission of the certification shall
be at the permit holder’s risk. The Floodplain Administrator shall review
the lowest floor and flood-proofing elevation survey data submitted.
Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder
immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted to proceed.
Failure to submit the survey or failure to make said corrections required
hereby shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.



(Ord. 016-211, passed 5-16-2016)



§ 156.09  COMPLIANCE.



   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of
this chapter and other applicable state regulations. Violation of the
requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein
shall prevent the city from taking such lawful action as is necessary to
prevent or remedy any violation.



(Ord. 016-211, passed 5-16-2016)  Penalty, see § 156.99



§ 156.10  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.



(Ord. 016-211, passed 5-16-2016)



§ 156.11  INTERPRETATION.



   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions
shall be:



   (A)   Considered minimum requirements;



   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and



   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted
under state statutes.



(Ord. 016-211, passed 5-16-2016)



§ 156.12  WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes. This chapter does
not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. This
chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or
employee, thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.



(Ord. 016-211, passed 5-16-2016)



§ 156.13  LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   The city hereby appoints the Mayor, or his or her designee, to
administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter by granting
or denying development permits in accordance with its provisions, and is
herein referred to as the “Floodplain Administrator”.



   (B)   (1)   The Floodplain Administrator and/or staff is hereby
appointed, authorized and directed to administer, implement and enforce the
provisions of this chapter. The Floodplain Administrator is further
authorized to render interpretations of this chapter, which are consistent
with its spirit and purpose by granting or denying development permits in
accordance with its provisions.



      (2)   The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain
Administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:



         (a)   Permit review. Review all development permits to
ensure that:



            1.   Permit requirements of this chapter have been
satisfied;



            2.   All other required state and federal permits
have been obtained: review proposed development to assure that all necessary
permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which
approval is required by federal or state law, including § 404 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1334;



            3.   Flood damages will be reduced in the best
possible manner;



            4.   The proposed development does not adversely
affect the carrying capacity of affected watercourses. For purposes of this
chapter, ADVERSELY AFFECTS means that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development
will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one
foot at any point.



         (b)   Review and use of any other base flood data. When
base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with § 156.07
of this chapter, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from
a federal or state agency, or other source, in order to administer the
provisions of §§ 156.25 through 156.31 of this chapter. Any such
information shall be submitted to the city for adoption.



         (c)   Notification of other agencies.



            1.   Notify adjacent communities, the state’s
Division of Water, and any other federal and/or state agencies with statutory
or regulatory authority prior to any alteration or relocation of the
watercourse;



            2.   Submit evidence of such notification to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); and



            3.   Assure that the flood-carrying capacity
within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained.



         (d)   Documentation of floodplain development. Obtain
and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following:



            1.   Certification required by § 156.26(A) of
this chapter (lowest floor elevations) as shown on an accurately completed
and certified elevation certificate. Verify and record the actual elevation
(in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of
all new and substantially improved structures, in accordance with §
156.08(B) of this chapter;



            2.   Certification required by § 156.26(B) of
this chapter (elevation or flood-proofing of non-residential structures) as
shown on an accurately completed and certified FEMA flood-proofing
certificate. Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) to which the new and substantially improved structures have been
flood-proofed, in accordance with § 156.08(B) of this chapter;



            3.   Certification required by § 156.26(C) of
this chapter (elevated structures);



            4.   Certification of elevation required by §
156.29(A) of this chapter (subdivision standards);



            5.   Certification required by § 156.26(E) of
this chapter (floodway encroachments);



            6.   Assure that maintenance is provided within
the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the
flood-carrying capacity is maintained;



            7.   Review certified plans and specifications for
compliance; and



            8.   Remedial action. Take action to remedy
violations of this chapter as specified in § 156.99 of this chapter.



         (e)   Map determinations. Make interpretations where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the special flood
hazard areas, for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a
mapped boundary and actual field conditions:



            1.   Where interpretation is needed as to the
exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for
example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions) the Floodplain Administrator shall make the
necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as
provided in § 156.14(C)(1) of this chapter;



            2.   When base flood elevation data and floodway
data have not been provided in accordance with § 156.07 of this chapter,
then the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize
any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or
other source, in order to administer the provisions of §§ 156.25 through
156.31 of this chapter;



            3.   When flood-proofing is utilized for a
particular structure, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain certification
from a registered professional engineer or architect, in accordance with §
156.26(B) of this chapter, a flood-proofing certificate; and



            4.   All records pertaining to the provisions of
this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the Floodplain
Administrator and shall be open for public inspection.



         (f)   Right of entry.



            1.   Whenever necessary to make an inspection to
enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, or whenever the Floodplain
Administrator has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any
structure or upon any premises any condition or ordinance violation which
makes such building, structure or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous,
the Floodplain Administrator may enter such building, structure or premises
at all reasonable times to inspect the same or perform any duty imposed upon
the Floodplain Administrator by this chapter.



            2.   If such structure or premises are occupied,
the Floodplain Administrator shall first present proper credentials and
request entry. If such building, structure or premises are unoccupied, he
shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons
having charge or control of such request entry.



            3.   If entry is refused, the Floodplain
Administrator shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure
entry.



            4.   When the Floodplain Administrator shall have
first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to
secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care
or control of any building, structure or premises shall fail or neglect,
after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry
therein by the Floodplain Administrator for the purpose of inspection and
examination pursuant to this chapter.



         (g)   Stop-work orders. Upon notice from the Floodplain
Administrator, work on any building, structure or premises that is being done
contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall immediately cease. Such
notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property,
or to his or her agent, or to the person performing the work, and shall state
the conditions under which work may be resumed.



         (h)   Revocation of permits.



            1.   The Floodplain Administrator may revoke a
permit or approval, issued under the provisions of this chapter, in case
there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material
fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based.



            2.   The Floodplain Administrator may revoke a
permit upon determination that the construction, erection, alteration,
repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the structure for
which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with,
the provisions of this chapter.



         (i)   Liability. Any officer, employee or member of the
Floodplain Administrator’s staff, charged with the enforcement of this
chapter, acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of
his or her duties, shall not thereby render personally liable, and is hereby
relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may accrue to
persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the
discharge of his or her duties. Any suit brought against any officer,
employee or member because of such act performed by him or her in the
enforcement of any provision of this chapter shall be defended by the
department of law until the final termination of the proceedings.



         (j)   Expiration of floodplain construction permit. A
floodplain development permit, and all provisions contained therein, shall
expire if the “start of construction” has not occurred within 180
calendar days from the date of its issuance.



(Ord. 016-211, passed 5-16-2016)



§ 156.14  APPEALS AND VARIANCE PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Nature of variances.



      (1)   The variance criteria set forth in this section are
based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a
piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted
for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that
complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional
hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The
characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent
parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to
the structure, its inhabitants or the property owners.



      (2)   It is the duty of the city to help protect its citizens
from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of
insuring a structure built below flood level is so serious that variances
from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance
are quite rare. The long-term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and
damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the
variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain
multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly
granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which
alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate.



   (B)   Designation of Variance and Appeal Board. The city shall
establish a Variance and Appeal Board consisting of three municipal offices
to serve on Appeals Board.



   (C)   Duties of Variance and Appeals Board.



      (1)   The Variance and Appeal Board shall hear and decide
requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter and appeals of
decisions or determinations made by the Floodplain Administrator in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.



      (2)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Variance and
Appeal Board may appeal such decision to the Circuit Court, as provided in
Kentucky Revised Statutes.



   (D)   Variance procedures. In passing upon such applications, the
Variance and Appeal Board shall consider all technical evaluations, all
relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this chapter,
and the:



      (1)   Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to
the injury of others;



      (2)   Danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;



      (3)   Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents
to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual
owner and future owners of the property;



      (4)   Importance to the community of the services provided by
the existing or proposed facility;



      (5)   Necessity that the facility be located on a waterfront,
in the case of functionally dependent use;



      (6)   Availability of alternative locations, which are not
subject to flooding or erosion damage;



      (7)   Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;



      (8)   Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program for that area;



      (9)   Safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;



      (10)   Expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and



      (11)   Costs of providing governmental services during and
after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities
and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, water systems, streets and
bridges and culverts.



   (E)   Conditions for variances. Upon consideration of the factors
listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the Variance and Appeal Board
may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary
to further the purposes of this chapter.



      (1)   Variances shall not be issued within any mapped
regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood
discharge would result.



      (2)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that
the variance is the “minimum necessary” to afford relief considering the
flood hazard. MINIMUM NECESSARY means to afford relief with a minimum of
deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of
variances to an elevation requirement, this means the city need not grant
permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation
the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the city believes
will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance.



      (3)   Variances shall only be issued upon:



         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;



         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance
would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and



         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance
will not result in increased flood height, additional threats to public
safety, cause extraordinary public expense, create nuisance (as defined in
the definition section under “public safety and nuisance”), cause fraud
or victimization of the public (as defined in the definition section) or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.



      (4)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be
given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood
elevation and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and stating
that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the lowest floor being situated below the base flood elevation.



      (5)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records
of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) upon request.



      (6)   Variances may be issued for new construction,
substantial improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the
conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of
division (D) above are satisfied and that the structure or other development
is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and
does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a
public nuisance.



   (F)   Variance notification. Any applicant to whom a variance is
granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community
official that:



      (1)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure
below the base flood elevation will result in increased premium rates for
flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage;



      (2)   Such construction below the base flood level increases
risks to life and property. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the
Floodplain Administrator in the office of the city’s Recorder and shall be
recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected
parcel of land; and



      (3)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of
all variance actions, including justification for their issuance or denial,
and report such variances issued in the community’s biennial report
submission to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.



   (G)   Historic structures. Variances may be issued for the repair or
rehabilitation of “historic structures” (see definition) upon
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude
the structure’s continued designation as an historic structure and the
variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure.



(Ord. 016-211, passed 5-16-2016)



FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION



§ 156.25  GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.



   In all special flood hazard areas, the following provisions are
required.



   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of
the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including
the effects of buoyancy.



   (B)   Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not
limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This
standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state
requirements for resisting wind forces.



   (C)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.



   (D)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.



   (E)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air condition
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as
to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding.



   (F)   Within Zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage
paths around structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from
proposed structures.



   (G)   New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.



   (H)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into flood waters.



   (I)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and
constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding.



   (J)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a
structure, which is not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter
shall meet the requirements of “new construction” as contained in this
chapter.



   (K)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a
structure, which is not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter,
shall be undertaken only if said non-conformity is not furthered, extended or
replaced.



(Ord. 016-211, passed 5-16-2016)



§ 156.26  SPECIFIC STANDARDS.



   In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation data have
been provided, as set forth in § 156.07 of this chapter, the following
provisions are required.



   (A)   Residential construction.



      (1)   New construction and substantial improvement of any
residential structure (including manufactured home) shall have the lowest
floor; including basement, mechanical equipment and ductwork elevated no
lower than two feet, one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid
foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings
sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces
on walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of division (C) below.



         (a)   In an AO Zone, the lowest floor shall be elevated
above the highest adjacent grade to a height equal to or higher than the
depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least two feet,
one foot above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.



         (b)   In an A Zone, where no technical data has been
produced by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, the Floodplain
Administrator will determine the method by which base flood elevations are
determined. Methods include, but are not limited to, detailed hydrologic and
hydraulic analyses, use of existing data available from other sources,
approximate methods, use of historical data, best supportable and reasonable
judgment in the event no data can be produced. The lowest floor shall be
elevated no lower than two feet, one foot above such base flood elevation.
Title 401 KAR (Kentucky Administrative Regulations) Ch. 4, Regulation 060, §
5(5)a, states as a part of the technical requirements for a state floodplain
permit: the applicant shall provide cross-sections for determining floodway
boundaries (and, thereby, base flood elevations) at any proposed construction
site where FEMA maps are not available. All cross-sections shall be
referenced to mean sea level and shall have vertical error tolerances of no
more than + five-tenths foot. Cross-sections elevations shall be taken at
those points which represent significant breaks in slope and at points where
hydraulic characteristics of the base floodplain change. Each cross-section
shall extend across the entire base floodplain and shall be in the number and
at the locations specified by the cabinet. If necessary to ensure that
significant flood damage will not occur, the cabinet may require additional
cross-sections or specific site elevations which extend beyond those needed
for making routine regulatory floodway boundary calculations.



         (c)   In all other zones, except X or areas removed from
the floodplain with a valid LOMC such as a LOMA or LOMR-F and the like,
elevated two feet, one foot above the base flood elevation.



      (2)   Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of
the lowest floor (including basement) shall be certified by a registered
professional engineer or surveyor, and verified by the community’s Building
Inspection Department to be properly elevated. Such certification and
verification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator.



   (B)   Non-residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or non-residential structure
(including manufactured homes used for non-residential purposes) shall be
elevated to conform with division (A) above or together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities:



      (1)   Be flood-proofed to an elevation two feet, one foot
above the level of the base flood elevation so that the structure is
water-tight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;



      (2)   Have structural components capable of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy and debris;



      (3)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall
certify that the standards of this division (B)(3) are satisfied. Such
certification along with the design and operational maintenance plans shall
be provided to the Floodplain Administrator;



      (4)   Manufactured homes shall meet the standards in division
(D) below; and



      (5)   All new construction and substantial improvement with
fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (including basements) that are
usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which
are subject to flooding, shall be constructed of flood resistant materials to
an elevation two feet, one foot above the base flood elevation, and, shall be
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls
by allowing for the entry and exit of flood water. Openings for meeting this
requirement must meet or exceed the standards of division (C) below.



   (C)   Elevated structures. New construction and substantial
improvements of elevated structures on columns, posts or pilings that include
fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the
lowest floor shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed
to allow for the entry and exit of flood waters to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls:



      (1)   Openings for complying with this requirement must either
be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following
minimum criteria:



         (a)   Provide a minimum of two openings having a total
net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding;



         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than
one foot above foundation interior grade (which must be equal to in elevation
or higher than the exterior foundation grade); and



         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
valves or other coverings or devices; provided, they permit the automatic
flow of flood waters in both directions.



      (2)   Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum
necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door), limited storage of
maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior
door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator); and



      (3)   The interior portion of such enclosed areas shall not be
finished or partitioned into separate rooms.



   (D)   Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.



      (1)   (a)   All new and substantially improved manufactured
homes placed on sites located within A, A1-30, AO, AH and AE on the
community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) must meet all the requirements
for new construction, including elevation and anchoring. Locations include:



            1.   On individual lots or parcels;



            2.   In expansions to existing manufactured home
parks or subdivisions;



            3.   In new manufactured home parks or
subdivisions;



            4.   In substantially improved manufactured home
parks or subdivisions;



            5.   Outside of a manufactured home park or
subdivision; and



            6.   In an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision on a site upon which a manufactured home has incurred
“substantial damage” as the result of a flood.



         (b)   All such manufactured homes must be:



            1.   Elevated on a permanent foundation;



            2.   Have its lowest floor elevated no lower than
two feet, one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; and



            3.   Be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.



      (2)   (a)   Except manufactured homes that have incurred
substantial damage as a result of a flood, all manufactured homes placed or
substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision
must be elevated so that:



            1.   The manufactured home is securely anchored to
an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and
lateral movement, so that either the:



               a.   The lowest floor of the manufactured
home is elevated no lower than two feet one foot above the base flood
elevation; or



               b.   The manufactured home chassis is
supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least an
equivalent strength, of no less than 36 inches in height above the highest
adjacent grade.



            2.   All recreational vehicles placed on sites
located within A, A1-30, AO, AH and AE on the community’s Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) must either:



               a.   Be on the site for fewer than 180
consecutive days;



               b.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway
use; or



               c.   Meet the permit requirements for new
construction of this chapter, including anchoring and elevation requirements
for “manufactured homes”.



         (b)   A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if
it is licensed and insured in accordance with the state’s motor vehicle
regulations, is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only
by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no
permanently attached additions.



   (E)   Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard
established in § 156.07 of this chapter are areas designated as floodways.
Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of
flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles and has erosion
potential, the following provisions shall apply:



      (1)   Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements and other developments unless
certification (with supporting technical data) by a registered professional
engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any
increase in the base flood elevation levels during occurrence of base flood
discharge; and



      (2)   If this division (E) is satisfied, all new construction
and substantial improvements and other proposed new development shall comply
with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 016-211, passed 5-16-2016)



§ 156.27  STANDARDS FOR STREAMS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATION
AND/OR FLOODWAYS.



   Located within the special flood hazard areas established in § 156.07
of this chapter, where streams exist but where no base flood data has been
provided or where base flood data has been provided without floodways, the
following provisions apply.



   (A)   No encroachments, including fill material or structures shall
be located within special flood hazard areas, unless certification by a
registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the
community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical
data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles.



   (B)   New construction and substantial improvements of structures
shall be elevated or flood-proofed to elevations established in accordance
with § 156.07 of this chapter.



(Ord. 016-211, passed 5-16-2016)  Penalty, see § 156.99



§ 156.28  STANDARDS FOR SHALLOW FLOODING ZONES.



   (A)   Located within the special flood hazard areas established in
§ 156.07 of this chapter are areas designated as shallow flooding areas.



   (B)   These areas have flood hazards associated with base flood
depths of one to three feet, where a clearly defined channel does not exist
and the water path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; therefore,
the following provisions apply.



      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements of
residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to or above either the base flood elevation or in Zone AO the flood
depth specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map above the highest adjacent
grade. In Zone AO, if no flood depth is specified, the lowest floor,
including basement, shall be elevated no less than two feet, one foot above
the highest adjacent grade.



      (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements of
non-residential structures shall:



         (a)   Have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to or above either the base flood elevation or in Zone AO the flood
depth specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, above the highest adjacent
grade. In Zone AO, if no flood depth is specified, the lowest floor,
including basement, shall be elevated no less than two feet, one foot above
the highest adjacent grade.



         (b)   Together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities be completely flood-proofed either to the base flood elevation or
above or, in Zone AO, to or above the specified flood depth, plus a minimum
of one foot so that any space below that level is water-tight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and effects of buoyancy. Certification is required as stated in §
156.26(B) of this chapter.



(Ord. 016-211, passed 5-16-2016)



§ 156.29  STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.



   (A)   All subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard area
and the elevation of the base flood and be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.



   (B)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.



   (C)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.



   (D)   In areas where base flood elevation and floodway data is not
available, base flood elevation and floodway data for subdivision proposals
and other proposed development (including manufactured home parks and
subdivisions) greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser,
shall be provided.



   (E)   All subdivision plans will include the elevation of proposed
structure(s) and lowest adjacent grade. If the site is filled above the base
flood elevation, the lowest floor and lowest adjacent grade elevations shall
be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided
to the Floodplain Administrator.



(Ord. 016-211, passed 5-16-2016)



§ 156.30  STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY STRUCTURES IN ALL ZONES BEGINNING WITH
THE LETTER “A”.



   For all accessory structures in special flood hazard areas designated
“A”, the following provisions shall apply:



   (A)   Must be non-habitable;



   (B)   Must be anchored to resist floatation and lateral movement;



   (C)   Must be provided with flood openings in accordance with the
standards of § 156.26(C) of this chapter;



   (D)   Must be built of flood resistant materials to one foot above
the base flood elevation;



   (E)   Must elevate utilities above the base flood elevation;



   (F)   Can only be used for storage or parking; and



   (G)   Must not be modified for a different use after permitting.



(Ord. 016-211, passed 5-16-2016)



§ 156.31  CRITICAL FACILITIES.



   (A)   Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the
extent possible, located outside the limits of the SFHA (100-year
floodplain). Construction of new critical facilities shall not be permissible
within the floodway; however, they may be permissible within the SFHA if no
feasible alternative site is available.



   (B)   Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the
lowest floor elevated one foot or more above the base flood elevation at the
site.



   (C)   Flood-proofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure
that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into flood waters.



   (D)   Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood
elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible.



(Ord. 016-211, passed 5-16-2016)



§ 156.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Civil offense. If, at any time, development occurs which is
not in accordance with the provisions of this chapter including obtaining or
complying with the terms and conditions of a floodplain development permit
and any approved modifications, such development shall constitute a civil
offense.



   (B)   Notice of violation. If, at any time, a duly authorized
employee or agent of the Floodplain Administrator has reasonable cause to
believe that a person has caused development to occur which is not in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, including obtaining or
complying with the terms and conditions of a floodplain development permit
and any approved modifications thereof, a duly authorized employee of the
Floodplain Administrator shall issue a notice to the person responsible for
the violation and/or the property owner, stating the facts of the offense or
violation, the section of this chapter and/or of the permit violated, when it
occurred, how the violation is to be remedied to bring the development into
conformity with this chapter or with the approved permit, and within what
period of time the remedy is to occur, which period of time shall be
reasonable and shall be determined by the nature of the violation and whether
or not it creates a nuisance or hazard. The remedy may include an order to
stop work on the development. The notice shall also state that a citation may
be forthcoming in the event that the requested remedies and corrective
actions are not taken, which citation will request a civil monetary fine and
shall state the maximum fine which could be imposed.



   (C)   Notice of citation. If, at any time, a duly authorized
employee or agent of the Floodplain Administrator has reasonable cause to
believe that a person has caused development to occur which is not in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, including obtaining or
complying with the terms and conditions of a floodplain development permit
and any approved modifications thereof, a duly authorized employee of the
Floodplain Administrator may issue a citation to the offender stating the
violation, prior notices of violation issued, how the violation is to be
remedied to bring the development into conformity with this chapter or with
the approved permit, and within what period of time the remedy is to occur
and what penalty or penalties are recommended. When a citation is issued, the
person to whom the citation is issued shall respond to the citation within
seven days of the date the citation is issued by either carrying out the
remedies and corrections set forth in the citation, paying the civil fine set
forth in the citation or requesting a hearing before the governing body. If
the person to whom the citation is issued does not respond to the citation
within seven days, that person shall be deemed to have waived the right to a
hearing and the determination that a violation occurred shall be considered
final.



   (D)   Penalties. Violation of the provisions of this chapter or
failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with granting of a
variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor civil offense.
Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its
requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined no less than $100 or
imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both; and, in addition, shall pay
all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained
shall prevent the Floodplain Administrator from taking such other lawful
action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.



(Ord. 016-211, passed 5-16-2016)



CHAPTER 157:  ZONING



Section



   157.01   Zoning regulations adopted by reference



§ 157.01  ZONING REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The city’s zoning regulations, and any amendments thereto, are hereby
adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if set out in full.



(Ord. 992-261, passed 4-27-1992; Ord. 94-329, passed 11-14-1994; Ord. 94-330,
passed 11-14-1994; Ord. 94-331, passed 11-14-1994; Ord. 998-427, passed
3-9-1998; Ord. 999-482, passed 10-25-1999; Ord. 000-495, passed 4-24-2000;
Ord. 002-550, passed 6-10-2002; Ord. 006-712, passed 12-11-2006; Ord.
008-755, passed 11-24-2008; Ord. 014-153, passed 6-23-2014; Ord. 016-206,
passed 4-12-2016)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



   Table



      I.   FRANCHISES



      II.   ANNEXATIONS AND BOUNDARIES



      III.   ZONING MAP CHANGES



      IV.   LEASES, AGREEMENTS AND CONTRACTS



      V.   CLOSING OR ABANDONING STREETS



TABLE I:  FRANCHISES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




450.3
 
--
 
Creating telephone franchises


(1991 Code, §§ 7-231—7-238)


480-48
 
--
 
TCI Cablevision of North Central Kentucky, Inc., cable television franchise


(1991 Code, App. A(3))


976-11
 
8--1976
 
Alltell Systems (formerly Echo Telephone Company), 20-year telephone franchise


(1991 Code, App. A(2))


980-46
 
1-10-1980
 
Creating cable television franchises


(1991 Code, §§ 7-141—7-163)


1981-65
 
6-22-1981
 
Creating gas and electric franchises


(1991 Code, §§ 7-206—7-213)


981-70
 
8-24-1981
 
Louisville Gas and Electric Company, 20-year gas and electric franchise


(1991 Code, App. A(4))


987-159
 
8-26-1987
 
TCI Cablevision of North Central Kentucky, Inc., cable television franchise


(1991 Code, App. A(3))


988-161
 
3-25-1988
 
Creating electric franchises


(1991 Code, §§ 7-181—7-189)


988-164
 
5-23-1988
 
Salt River Rural Electric Cooperative Corporation, ten-year electric franchise


(1991 Code, App. A(1))


989-202
 
--1989
 
TCI Cablevision of North Central Kentucky, Inc., cable television franchise


(1991 Code, App. A(3))


995-339
 
4-24-1995
 
TCI Cablevision of North Central Kentucky, Inc., cable television services
franchise


996-378
 
6-24-1996
 
Alltell Kentucky, Inc., a 20-year telephone franchise


999-453
 
2-22-1999
 
Creating a ten-year electricity franchise


-
 
4-24-1999
 
TCI Cablevision of North Central Kentucky, Inc., cable system construction
and operation franchise


999-461
 
6-14-1999
 
Salt River Rural Electric Cooperative Corporation, ten-year electric service
franchise


999-475
 
10-25-1999
 
Creating a two-year garbage collection franchise


002-540
 
2-11-2002
 
Creating a two-year garbage collection franchise


004-615
 
3-22-2004
 
Renewing a garbage collection and disposal franchise


015-182
 
4-27-2015
 
Creating a telephone and communications franchise


015-192
 
6-22-2015
 
Windstream Kentucky East, LLC, telephone and communications franchise


017-238
 
6-26-2017
 
Renewing an exclusive garbage and refuse collection and disposal franchise


017-242
 
9-11-2017
 
Amending terms of a garbage and refuse collection and disposal franchise


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE II:  ANNEXATIONS AND BOUNDARIES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




990-228
 
1-14-1991
 
Proposing to annex unincorporated territory


991-233
 
2-25-1991
 
Annexing unincorporated territory


991-240
 
7-22-1991
 
Annexing 256.94 acres of unincorporated territory


991-241
 
8-12-1991
 
Annexing unincorporated territory


992-266
 
6-22-1992
 
Annexing unincorporated territory


992-272
 
8-10-1992
 
Annexing unincorporated territory


992-278
 
9-28-1992
 
Annexing unincorporated territory


992-288
 
1-28-1993
 
Annexing unincorporated territory


994-326
 
9-12-1994
 
Annexing unincorporated territory


995-332
 
1-23-1995
 
Annexing unincorporated territory


995-333
 
4-10-1995
 
Annexing 150 acres of territory


995-360
 
10-23-1995
 
Annexing unincorporated territory


996-375
 
5-20-1996
 
Annexing unincorporated territory


997-402
 
8-9-1997
 
Annexing unincorporated territory


999-465
 
7-12-1999
 
Annexing 2.40 acres (located at the intersection of Beech Grove Road and
Reichmuth Lane)


999-477
 
9-10-1999
 
Annexing 124 acres of unincorporated territory


999-476
 
9-27-1999
 
Annexing 6.62 acres of land contiguous to the existing city limits and
located on Highway 44 East


000-485
 
2-14-2000
 
Annexing 31.766 acres of land


000-497
 
5-8-2000
 
Annexing 40+ acres of land (located on Highway 480)


001-521
 
5-14-2001
 
Annexing 20 acres of land (located on Highway 44 and Halls Lane)


001-531
 
9-10-2001
 
Annexing 116.48 acres of territory (located at 1510 Cedar Grove Road)


002-542
 
3-25-2002
 
Annexing 8.84 acres of land (located behind 400 Raymond Road)


002-560
 
9-9-2002
 
Annexing 157.4 acres of land


003-569
 
2-24-2003
 
Annexing 8.61 acres of certain unincorporated territory (located on Highway
1020)


003-589
 
--2003
 
Annexing certain unincorporated territory


003-590
 
7-28-2003
 
Annexing certain unincorporated territory


003-591
 
--2003
 
Annexing certain unincorporated territory


003-592
 
8-11-2003
 
Annexing certain unincorporated territory


003-595
 
--2003
 
Annexing certain unincorporated territory


003-597
 
9-8-2003
 
Annexing certain unincorporated territory


003-604
 
--2003
 
Annexing certain unincorporated territory


003-605
 
11-10-2003
 
Annexing certain unincorporated territory


004-613
 
--2004
 
Annexing certain unincorporated territory


004-614
 
--2004
 
Annexing 1 acre, more or less, of certain unincorporated territory


004-617
 
4-12-2004
 
Annexing certain unincorporated territory


004-618
 
4-12-2004
 
Annexing 1 acre, more or less, of certain unincorporated territory


004-621
 
--2004
 
Proposing to annex certain territory (belonging to Marilyn Maraman Lee)


004-623
 
5-24-2004
 
Annexing certain territory (belonging to Marilyn Maraman Lee)


004-624
 
5-24-2004
 
Annexing certain territory (belonging to Troutwine Family, LLC, and Shiela T.
Bolus)


004-628
 
6-14-2004
 
Annexing certain territory (belonging to Troutwine Family, LLC, and Shiela T.
Bolus)


005-655
 
--2005
 
Annexing unincorporated territory


005-656
 
5-23-2005
 
Annexing unincorporated territory


005-661
 
--2005
 
Annexing unincorporated territory


005-662
 
6-21-2005
 
Annexing unincorporated territory


005-669
 
8-8-2005
 
Annexing unincorporated territory


005-672
 
8-22-2005
 
Annexing a 0.5741-acre tract of territory


005-673
 
9-12-2005
 
Annexing unincorporated territory


005-674
 
9-26-2005
 
Annexing unincorporated territory


005-679
 
11-14-2005
 
Annexing unincorporated territory


005-682
 
11-28-2005
 
Annexing unincorporated territory


005-683
 
11-28-2005
 
Annexing unincorporated territory


06-694
 
--2006
 
Annexing unincorporated territory


006-684
 
1-9-2006
 
Annexing unincorporated territory


006-700
 
7-24-2006
 
Annexing unincorporated territory


007-731
 
9-24-2007
 
Annexing unincorporated territory


008-739
 
2-18-2008
 
Annexing unincorporated territory


008-756
 
11-24-2008
 
Annexing unincorporated territory


008-757
 
11-24-2008
 
Annexing unincorporated territory


010-787
 
7-26-2010
 
Annexing unincorporated territory


010-789
 
8-23-2010
 
Annexing unincorporated territory


011-093
 
--2011
 
Annexing 165.19 acres of property


012-101
 
3-26-2012
 
Annexing 2.179 acres of property


012-102
 
5-14-2012
 
Annexing 11.1 acres of property


012-103
 
5-14-2012
 
Annexing 3.8 acre of property


012-104
 
6-11-2012
 
Annexing 1.03 acres of property


012-105
 
6-11-2012
 
Annexing 184.8 acres of property


012-106
 
6-11-2012
 
Annexing 1.1 acres of property


012-107
 
6-11-2012
 
Annexing 0.50 acre of property


012-110
 
6-25-2012
 
Annexing 2.2 acres of property


014-150
 
3-10-2014
 
Annexing 2.15 acres of property


014-168
 
10-27-2014
 
Annexing 177.820 acres (referred to as the I-65 Corridor from KSR 480 to KSR
245)


015-173
 
--2015
 
Annexing unincorporated territory


015-177
 
4-13-2015
 
Annexing 102.32 acres of property


015-178
 
4-13-2015
 
Annexing 120.652 acres of property


015-179
 
4-13-2015
 
Annexing 210.02 acres of property


015-181
 
4-27-2015
 
Annexing 1.73 acres (known as the C.W. Shepherd property)


015-188
 
6-22-2015
 
Annexing 217.75 acres of property


015-189
 
6-22-2015
 
Annexing 164.6 acres (known as the Longacre property)


015-190
 
6-22-2015
 
Annexing property (at the KSR 245 Corridor adjacent to KSR 61)


016-202
 
1-4-2016
 
Annexing 131.49 acres (referred to as the Miller Enterprises, LLC, and the
Miller property)


016-212
 
6-7-2016
 
Annexing 33,462.38 square feet of property


017-243
 
9-25-2017
 
Annexing 5.062 acres owned by Salt River Investment, Inc.


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE III:  ZONING MAP CHANGES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




990-217
 
6-25-1990
 
Property to R-4 (requested by Russell, Norman and Ethel Peacock)


990-218
 
8-27-1990
 
Property to IL (requested by Publishers Printing Company, Inc.)


990-222
 
9-24-1990
 
Property to B-2 (requested by C.E. Grasch)


990-223
 
10-22-1990
 
Property to B-2 (requested by Paroquet Springs Development)


990-224
 
10-23-1990
 
Property to R-1 (requested by the Estate of Sara Fern Barger)


990-225
 
12-10-1990
 
Property to I-L (requested by Simon Holding Company)


990-226
 
12-10-1990
 
Property to R-3 (requested by A. Geraldine Froman)


991-230
 
1-28-1991
 
Property to R-4 (requested by Gloria Jean Latham)


991-231
 
2-11-1991
 
Property to B-2 (requested by the Land Store Investment, Inc.)


991-235
 
2-25-1991
 
Property to B-1 (requested by Robert Bush and William Simmons)


991-237
 
5-13-1991
 
Property to R-2 (requested by Bobby G. and Virginia Elkins)


991-242
 
8-26-1991
 
Property to R-3 (requested by Lou Ann and Gary D. Moore)


991-248
 
10-14-1991
 
Property to R-2 (requested by Norman, M. Joan and M. Pauline McAdams)


991-249
 
10-14-1991
 
1.15 acres, more or less, to R-1 (requested by Elza W. and Doris Stevenson)


991-250
 
10-14-1991
 
Property to B-2 (requested by Robert and Evelyn Huff)


991-251
 
10-14-1991
 
Property to R-4 (being Lots 36, 37 (half) and 38 in the Adams Addition)


992-257
 
2-24-1992
 
Property to B-2 (requested by D. Bruce Thomason and Ruth Sohm)


992-259
 
4-13-1992
 
3.40 acres, more or less, to R-1 (requested by Everett R. and Billy Sure
Waters)


992-260
 
4-13-1992
 
Property to R-4 (requested by Mary E. Crowe)


992-264
 
6-22-1992
 
1.07 acres, more or less, to R-1 (requested by Donny and Rita Groce)


992-265
 
6-22-1992
 
Property to B-2 (requested by Thomas and Debra Huff)


992-267
 
7-27-1992
 
Property to B-1 (requested by J. Chester Porter, William G. Porter and
Kenneth Stout)


992-268
 
7-27-1992
 
Property to IG (requested by Joseph T. Young)


992-277
 
9-14-1992
 
1.06 acres, more or less, to R-1 (requested by James W. and Matilda R. Harp)


992-279
 
--1992
 
Property to R-3


992-280
 
9-28-1992
 
Property to B-2 (requested by Gobel and Judy Newsome)


992-281
 
10-12-1992
 
Property to B-1 (requested by the Estate of Pauline W. Cundiff)


992-284
 
11-23-1992
 
Property to B-1 (requested by Jimmy C. and Carol Allen)


992-285
 
1-11-1993
 
Property to R-3 (being Tracts 11, 12 and 13 in division of the Sarah Fern
Barger Estate)


992-286
 
1-11-1993
 
Property to B-1 (requested by Anthony and Vicki Cox)


992-287
 
1-11-1993
 
Property to B-2 (requested by Harold W. Hardy)


993-291
 
3-8-1993
 
Property to B-1 (requested by Gene A. and Mildred Hester)


993-296
 
4-12-1993
 
Property to B-1 (requested by Herbert and Doriscella Cox)


993-298
 
5-24-1993
 
Property to R-1 (requested by William F. Porter)


993-302
 
6-28-1993
 
Property to R-4 (requested by Edna Waters)


993-303
 
8-9-1993
 
Property to R-3 (requested by Richard Haarman)


993-307
 
10-25-1993
 
Property to B-2 (requested by Edgar F. and Pamela J. Huey)


993-309
 
11-22-1993
 
Property to R-3 (requested by Beech Grove Place, Inc.)


994-310
 
2-14-1994
 
Property to R-3 (requested by Robert C. Kyser Sr.)


994-311
 
3-28-1994
 
Property to B-1 (requested by Lillian Stallings)


994-314
 
5-23-1994
 
Property to R-3 (located on Lots, 9, 10, 11 and 12 and a portion of Lot 13 of
the Howlett Heirs Division)


994-315
 
5-23-1994
 
20 feet of property to B-2 (located within the south right-of-way of Highway
44 East)


994-316
 
5-23-1994
 
50 feet of property to B-2 (requested by Anthony Wayne and Sharon Denise
Hester)


994-320
 
7-25-1994
 
Property to R-4 (Lots 24 and 28 of Adams Addition)


994-325
 
9-12-1994
 
Property to B-2 (a house and lot on Second Street)


994-327
 
10-10-1994
 
Property to R-4 (requested by J.B. Latham)


995-336
 
4-10-1995
 
Property to IL (requested by Keith and Dorothy White)


995-337
 
4-10-1995
 
7.739 acres, more or less, to R-3 (as shown on the survey of James L.
Spaulding and Associates)


995-338
 
4-10-1995
 
150 acres, more or less, to IL (as shown by the survey of Raymond E. Leigh
Jr.)


995-340
 
5-8-1995
 
Property to R-3 (located at Tracts T-6 and T-7 of the Charles H, Reichmuth
Farm Subdivision)


995-341
 
5-8-1995
 
20 acres, more or less, to R-3 (Lots T-1 and T-2 as shown on the survey of
Kendall Clemons)


995-346
 
6-12-1995
 
Property to B-2 (being Lot 22 in Wade Subdivision)


995-353
 
7-10-1995
 
Property to R-3 (being Lot 62 of Masdens Fairview Subdivision)


995-355
 
8-28-1995
 
Property to B-2 (requested by Davy and Patti Bratcher)


995-356
 
9-25-1995
 
Property to B-2 (requested by Sherman R. and Sheila Lynn Tinnell)


995-361
 
11-13-1995
 
Property to R-1 (requested by Eddie and Margaret Dawson)


995-362
 
11-11-1995
 
Property to R-4 (requested by Dorothy L. Gillahan)


995-363
 
11-11-1995
 
Property to R-3 (requested by Samuel Dever)


996-365
 
2-26-1996
 
Property to B-2 (requested by Bobby R. and Hazel L. Roution and James W. and
Sylvia D. Griffin)


996-366
 
2-26-1996
 
Property to B-2 (requested by Roy M. Wilson)


996-367
 
2-26-1996
 
Property to B-1 (requested by Woodrow Jr. and Linda Tinnell)


996-368
 
3-11-1996
 
0.420 acre to R-3 (requested by Jerry L. and Donna R. Froman)


996-369
 
3-25-1996
 
Property to B-2 (requested by Albert and Linda J. Tinnell)


996-370
 
3-25-1996
 
26.85 acres, more or less, to R-3 (requested by Gary D., Lou Ann and Marie
Moore)


996-371
 
3-25-1996
 
0.19 acre, more or less, to R-3 (requested by William Howard and Bessie Mae
Crenshaw)


996-374
 
5-13-1996
 
36 acres, more or less, to R-3 (requested by Ernest R. and Virginia H. Walls)


996-379
 
7-8-1996
 
Property to R-3 (requested by David Earl and Marilyn Elise Ryan)


996-380
 
8-12-1996
 
Property to B-2 (requested by the Estate of Mary Elizabeth Swanner)


996-387
 
11-1-1996
 
4 acres, more or less, to R-2 (requested by Teresa Browner and Ronald Gaw)


996-388
 
11-1-1996
 
Property to R-3 (being Lots, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38,
39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71
and 72 in the W.H. Hays Subdivision)


996-391
 
1-13-1997
 
9.555 acres of property to R-1 (requested by Gary L. Taylor and Ricki R. and
Tina Robinson)


997-393
 
3-24-1997
 
Property to R-4 (requested by James N. and Carolyn Nalley)


997-394
 
3-24-1997
 
Property to R-3 (requested by Reid Brothers, Inc.)


997-395
 
3-24-1997
 
Property to R-3 (requested by the Family Homes Construction Company)


997-396
 
3-24-1997
 
Property to R-3 (being Tract T-3 and Tract T-4 of the Charles H. Reichmuth
Farm Subdivision)


997-398
 
4-28-1997
 
Property to B-1 (requested by Anthony Cox)


997-399
 
4-28-1997
 
Property to B-1 (requested by Gene A. and Mildred Hester)


997-408
 
7-28-1997
 
Property to R-3 (Tracts T-5 and T-8 of the Charles H. Reichmuth Farm
Subdivision)


997-409
 
7-28-1997
 
Property to B-1 (the property of Paraquet Corporation)


997-413
 
9-8-1997
 
3 acres to B-1 (requested by Thomas B. Givhan)


997-414
 
10-29-1997
 
Property to R-4 (requested by Rosanna L. Barker)


997-417
 
11-10-1997
 
Property to B-2 (Lots 20 and 21 of Wade Subdivision)


997-421
 
1-12-1998
 
Property to B-2 (requested by R.L. and Wanda F. Collins)


998-423
 
2-9-1998
 
Property to R-3 (requested by Barney A. and Betty L. Horton)


998-425
 
3-9-1998
 
Property to R-3 (being Lot 61 of Masden Fairview Subdivision)


998-426
 
3-23-1998
 
Property to B-2 (requested by Corinne Hill)


998-428
 
3-23-1998
 
Property to B-2 (requested by Seven Counties Services, Inc.)


998-429
 
4-13-1998
 
Property to R-3 (being Lot 10 of Simmons Subdivision)


998-433
 
5-11-1998
 
Property to R-3 (requested by Anthony Wayne Hill)


998-434
 
5-11-1998
 
Property to B-2 (requested by the Cox Enterprises Corporation)


998-437
 
7-13-1998
 
Property to R-4 (mobile home location)


998-438
 
7-27-1998
 
3.84 acres, more or less, to R-3 (requested by Samuel and Vicki Dever)


998-439
 
7-27-1998
 
Property to R-3 (requested by Bobby and Hazel Roution)


998-442
 
8-24-1998
 
7.6531 acres, more or less, to B-2 (requested by the McAdams Living Trust,
Ben McAdams and M. Pauline McAdams)


998-443
 
8-24-1998
 
Property to B-2 (requested by Eddie and Margaret Dawson)


999-451
 
2-22-1999
 
420 acres, more or less, to B-2 and IL (owned by the Salt River Development
Company, LLC)


999-454
 
3-22-1999
 
9.2 acres, more or less, to B-1 (owned by Mary Jo West)


999-455
 
4-14-1999
 
6.07 acres, more or less, to B-1 (owned by James M. and Jenny Bieckert)


999-456
 
4-14-1999
 
50-foot setback to B-2 (from Cedar Grove Road)


999-457
 
--1999
 
5 acres, more or less, to R-3 (owned by Dennis and Nancy Knowles)


999-458
 
5-25-1999
 
10 acres, more or less, to R-3 (owned by J. Chester Porter and Maria Bouvette)


999-466
 
7-12-1999
 
0.498 acre, more or less, to R-3 (owned by Kay Oakley)


999-467
 
7-12-1999
 
Property to B-2 (located at 316 Plum Street)


999-469
 
8-9-1999
 
8 acres to B-2 (located behind the Bo-Kay Florist at 1795 Highway 44 East)


999-470
 
8-23-1999
 
2 lots to R-4 (located at 141 Bryant Street)


999-472
 
9-13-1999
 
10 acres to R-3 (5 acres located at 1503 Beech Grove Road and 5 acres at 1508
Beech Grove Road)


999-473
 
9-13-1999
 
0.92 acres to B-2 (located at 1203 Highway 44 East)


000-483
 
2-14-2000
 
Property to R-3 (located at Lot D of the Howlett Heirs Division located on
the west side of Fugate Lane, 900 feet, more or less, south of Highway 44
West)


000-486
 
2-14-2000
 
Property to B-2 (located at 590 Cedar Grove Road)


000-487
 
2-14-2000
 
Property to B-2 (located at 147 Combs Court)


000-490
 
3-13-2000
 
0.591232 acre, more or less, to B-2 (located at 640 and 648 Old Preston
Highway)


000-492
 
4-24-2000
 
2.672 acres, more or less, to R-3 (located on the north side of Beech Grove
Road, abutting the west property line of 400 Beech Grove Road)


000-496
 
4-24-2000
 
Property to B-2 (located at 1425 Highway 44 East)


000-500
 
6-26-2000
 
Property to IG (located at 1215 W. Blue Lick Road)


000-503
 
7-10-2000
 
3.17 acres, more or less, to R-3 (located on the south side of Chillicoop
Road, 2,000 feet, more or less, east of Raymond Road)


000-504
 
7-10-2000
 
55 acres, more or less, to B-1 (located at 4404 Coral Ridge Road)


000-505
 
7-10-2000
 
9.45 acres, more or less, to EP-A (located at 456 Sarver Lane)


000-506
 
7-10-2000
 
58 acres, more or less, to EP-B (located at 558 Sarver Lane)


000-511
 
11-27-2000
 
1 acre, more or less, to B-2 (located at 290 Old Preston Highway South, on
the southeast corner of the intersection of Harley and Old Preston Highway)


000-512
 
11-27-2000
 
0.740 acre, more or less, to B-1 (located at 260 Hester Street, in the
unconstructed gravel road known as North Street)


001-513
 
2-26-2001
 
22.849 acres, more or less, to R-3 (located on the south side of Highway 44
East in front of the KOA Campground)


001-514
 
3-12-2001
 
Property to B-2 (located at 161 Combs Court)


001-515
 
3-12-2001
 
4.04 acres, more or less, to B-1 (located on the west side of Dawson Drive,
north of Cedar Grove Road)


001-517
 
4-9-2001
 
11.403 acres, more or less, to IL (located at 1838 S. Preston Highway)


001-526
 
6-28-2001
 
5.68 acres, more or less, to R-1 (located at 197 Haley Avenue)


001-527
 
6-11-2001
 
1.9787 acres, more or less, to R-3 (located at 2574 Highway 44 East)


001-530
 
9-10-2001
 
2.3 acres, more or less, to B-2 (located at Lots 7, 8, 9 and 10 of Capps Park
Subdivision on Stevens Drive and Phillip Court)


001-532
 
10-22-2001
 
4.51 acres, more or less, to R-1 (located at 718 Beech Grove Road)


001-534
 
11-26-2001
 
77.472 acres, more or less, to IL (located on the north side of Cedar Grove
Road, 6/10 of a mile, east of I-65)


002-535
 
1-14-2002
 
0.703 acre, more or less, to B-2 (located at 144 Phillips Court)


002-538
 
1-28-2002
 
1.5 acres, more or less, to B-2 (located at 210 Stevens Drive)


002-539
 
2-11-2002
 
1.709 acres, more or less, to B-2 (located at the southwest intersection of
S. Preston Highway and Beech Grove Road)


002-543
 
4-8-2002
 
1 acre, more or less, to B-1 (located on the north side of Cedar Grove Road
abutting the west property line of Cedar Grove Elementary School)


002-545
 
5-13-2002
 
3.5 acres, more or less, to B-1 (located at 1260 Beech Grove Road)


002-546
 
5-13-2002
 
1 acre, more or less, to B-2 (located at 240 Stevens Drive)


002-547
 
5-13-2002
 
0.89 acres, more or less, to R-3 (located on the west side of Fugate Lane,
300 feet south of Highway 44 West)


002-557
 
7-8-2002
 
3.43 acres, more or less, to R-3 (located on the west side of Haley Avenue
and 180 feet from Beech Grove Road)


002-558
 
8-26-2002
 
24.47 acres, more or less, to B-2 and 3.21 acres, more or less, to B-2 (both
located on Highway 44 East - 4th Street - and connecting to Highway 61 North
- Buckman Street)


002-563
 
9-23-2002
 
1.5 acres, more or less, to B-2 (located at the northeast intersection of
Cedar Grove Road and N. Hickory Lane)


002-565
 
11-25-2002
 
0.68 acres, more or less, to B-2 (located at 1994 Highway 44 East)


002-566
 
12-9-2002
 
10 acres to R-3, more or less (located to the south of Old Ford Road and on
the north side of Beech Grove Road)


003-568
 
2-24-2003
 
10.58 acres, more or less, to R-3 (located between 614 and 718 Beech Grove
Road)


003-570
 
4-14-2003
 
34.39 acres, more or less, to B-1, and 122.35 acres, more or less, to IL
(located on the south side of Cedar Grove Road across from the Cedar Grove
Elementary School)


003-571
 
4-14-2003
 
4.78 acres, more or less, to IL (located at 212 Cedar Grove Road)


003-572
 
4-14-2003
 
10 acres, more or less, to B-1 (located at 1689 S. Preston Highway)


003-573
 
4-14-2003
 
39.35 acres, more or less, to R-3 (located at 438 Old Ford Road)


003-577
 
5-12-2003
 
0.3 acre, more or less, to R-3 (located at the northeast intersection of
Cherry Street and Plum Street)


003-578
 
5-12-2003
 
8.61 acres, more or less, to B-1 (located on the west side of Coral Ridge
Road, 200 feet, more or less, north of 301 Coral Ridge Road)


003-579
 
5-12-2003
 
3.99 acre, more or less, to B-2 (located at the intersection of Highway 44
East and Houston Drive)


003-594
 
--2003
 
28 acres, more or less, to R-3 (located on the south side of Highway 44 East,
abutting the east property line on 2003 Highway 44 East)


003-596
 
--2003
 
3.40 acres, more or less, to R-3 (located on the west side of S. Preston
Highway, abutting the north property line of Insight Communications at 695 S.
Preston Highway)


003-598
 
--2003
 
2.48 acres, more or less, to R-1 (accessed through a 15-foot easement on the
left side of Haley Avenue, approximately 1,000 feet, more or less, from Beech
Grove Road)


004-607
 
2-9-2004
 
9 acres, more or less, to B-1 (located at 334 Cedar Grove Road)


004-609
 
2-23-2004
 
840 acres, more or less, to R-3 (located on the north side of Cedar Grove
Road, bounded by Mooney Lane on the west, Valley View Drive on the east and
Salt River on the north)


004-612
 
3-8-2004
 
0.7 acre, more or less, to B-2 (located at 1369 Highway 44 West)


004-620
 
4-26-2004
 
70 acres, more or less, to R-3 (beginning at the southwest intersection of W.
Blue Lick Road and Saltwell Drive)


004-625
 
5-24-2004
 
108 acres, more or less, to R-3 (located on the west side of N. Preston
Highway, abutting the north property line of the U.S. Post Office and then
running in a westerly direction to W. Blue Lick Road in the vicinity of
Saltwell Road)


004-626
 
5-24-2004
 
5.8 acres, more or less, to B-1 (located at the southeast intersection of
Highway 44 West and Hensley Road)


004-627
 
5-24-2004
 
53.163 acres to EPA and 66.864 acres to EPB (located at 4404 Coral Ridge Road
and Sarver Lane)


004-631
 
6-28-2004
 
31.67 acres, more or less, to R-3 (located on the east side of Hensley Road,
800 feet, more or less, south of Highway 44 West)


004-635
 
8-23-2004
 
172.2 acres, more or less (47.752 acres belonging to Sheila Bolus and 124.423
acres belonging to the Troutwine Family, LLC) (located on the east side of W.
Blue Lick Road, 1, 500 feet, more or less, north of Salt Well Road)


004-636
 
8-23-2004
 
109.931 acres, more or less, to IL (located on the north side of Cedar Grove
Road, 300 feet, more or less, west of the Cedar Grove Elementary School)


004-641
 
10-11-2004
 
9.95 acres, more or less, to B-2 (located on the south side of Highway 44
East abutting the east property line of 2003 Highway 44 East)


004-642
 
10-25-2004
 
5 acres, more or less, to B-1 (located on the east side of the connector
road, 1,000 feet, more or less, south of Cedar Grove Road)


004-644
 
11-8-2004
 
60 feet by 150 feet to B-2 (located at 1289 Highway 44 East)


004-645
 
11-22-2004
 
10 acres, more or less, to B-1 (accessed through an easement between the
Bullitt County Stockyards and the Bullitt County Road Department on S.
Preston Highway)


005-650
 
1-24-2005
 
2.25 acres, more or less, to R-3 (located on the south side of Northside
Avenue, 400 feet, more or less, west of N. Preston Highway)


005-651
 
1-24-2005
 
0.67 acre, more or less, to B-2 (located at 2002 Highway 44 East)


005-653
 
4-25-2005
 
3.5 acres, more or less, to R-3 (located at 640 W. Blue Lick Road)


005-654
 
4-25-2005
 
85 feet by 149 feet to R-3 (located at 654 W. Blue Lick Road)


005-657
 
6-13-2005
 
0.20 acre, more or less, to R-3 (located at the southwest intersection of
Cedar Grove Road and S. Hickory Lane)


005-665
 
6-21-2005
 
6.66 acres, more or less, to B-2 (located at 3088 Highway 44 East)


005-666
 
6-21-2005
 
40.64 acres, more or less, to R-2 (located at 3088 Highway 44 East)


005-671
 
8-22-2005
 
159.30 acres, more or less, to R-3 (located at 2761 Cedar Grove Road)


005-680
 
11-28-2005
 
0.57 acre, more or less, to B-2 (located at 2933 Highway 44 East)


005-681
 
11-28-2005
 
13.25 acres, more or less, to IL (located at 1880 and 1954 S. Preston Highway)


006-685
 
2-13-2006
 
0.5 acre, more or less, to B-2 (located at 1357 Highway 44 East)


006-868
 
2-13-2006
 
86 acres, more or less, to B-1 (located at 1788 and 1889 Cedar Grove Road)


006-687
 
2-13-2006
 
181.79 acres, more or less, to IL (located at the end of Mooney Lane)


006-688
 
2-27-2006
 
1.4 acres, more or less, to R-4 (located at 158 Cedar Grove Road)


006-692
 
4-24-2006
 
3.40 acres, more or less, to B-1 (located on the west side of S. Preston
Highway abutting the north property line of Insight Cable Company)


006-697
 
6-26-2006
 
62 feet by 260 feet to R-3 (located at 670 W. Blue Lick Road)


006-698
 
6-26-2006
 
150 feet by 200 feet to B-2 (located at 314 Old Preston Highway South)


006-701
 
7-24-2006
 
150 feet by 155 feet to B-2 (located at 175 N. Maple Street)


006-702
 
7-24-2006
 
169.84 acres, more or less, to B-2 (located on Conestoga Parkway)


006-703
 
7-24-2006
 
1.44 acres, more or less, to IL (located at 190 Cedar Grove Road)


006-704
 
8-14-2006
 
47.30 acres, more or less, to R-3 (located at 3088 Highway 44 East)


006-706
 
8-28-2006
 
16 acres, more or less, to IG (located on the north side of Buffalo Run Road
at its intersection with Ohm Drive)


006-711
 
10-23-2006
 
0.78 acre, more or less, to B-2 (located on Hester Street across from the
Shepherdsville Square Shopping Center)


006-713
 
12-11-2006
 
2.86 acres, more or less, to R-3 (located at 309 Old Ford Road)


007-716
 
2-12-2007
 
Two acres, more or less, to B-2 (located at the southeast intersection of
Highway 44 East and Huston Drive)


007-717
 
3-12-2007
 
1.81 acres, more or less, to B-1 (located at the northeast intersection of
Old Preston Highway South and Cedar Grove Road)


007-722
 
6-11-2007
 
40.88 acres, more or less, to IL; 0.60 acre, more or less, to R-2 (located at
412 Cedar Grove Road, property to the rear of 412 Cedar Grove Road and
property abutting the west property line of 360 Cedar Grove Road)


007-724
 
6-25-2007
 
5.5 acres, more or less, to B-1 (located at the intersection of Charles
Hamilton Highway and a road formerly known as Maraman Road, just south of
Highway 480)


007-727
 
7-23-2007
 
9.619 acres, more or less, to B-2; 149.71 acres, more or less, to IL (located
at 2761 Cedar Grove Road)


007-728
 
8-13-2007
 
3 acres, more or less, to B-2 (located at 207, 237 and 247 Highway 44 West)


007-735
 
10-22-2007
 
1.37 acres, more or less, to B-1 (located at 1746 Highway 44 East)


007-736
 
10-22-2007
 
0.61 acre, more or less, to B-2 (located at 141 Plum Street)


008-737
 
1-14-2008
 
119.8 acres, more or less, to IL (located behind Love’s Truck Stop at 1090
Cedar Grove Road)


008-740
 
3-10-2008
 
8 acres, more or less, to IG (located at 1825 S. Preston Highway)


008-749
 
7-28-2008
 
Repealing Ord. 007-736 (rezoning of property located at 141 Plum Street)


008-751
 
8-11-2008
 
3.24 acres, more or less, to R-3 (located at the end of Haley Avenue)


008-758
 
12-8-2008
 
1.251 acres, more or less, to B-1 (located at 550 Sparrow Drive)


009-761
 
2-23-2009
 
1.1 acres, more or less, to B-1 (located at 1566 Highway 44 East)


009-762
 
2-23-2009
 
115.919 acres, more or less, to B-2 (front 3.056 acres) and I-L (remaining
112.863 acres) (located along Highway 480 adjacent to the Cedar Grove
Business Park, Phase III)


009-764
 
4-13-2009
 
8.470 acres, more or less, to R-3 (located at 377 Nancy Drive)


009-766
 
6-9-2009
 
5.8 acres, more or less, to R-3 (located at the corner of Hensley Road and
Highway 44 West)


010-771
 
7-13-2009
 
5.509 acres, more or less, to I-L (located at 984 Old Preston Highway)


010-779
 
6-28-2010
 
0.307 acre, more or less, to R-3 (located at the corner of West Blue Lick
Road and Bryant Lane)


011-076
 
5-9-2011
 
1.765 acres, more or less, to R-3 (located on the south side of Old Cedar
Grove Road, approximately 600 feet off Cedar Grove Road)


011-087
 
9-26-2011
 
95 feet by 165 feet, more or less, to B-2 (located at 748 Highway 44 West)


011-091
 
11-28-2011
 
35.875 acres, more or less, to IL (located at Tract 6-B and a portion of
Tract 7 on Congress Parkway in the Settlers Point Business Park)


012-094
 
1-23-2012
 
2.32 acres, more or less, to I-G (located at 1925 S. Preston Highway)


012-095
 
2-23-2012
 
48 acres, more or less, to I-G (located on the west side of S. Preston
Highway just south of Beech Grove Road)


012-096
 
2-23-2012
 
1.48 acres, more or less, to I-G (located at 5241 S. Preston Highway just
south of Beech Grove Road)


012-097
 
2-23-2012
 
89 acres, more or less, to I-G (located on the west side of S. Preston
Highway just south of Beech Grove Road)


012-098
 
3-12-2012
 
1.7 acres, more or less, to R-3 (located at Lots 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 and 21 of
Masden Acres located on the west side of W. Shannon Lane)


012-099
 
3-12-2012
 
2.3 acres, more or less, to B-1 (located at 745 S. Preston Highway)


012-111
 
6-25-2012
 
1.47 acres, more or less, to R-2 (located at 703 Cedar Grove Road)


012-112
 
8-13-2012
 
1.325 acres, more or less, to B-1 (located on Lot 2-E in Settlers Point
Business Park)


012-113
 
8-13-2012
 
2.8 acres, more or less, to R-3 (located at the corner of Hensley Road and
Highway 44 West)


012-114
 
8-13-2012
 
1.5 acres, more or less, to R-1 (located at 2028 S. Preston Highway)


012-120
 
11-5-2012
 
0.438 acre, more or less, to B-2 (located at 154 and 166 Highway 44 West)


012-122
 
12-10-2012
 
100 feet by 200 feet, more or less, to B-1 (located on Old Preston Highway -
Salt River area)


012-123
 
12-10-2012
 
120 feet by 110 feet, more or less, to R-4 (located at 193 Hester Street)


013-126
 
2-11-2013
 
4 acres, more or less, to R-1 (located at 1196 Forest Hill Road)


013-129
 
4-8-2013
 
25.43 acres, more or less, to B-1 (located 1,680 linear feet north of the
intersection of Adam Shepherd Parkway and Conestoga Parkway)


013-130
 
6-10-2013
 
1.03589 acres, more or less, to IL (located on the south side of Adam
Shepherd Parkway adjoining the CSX Railroad and existing Publishers property)


013-131
 
6-10-2013
 
0.50 acre, more or less, to B-1 (located on Adam Shepherd Parkway between
Frisch’s Restaurant and PNC Bank)


013-139
 
8-12-2013
 
1.701 acres, more or less, to B-1 (located at 699 N. Buckman Street)


013-146
 
11-25-2013
 
79.3 feet by 156 feet, more or less, to B-2 (located at 178 Combs Street)


014-158
 
7-28-2014
 
3.42 acres, more or less, to R-3 (located at the corner of Highway 44 East
and Boardwalk Avenue)


014-159
 
7-28-2014
 
0.7 acre, more or less, to R-3 (located at the corner of Highway 44 East and
Boardwalk Avenue)


014-160
 
7-28-2014
 
6 acres, more or less, to B-1 (located at 438 Old Preston Highway)


014-166
 
10-13-2014
 
1.3 acres, more or less, to R-3 (located at 210 and 230 W. Blue Lick Road)


015-184
 
5-11-2015
 
1.73 acres, more or less, to B-1 (located on Highway 44 West)


015-193
 
8-11-2015
 
141.4 acres, more or less, to I-L (located at Buffalo Run and Ohm Drive south
of Buffalo Run and east of I-65)


015-194
 
8-11-2015
 
164.6 acres, more or less, to I-L (located at 1470 Arrow Creek Road south of
Buffalo Run and east of I-65)


015-197
 
10-5-2015
 
88.63 acres, more or less, to I-G (located at 5231 S. Preston Highway)


015-198
 
10-5-2015
 
51.75 acres, more or less, to I-G (located at S. Preston Highway)


016-202
 
2-9-2016
 
0.85 acre, more or less, to B-1 (located at the northwest corner of Highway
44 East and Hoot Owl Camp Road)


016-203
 
3-22-2016
 
65 feet by 140 feet, more or less, to B-2 (located at 230 Highway 44 West)


016-215
 
6-14-2016
 
0.57 acre, more or less, to B-2 (located at 472 N. Buckman Street)


016-217
 
6-17-2016
 
0.77 acre, more or less, to I-L (adjacent to Buffalo Run)


016-222
 
10-11-2016
 
1.15 acres, more or less, to R-3 (located on east side of Hoot Owl Camp Road)


016-223
 
12-13-2016
 
.75 acre, more or less, to B-2 (located at West 4th Street and KY 44)


016-224
 
12-13-2016
 
.52 acre, more or less, to B-2 (located at West 4th Street and KY 44)


017-228
 
4-10-2017
 
0.42 acres, more or less, to B-2 (located at the corner of Abbott Street and
Highway 44)


017-229
 
4-10-2017
 
2.77 acres, more or less, to B-1 (located at 258 West Blue Lick Road)


017-231
 
5-22-2017
 
0.106 acres, more or less, to B-2 (located at 142 Abbott Street)


017-232
 
5-22-2017
 
30.963 acres, more or less, to R-3 (along West Blue Lick Road)


017-241
 
9-11-2017
 
6.88 acres, more or less, to I-L (located at Settlers Point Business Park)


017-245
 
10-23-2017
 
532.76 acres, more or less, to I-L (made up of various parcels along I-65
from Cooper Run Road south to Chapeze Lane)


017-249
 
11-27-2017
 
4.67 acres, to I-L (located at 1315 Cedar Grove Road)


2017-252
 
1-8-2018
 
43.811 acres, to B-1 (located at South Lakeview Drive between KY 44E, Salt
River, and the northbound exit ramp of I-65)


018-253
 
2-26-2018
 
3.2, 0.52, and 0.75 acres, to B-1 (made up of three parcels adjoining Highway
44 West between North Buckman Street and Mobile Park Drive)


018-254
 
2-26-2018
 
3.2, 0.52, and 0.75 acres, to B-1 (made up of three parcels adjoining Highway
44 West between North Buckman Street and Mobile Park Drive)


2018-255
 
3-26-2018
 
2.569 acres, more or less, to R-3 (located at South Lakeview Drive between
East Fourth Street and the dead end of South Lakeview Drive)


018-256
 
4-23-2018
 
0.242 acres, more or less, to B-2 (located at 299 Old Ford Road)


018-259
 
6-11-2018
 
32.26 acres, more or less, to I-G (located at 857 Park Loop Road)


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE IV:  LEASES, AGREEMENTS AND CONTRACTS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




997-419
 
12-8-1997
 
Acquiring property with the assistance from the Federal Emergency Management
Administration


002-541
 
2-25-2002
 
Approving a lease for financing of a public project; payment and security;
maintenance


007-732
 
9-10-2007
 
Approving a lease for financing public property; payment and security;
maintenance


008-742
 
6-9-2008
 
Approving a lease for financing public safety vehicles and equipment; payment
and security; maintenance


008-741
 
6-16-2008
 
Approving a lease for financing an overpass, bypass and/or road; payment and
security; maintenance


010-788
 
7-12-2010
 
Approving a lease for financing of a public project; payment and security;
maintenance


014-172
 
12-29-2014
 
Approving a lease agreement with Republic Bank and Trust Company to finance
the acquisition of police vehicles


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE V:  CLOSING OR ABANDONING STREETS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




990-227
 
12-10-1990
 
Closing a ten-foot wide alley


990-229
 
1-14-1991
 
Closing a ten-foot alleyway and a 50-foot portion of Bird Street


991-247
 
10-14-1991
 
Closing a 40-foot portion of Mellwood Drive


992-258
 
3-9-1992
 
Closing a 50-foot portion of Harbor Avenue


992-274
 
8-24-1992
 
Closing a 50-foot portion of a street in Oxley’s Paroquet Addition


993-289
 
2-8-1993
 
Closing a 50-foot portion of Harbor Avenue


993-297
 
4-12-1993
 
Closing a 50-foot street running from Cliffside Drive and an open field
adjoining Floyds Fork


993-308
 
11-22-1993
 
Closing a ten-foot alley running from a passway in the Grace Ice Subdivision
parallel to Highway 44 West


995-347
 
6-26-1995
 
Closing a 50-foot portion of Sheena Court


995-350
 
6-12-1995
 
Closing an 80-foot portion of West Street


995-351
 
6-26-1995
 
Closing a 40-foot portion of Fifth Avenue


996-372
 
4-22-1996
 
Closing a portion of a 30-foot street (Hester Street)


996-373
 
6-10-1996
 
Closing a portion of a ten-foot alley


997-401
 
5-12-1997
 
Closing a 50-foot wide unconstructed street


998-447
 
10-12-1998
 
Closing two unconstructed alleys


002-537
 
--2002
 
Closing a portion of a road formerly known as Dawson Drive


002-549
 
6-10-2002
 
Closing a portion of a road formerly known as Third Street and Walnut Street


005-670
 
8-8-2005
 
Closing a right-of-way known as Croan and Griffin Alley


006-693
 
5-8-2006
 
Closing a right-of-way known as a ten-foot passway between Abbott Street
through the St. Aloyius Church property


007-730
 
9-24-2007
 
Closing/abandoning a portion of an unnamed alley between Second Street and
Frank E. Simon alley


009-767
 
10-12-2009
 
Closing/abandoning a portion of an unimproved alley running southeast from
Highway 44


009-768
 
10-12-2009
 
Closing/abandoning a portion of an unimproved alley formerly known as North
Street running southeast from Highway 44


010-784
 
7-26-2010
 
Closing/abandoning a portion of North Street running south of Highway 44


010-785
 
7-26-2010
 
Closing/abandoning a portion of an unimproved alley running south of Highway
44


010-786
 
7-26-2010
 
Closing/abandoning a portion of an unimproved alley running south of Highway
44 West


011-794
 
3-28-2011
 
Closing/abandoning a portion of an unimproved alley formally known as North
Street/Hogland Street running southeast from Highway 44


013-128
 
4-8-2013
 
Closing a 20-foot wide right-of-way on Publishers Press intersecting Adam
Shepherd Parkway


013-132
 
6-10-2013
 
Closing a right-of-way known as a 0.11-acre passway of Fifth Avenue


015-191
 
7-28-2015
 
Closing a 30-foot wide right-of-way of Second Avenue


016-207
 
4-12-2016
 
Closing a right-of-way known as 2.12 acres of Buffalo Run Road


016-216
 
6-14-2016
 
Closing a right-of-way known as a 2.12-acre roadway, partially Buffalo Run
Road


 
 
 
 
 




 



PARALLEL REFERENCES



References to Kentucky Revised Statutes



References to 1991 Code



References to Ordinances



REFERENCES TO KENTUCKY REVISED STATUTES



 

KRS Section
 
Code Section




15.410 through 15.510
 
32.22


17.150
 
32.22


18A.225(2)
 
113.12


18A.228
 
113.12


24A.120
 
152.99, 154.999


61.080
 
34.022


61.090
 
34.022


61.252
 
34.021


61.805 to 61.850
 
31.19


61.810
 
34.023, 34.079


61.815
 
34.023


61.870 to 61.884
 
33.13, 34.005, 34.028, 34.074, 34.082


Ch. 64
 
32.41


65.003
 
34.003


65.007
 
31.44


65.8801 to 65.8839
 
31.15, 31.16, 31.26


65.8815(5)
 
31.19


67.084 et seq.
 
156.01


67C.105
 
152.35


Ch. 78
 
32.45


78.510(21)
 
32.04


82.082
 
34.003


Ch. 83A
 
32.45


83A.010(5)
 
10.02


83A.010(6)
 
10.02


83A.010(8)
 
10.02


83A.045
 
32.02


83A.045(2)(b)(1)
 
32.02


83A.060(5)
 
151.05, 151.40


83A.060(8)(b)
 
Adopting Ordinance


83A.065
 
10.99


83A.080
 
Ch. 32, 34.004


83A.130
 
Ch. 30, 30.01


83A.130(9)
 
32.16


83A.130(12)
 
Ch. 32


83A.165
 
32.02


83A.170
 
32.02


83A.175
 
32.02, 32.18


87.175
 
32.17


Ch. 90
 
33.08


90.310 et seq.
 
33.01


90.360
 
33.21


91A.010(4)
 
10.02


91A.010(8)
 
10.02


91A.040
 
36.01


91A.070
 
36.02


91A.080
 
113.01


91A.080(6)
 
113.06


91A.350 to 91A.390
 
31.42


Ch. 95
 
33.08


95.445
 
32.22


95.761 et seq.
 
33.01


95.761(3)
 
33.21


Ch. 100
 
31.01, 152.15


100.111
 
154.003


100.111(2)
 
152.36


100.365
 
92.01


131.010(6)
 
113.06


Ch. 134
 
36.02


Ch. 136
 
110.21


136.120
 
111.03


136.575(1)
 
110.21


151.250
 
156.06


Ch. 154
 
35.01


186.042
 
70.07


189.040(9)
 
Ch. 71, 71.02


189.080
 
Ch. 71


189.287
 
Ch. 71


189.410
 
Ch. 71


189.460
 
70.07


189.700
 
114.01


198.010 et seq.
 
Ch. 151


198B.050
 
Ch. 151


198B.060
 
Ch. 151


198B.110
 
Ch. 151


198B.990
 
151.01, 153.99


218A
 
117.37, 117.41


227.300
 
31.60


227.320
 
151.04


227.702
 
110.04


242.123
 
112.02


Ch. 243
 
111.03


243.070
 
112.01


243.070(7)
 
112.03


244.290
 
112.03


244.290(3)(d)(6)
 
112.02


244.480
 
112.03


252.170 et seq.
 
Ch. 92


258.005 et seq.
 
Ch. 92


258.255
 
92.05


281.655
 
114.07


Ch. 322
 
155.02


Ch. 337
 
32.45


Ch. 344
 
93.03


344.230(3)
 
93.03


376.275
 
35.17, 91.59


404, Subtitle 39
 
114.07


413.072
 
91.04


Ch. 424
 
116.03


446.010(1)
 
10.02


446.010(2)
 
10.02


446.010(8)
 
10.02


446.010(9)
 
10.02


446.010(10)
 
10.02


446.010(12)
 
10.02


446.010(13)
 
10.02


446.010(14)
 
10.02


446.010(15)
 
10.02


446.010(17)
 
10.02


446.010(18)
 
10.02


446.010(23)
 
10.02


446.010(25)
 
10.02


446.010(26)
 
10.02


446.010(27)
 
10.02


446.010(28)
 
10.02


446.010(30)
 
10.02


446.010(31)
 
10.02


446.010(33)
 
10.02


446.010(37)
 
10.02


446.010(39)
 
10.02


446.010(43)
 
10.02


446.010(46)
 
10.02


446.010(47)
 
10.02


446.010(49)
 
10.02


446.010(55)
 
10.02


446.020(1)
 
10.03


446.020(2)
 
10.03


446.030
 
10.04


446.050
 
10.05


446.060
 
10.06


446.080(1)
 
10.03


446.080(3)
 
10.03


446.080(4)
 
10.03


446.090
 
10.07


446.100
 
10.08, 10.09


446.140
 
10.01


500.090
 
117.99


506.030
 
117.37, 117.41


510.140
 
117.37


527.020
 
130.04


Ch. 528
 
117.37


Ch. 529
 
117.37, 117.41


Ch. 530
 
117.37, 117.41


Ch. 531
 
117.37


534.040(2)(c)
 
10.99


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO 1991 CODE



 

1991 Code
 
2017 Code




2-26
 
30.01


2-27
 
30.02


2-28
 
30.03


2-62
 
31.01


2-81
 
31.02


2-101
 
32.03


2-116
 
32.15


2-117
 
32.15


2-118
 
32.15


2-119
 
32.15


2-120
 
32.15


2-156
 
32.16


2-157
 
32.16


2-158
 
32.16


2-159
 
32.16


2-160
 
32.16


2-176
 
32.17


2-177
 
32.17


2-178
 
32.17


2-179
 
32.17


2-180
 
32.17


2-181
 
32.17


2-201
 
32.18


2-202
 
32.18


2-203
 
32.18


2-204
 
32.18


2-205
 
32.18


2-221
 
32.19


2-222
 
32.19


2-223
 
32.19


2-224
 
32.19


2-225
 
32.19


2-241
 
32.20


2-242
 
32.20


2-243
 
32.20


2-244
 
32.20


2-245
 
32.20


2-281
 
32.22


2-282
 
32.22


2-283
 
32.22


2-284
 
32.22


2-285
 
32.22


2-301
 
32.22


2-302
 
32.22


2-303
 
32.22


2-304
 
32.22


2-305
 
32.22


2-306
 
32.22


2-321
 
32.23


2-322
 
32.23


2-323
 
32.23


2-324
 
32.23


2-325
 
32.23


2-336
 
32.24


2-337
 
32.24


2-338
 
32.24


2-339
 
32.24


2-340
 
32.24


2-416
 
31.55


2-417
 
31.56


2-418
 
31.57


2-419
 
31.58


2-420
 
31.59


2-421
 
31.60


2-422
 
31.61, 31.99


2-423
 
31.61, 31.99


2-424
 
31.62, 31.99


2-425
 
31.63


3-1
 
92.01


3-2
 
92.02


3-3
 
92.03


3-4
 
92.04


3-5
 
92.05


3-6
 
92.06


3-7
 
92.07


3-8
 
92.08


3-9
 
92.09


3-10
 
92.99


3-31
 
92.20


3-32
 
92.21


3-46
 
92.35


3-47
 
92.36


3-48
 
92.37


3-49
 
92.38


3-66
 
92.50


3-67
 
92.50


3-68
 
92.51


3-69
 
92.52


4-1
 
151.01


4-26
 
151.02


4-27
 
151.03


4-41
 
151.20


4-42
 
151.21


4-43
 
151.21


4-44
 
151.22


4-45
 
151.23


4-46
 
151.24


4-47
 
151.25, 151.99


4-66
 
151.40


4-67
 
151.41


4-68
 
151.42


4-69
 
151.42


4-70
 
151.43


4-71
 
151.44


4-72
 
151.45


4-73
 
151.46


4-91
 
151.60


4-92
 
151.61


4-93
 
151.62


4-94
 
151.63


4-95
 
151.64


4-96
 
151.99


4-141
 
151.04


6-26
 
93.01


6-27
 
93.02


6-28
 
93.03


6-29
 
93.99


6-30
 
93.04


7-36
 
112.15


7-37
 
112.16


7-38
 
112.17


7-51
 
112.30


7-52
 
112.31


7-53
 
112.32


7-96
 
118.01


7-97
 
118.99


7-98
 
118.02


7-99
 
118.03


7-100
 
118.04


7-141
 
TSO Table I


7-142
 
TSO Table I


7-143
 
TSO Table I


7-144
 
TSO Table I


7-145
 
TSO Table I


7-146
 
TSO Table I


7-147
 
TSO Table I


7-148
 
TSO Table I


7-149
 
TSO Table I


7-150
 
TSO Table I


7-151
 
TSO Table I


7-152
 
TSO Table I


7-153
 
TSO Table I


7-154
 
TSO Table I


7-155
 
TSO Table I


7-156
 
TSO Table I


7-157
 
TSO Table I


7-158
 
TSO Table I


7-159
 
TSO Table I


7-160
 
TSO Table I


7-161
 
TSO Table I


7-162
 
TSO Table I


7-163
 
TSO Table I


7-181
 
TSO Table I


7-182
 
TSO Table I


7-183
 
TSO Table I


7-184
 
TSO Table I


7-185
 
TSO Table I


7-186
 
TSO Table I


7-187
 
TSO Table I


7-188
 
TSO Table I


7-189
 
TSO Table I


7-206
 
TSO Table I


7-207
 
TSO Table I


7-208
 
TSO Table I


7-209
 
TSO Table I


7-210
 
TSO Table I


7-211
 
TSO Table I


7-212
 
TSO Table I


7-213
 
TSO Table I


7-231
 
TSO Table I


7-232
 
TSO Table I


7-233
 
TSO Table I


7-234
 
TSO Table I


7-235
 
TSO Table I


7-236
 
TSO Table I


7-237
 
TSO Table I


7-238
 
TSO Table I


10-1
 
150.01


10-2
 
150.02


11-26
 
152.01


11-27
 
152.99


11-41
 
152.02


11-42
 
152.03, 152.99


11-56
 
152.04


11-57
 
152.04


11-58
 
152.04


11-71
 
152.15


11-72
 
152.16


11-73
 
152.17


11-74
 
152.99


11-75
 
152.18


11-76
 
152.19


11-77
 
152.20


11-78
 
152.21


11-79
 
152.21


11-80
 
152.22


11-96
 
90.01


11-97
 
90.02


11-98
 
90.99


11-116
 
90.15


11-117
 
90.16


11-118
 
90.17


11-119
 
90.18


11-120
 
90.19


11-121
 
90.20


11-122
 
90.21


11-123
 
90.22


12-36
 
70.01


12-37
 
70.99


12-38
 
70.02


12-39
 
Ch. 73 Schd. I


12-40
 
70.03


12-41
 
70.04


12-42
 
70.05


12-43
 
70.06, 70.99


12-44
 
70.07, 70.99


12-61
 
71.01


12-62
 
71.02


12-63
 
71.99


12-81
 
72.01


12-82
 
72.02


12-83
 
72.03


12-84
 
72.99


13-1
 
50.01


13-2
 
50.02, 50.99


App. A
 
TSO Table I


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




130.2
 
--
 
32.17


220.11
 
--
 
118.01—118.04


220.12
 
--
 
118.02, 118.03


220.14
 
--
 
118.99


310.2
 
--
 
31.55—31.63, 31.99


410.1
 
--
 
112.15—112.17


450.3
 
--
 
TSO Table I


480-48
 
--
 
TSO Table I


520.2
 
--
 
71.01, 71.02, 71.99


540.5
 
--
 
70.06, 70.99, Ch. 73 Schd. I


540.8
 
--
 
70.06, 70.99


540.9
 
--
 
70.06, 70.99


540.10
 
--
 
72.01—72.03, 72.99


610.2
 
--
 
50.01


620.2
 
--
 
152.01, 152.04


620.6
 
--
 
152.03, 152.99


620.7
 
--
 
152.02


840.4
 
--
 
92.01—92.09, 92.20, 92.21, 92.35—92.38, 92.50—92.52, 92.99


910.1
 
--
 
150.01


1020.5
 
--
 
90.01, 90.02, 90.15—90.22, 90.99


976-11
 
8--1976
 
TSO Table I


979-39
 
3-26-1979
 
151.60—151.64, 151.99


979-41
 
7-12-1979
 
151.40—151.46


979-43
 
10-11-1979
 
150.02


980-46
 
1-10-1980
 
TSO Table I


980-47
 
2-25-1980
 
70.06, 70.99


980-53
 
8-14-1980
 
31.01, 31.02


1981-65
 
6-22-1981
 
TSO Table I


981-69
 
8-24-1981
 
151.20


981-70
 
8-24-1981
 
TSO Table I


982-78
 
1-4-1982
 
32.17


982-79
 
1-4-1982
 
32.24


982-80
 
1-4-1982
 
32.21, 32.22


982-81
 
1-4-1982
 
32.18


982-82
 
1-4-1982
 
32.15, 32.19


982-83
 
1-4-1982
 
32.16


982-86
 
3-22-1982
 
151.01—151.03, 151.21—151.25, 151.99


982-88
 
4-26-1982
 
32.22


983-94
 
3-10-1983
 
93.01—93.04, 93.99


983-103
 
12-27-1983
 
32.17


983-104
 
12-27-1983
 
32.24


983-105
 
12-27-1983
 
32.21, 32.22


983-106
 
12-27-1983
 
32.18


983-107
 
12-27-1983
 
32.15, 32.19


983-108
 
12-27-1983
 
32.16


983-109
 
12-27-1983
 
32.20, 32.23


984-111
 
1-23-1984
 
30.02


984-117
 
10-22-1984
 
32.03


984-120
 
1-10-1985
 
112.30—112.32


985-130
 
9-23-1985
 
50.02, 50.99


985-132
 
11-25-1985
 
152.15—152.22, 152.99


986-144
 
11-10-1986
 
151.25, 151.99


987-159
 
8-26-1987
 
TSO Table I


988-161
 
3-25-1988
 
TSO Table I


988-164
 
5-23-1988
 
TSO Table I


989-198
 
7-24-1989
 
151.04


989-202
 
--1989
 
TSO Table I


990-210
 
4-9-1990
 
70.07, 70.99


990-217
 
6-25-1990
 
TSO Table III


990-218
 
8-27-1990
 
TSO Table III


990-222
 
9-24-1990
 
TSO Table III


990-223
 
10-22-1990
 
TSO Table III


990-224
 
10-23-1990
 
TSO Table III


990-225
 
12-10-1990
 
TSO Table III


990-226
 
12-10-1990
 
TSO Table III


990-227
 
12-10-1990
 
TSO Table V


990-228
 
1-14-1991
 
TSO Table II


990-229
 
1-14-1991
 
TSO Table V


991-230
 
1-28-1991
 
TSO Table III


991-231
 
2-11-1991
 
TSO Table III


991-232
 
2-11-1991
 
153.03


991-233
 
2-25-1991
 
TSO Table II


991-235
 
2-25-1991
 
TSO Table III


991-237
 
5-13-1991
 
TSO Table III


991-240
 
7-22-1991
 
TSO Table II


991-241
 
8-12-1991
 
TSO Table II


991-242
 
8-26-1991
 
TSO Table III


991-247
 
10-14-1991
 
TSO Table V


991-248
 
10-14-1991
 
TSO Table III


991-249
 
10-14-1991
 
TSO Table III


991-250
 
10-14-1991
 
TSO Table III


991-251
 
10-14-1991
 
TSO Table III


992-273
 
- -1992
 
32.04


992-257
 
2-24-1992
 
TSO Table III


992-258
 
3-9-1992
 
TSO Table V


992-259
 
4-13-1992
 
TSO Table III


992-260
 
4-13-1992
 
TSO Table III


992-261
 
4-27-1992
 
157.01


992-264
 
6-22-1992
 
TSO Table III


992-265
 
6-22-1992
 
TSO Table III


992-266
 
6-22-1992
 
TSO Table II


992-267
 
7-27-1992
 
TSO Table III


992-268
 
7-27-1992
 
TSO Table III


992-272
 
8-10-1992
 
TSO Table II


992-274
 
8-24-1992
 
TSO Table V


992-277
 
9-14-1992
 
TSO Table III


992-278
 
9-28-1992
 
TSO Table II


992-279
 
--1992
 
TSO Table III


992-280
 
9-28-1992
 
TSO Table III


992-281
 
10-12-1992
 
TSO Table III


992-284
 
11-23-1992
 
TSO Table III


992-285
 
1-11-1993
 
TSO Table III


992-286
 
1-11-1993
 
TSO Table III


992-287
 
1-11-1993
 
TSO Table III


992-288
 
1-28-1993
 
TSO Table II


993-289
 
2-8-1993
 
TSO Table V


993-291
 
3-8-1993
 
TSO Table III


993-296
 
4-12-1993
 
TSO Table III


993-297
 
4-12-1993
 
TSO Table V


993-299
 
5-19-1993
 
117.01—117.03, 117.15—117.20, 117.35—117.44, 117.99


993-298
 
5-24-1993
 
TSO Table III


993-302
 
6-28-1993
 
TSO Table III


993-303
 
8-9-1993
 
TSO Table III


993-307
 
10-25-1993
 
TSO Table III


993-308
 
11-22-1993
 
TSO Table V


993-309
 
11-22-1993
 
TSO Table III


994-310
 
2-14-1994
 
TSO Table III


994-311
 
3-28-1994
 
TSO Table III


994-314
 
5-23-1994
 
TSO Table III


994-315
 
5-23-1994
 
TSO Table III


994-316
 
5-23-1994
 
TSO Table III


994-320
 
7-25-1994
 
TSO Table III


994-325
 
9-12-1994
 
TSO Table III


994-326
 
9-12-1994
 
TSO Table II


994-327
 
10-10-1994
 
TSO Table III


94-329
 
11-14-1994
 
157.01


94-330
 
11-14-1994
 
157.01


94-331
 
11-14-1994
 
157.01


995-332
 
1-23-1995
 
TSO Table II


995-333
 
4-10-1995
 
TSO Table II


995-336
 
4-10-1995
 
TSO Table III


995-337
 
4-10-1995
 
TSO Table III


995-338
 
4-10-1995
 
TSO Table III


995-339
 
4-24-1995
 
TSO Table I


995-340
 
5-8-1995
 
TSO Table III


995-341
 
5-8-1995
 
TSO Table III


995-346
 
6-12-1995
 
TSO Table III


995-350
 
6-12-1995
 
TSO Table V


995-347
 
6-26-1995
 
TSO Table V


995-351
 
6-26-1995
 
TSO Table V


995-353
 
7-10-1995
 
TSO Table III


995-355
 
8-28-1995
 
TSO Table III


995-356
 
9-25-1995
 
TSO Table III


995-360
 
10-23-1995
 
TSO Table II


995-362
 
11-11-1995
 
TSO Table III


995-363
 
11-11-1995
 
TSO Table III


995-361
 
11-13-1995
 
TSO Table III


996-365
 
2-26-1996
 
TSO Table III


996-366
 
2-26-1996
 
TSO Table III


996-367
 
2-26-1996
 
TSO Table III


996-368
 
3-11-1996
 
TSO Table III


996-369
 
3-25-1996
 
TSO Table III


996-370
 
3-25-1996
 
TSO Table III


996-371
 
3-25-1996
 
TSO Table III


996-372
 
4-22-1996
 
TSO Table V


996-374
 
5-13-1996
 
TSO Table III


996-375
 
5-20-1996
 
TSO Table II


996-373
 
6-10-1996
 
TSO Table V


996-378
 
6-24-1996
 
TSO Table I


996-379
 
7-8-1996
 
TSO Table III


996-380
 
8-12-1996
 
TSO Table III


996-386
 
9-23-1996
 
151.21


996-387
 
11-1-1996
 
TSO Table III


996-388
 
11-1-1996
 
TSO Table III


996-390
 
12-9-1996
 
110.21


996-391
 
1-13-1997
 
TSO Table III


997-393
 
3-24-1997
 
TSO Table III


997-394
 
3-24-1997
 
TSO Table III


997-395
 
3-24-1997
 
TSO Table III


997-396
 
3-24-1997
 
TSO Table III


997-398
 
4-28-1997
 
TSO Table III


997-399
 
4-28-1997
 
TSO Table III


997-400
 
4-28-1997
 
130.04


997-401
 
5-12-1997
 
TSO Table V


997-408
 
7-28-1997
 
TSO Table III


997-409
 
7-28-1997
 
TSO Table III


997-402
 
8-9-1997
 
TSO Table II


997-413
 
9-8-1997
 
TSO Table III


997-415
 
10-13-1997
 
116.01—116.11, 116.99


997-414
 
10-29-1997
 
TSO Table III


997-416
 
11-10-1997
 
114.01—114.17, 114.99


997-417
 
11-10-1997
 
TSO Table III


997-418
 
11-10-1997
 
31.40—31.44


997-419
 
12-8-1997
 
TSO Table IV


997-421
 
1-12-1998
 
TSO Table III


998-423
 
2-9-1998
 
TSO Table III


998-425
 
3-9-1998
 
TSO Table III


998-427
 
3-9-1998
 
157.01


998-426
 
3-23-1998
 
TSO Table III


998-428
 
3-23-1998
 
TSO Table III


998-429
 
4-13-1998
 
TSO Table III


998-433
 
5-11-1998
 
TSO Table III


998-434
 
5-11-1998
 
TSO Table III


998-437
 
7-13-1998
 
TSO Table III


998-438
 
7-27-1998
 
TSO Table III


998-439
 
7-27-1998
 
TSO Table III


998-441
 
8-10-1998
 
52.118


998-442
 
8-24-1998
 
TSO Table III


998-443
 
8-24-1998
 
TSO Table III


998-447
 
10-12-1998
 
TSO Table V


999-451
 
2-22-1999
 
TSO Table III


999-452
 
2-22-1999
 
151.24


999-453
 
2-22-1999
 
TSO Table I


999-454
 
3-22-1999
 
TSO Table III


999-455
 
4-14-1999
 
TSO Table III


999-456
 
4-14-1999
 
TSO Table III


-
 
4-24-1999
 
TSO Table I


999-457
 
--1999
 
TSO Table III


999-458
 
5-25-1999
 
TSO Table III


999-461
 
6-14-1999
 
TSO Table I


999-464
 
6-28-1999
 
130.04, 130.99


999-465
 
7-12-1999
 
TSO Table II


999-466
 
7-12-1999
 
TSO Table III


999-467
 
7-12-1999
 
TSO Table III


999-469
 
8-9-1999
 
TSO Table III


999-470
 
8-23-1999
 
TSO Table III


999-477
 
9-10-1999
 
TSO Table II


999-472
 
9-13-1999
 
TSO Table III


999-473
 
9-13-1999
 
TSO Table III


999-476
 
9-27-1999
 
TSO Table II


999-479
 
10-11-1999
 
151.05


999-475
 
10-25-1999
 
TSO Table I


999-482
 
10-25-1999
 
157.01


000-483
 
2-14-2000
 
TSO Table III


000-485
 
2-14-2000
 
TSO Table II


000-486
 
2-14-2000
 
TSO Table III


000-487
 
2-14-2000
 
TSO Table III


000-490
 
3-13-2000
 
TSO Table III


000-492
 
4-24-2000
 
TSO Table III


000-495
 
4-24-2000
 
157.01


000-496
 
4-24-2000
 
TSO Table III


000-497
 
5-8-2000
 
TSO Table II


000-500
 
6-26-2000
 
TSO Table III


000-503
 
7-10-2000
 
TSO Table III


000-504
 
7-10-2000
 
TSO Table III


000-505
 
7-10-2000
 
TSO Table III


000-506
 
7-10-2000
 
TSO Table III


000-511
 
11-27-2000
 
TSO Table III


000-512
 
11-27-2000
 
TSO Table III


001-513
 
2-26-2001
 
TSO Table III


001-514
 
3-12-2001
 
TSO Table III


001-515
 
3-12-2001
 
TSO Table III


001-518
 
3-26-2001
 
35.01


001-517
 
4-9-2001
 
TSO Table III


001-520
 
--2001
 
116.03, 116.07


001-521
 
5-14-2001
 
TSO Table II


001-527
 
6-11-2001
 
TSO Table III


001-526
 
6-28-2001
 
TSO Table III


001-530
 
9-10-2001
 
TSO Table III


001-531
 
9-10-2001
 
TSO Table II


001-532
 
10-22-2001
 
TSO Table III


001-534
 
11-26-2001
 
TSO Table III


002-535
 
1-14-2002
 
TSO Table III


002-537
 
--2002
 
TSO Table V


002-538
 
1-28-2002
 
TSO Table III


002-539
 
2-11-2002
 
TSO Table III


002-540
 
2-11-2002
 
TSO Table I


002-541
 
2-25-2002
 
TSO Table IV


002-542
 
3-25-2002
 
TSO Table II


002-543
 
4-8-2002
 
TSO Table III


002-545
 
5-13-2002
 
TSO Table III


002-546
 
5-13-2002
 
TSO Table III


002-547
 
5-13-2002
 
TSO Table III


002-549
 
6-10-2002
 
TSO Table V


002-550
 
6-10-2002
 
157.01


002-557
 
7-8-2002
 
TSO Table III


002-558
 
8-26-2002
 
TSO Table III


002-560
 
9-9-2002
 
TSO Table II


002-563
 
9-23-2002
 
TSO Table III


002-564
 
10-16-2002
 
153.02, 153.99


002-565
 
11-25-2002
 
TSO Table III


002-566
 
12-9-2002
 
TSO Table III


003-568
 
2-24-2003
 
TSO Table III


003-569
 
2-24-2003
 
TSO Table II


003-570
 
4-14-2003
 
TSO Table III


003-571
 
4-14-2003
 
TSO Table III


003-572
 
4-14-2003
 
TSO Table III


003-573
 
4-14-2003
 
TSO Table III


003-577
 
5-12-2003
 
TSO Table III


003-578
 
5-12-2003
 
TSO Table III


003-579
 
5-12-2003
 
TSO Table III


003-589
 
--2003
 
TSO Table II


003-590
 
7-28-2003
 
TSO Table II


003-591
 
--2003
 
TSO Table II


003-592
 
8-11-2003
 
TSO Table II


003-594
 
--2003
 
TSO Table III


003-595
 
--2003
 
TSO Table II


003-596
 
--2003
 
TSO Table III


003-597
 
9-8-2003
 
TSO Table II


003-598
 
--2003
 
TSO Table III


003-604
 
--2003
 
TSO Table II


003-605
 
11-10-2003
 
TSO Table II


004-607
 
2-9-2004
 
TSO Table III


004-609
 
2-23-2004
 
TSO Table III


004-610
 
2-23-2004
 
10.99


004-612
 
3-8-2004
 
TSO Table III


004-613
 
--2004
 
TSO Table II


004-614
 
--2004
 
TSO Table II


004-615
 
3-22-2004
 
TSO Table I


004-617
 
4-12-2004
 
TSO Table II


004-618
 
4-12-2004
 
TSO Table II


004-619
 
--2004
 
151.05


004-620
 
4-26-2004
 
TSO Table III


004-621
 
--2004
 
TSO Table II


004-623
 
5-24-2004
 
TSO Table II


004-624
 
5-24-2004
 
TSO Table II


004-625
 
5-24-2004
 
TSO Table III


004-626
 
5-24-2004
 
TSO Table III


004-627
 
5-24-2004
 
TSO Table III


004-628
 
6-14-2004
 
TSO Table II


004-630
 
6-14-2004
 
151.02, 151.03, 151.21—151.24, 151.99


004-631
 
6-28-2004
 
TSO Table III


004-634
 
--2004
 
110.20


004-635
 
8-23-2004
 
TSO Table III


004-636
 
8-23-2004
 
TSO Table III


004-637
 
--2004
 
153.01, 153.99


004-641
 
10-11-2004
 
TSO Table III


004-642
 
10-25-2004
 
TSO Table III


004-644
 
11-8-2004
 
TSO Table III


004-645
 
11-22-2004
 
TSO Table III


005-650
 
1-24-2005
 
TSO Table III


005-651
 
1-24-2005
 
TSO Table III


005-653
 
4-25-2005
 
TSO Table III


005-654
 
4-25-2005
 
TSO Table III


005-655
 
--2005
 
TSO Table II


005-656
 
5-23-2005
 
TSO Table II


005-657
 
6-13-2005
 
TSO Table III


005-661
 
--2005
 
TSO Table II


005-662
 
6-21-2005
 
TSO Table II


005-664
 
6-21-2005
 
52.117


005-665
 
6-21-2005
 
TSO Table III


005-666
 
6-21-2005
 
TSO Table III


005-667
 
7-25-2005
 
91.01—91.05, 91.55—91.62, 91.99


005-669
 
8-8-2005
 
TSO Table II


005-670
 
8-8-2005
 
TSO Table V


005-671
 
8-22-2005
 
TSO Table III


005-672
 
8-22-2005
 
TSO Table II


005-673
 
9-12-2005
 
TSO Table II


005-674
 
9-26-2005
 
TSO Table II


005-679
 
11-14-2005
 
TSO Table II


005-680
 
11-28-2005
 
TSO Table III


005-681
 
11-28-2005
 
TSO Table III


005-682
 
11-28-2005
 
TSO Table II


005-683
 
11-28-2005
 
TSO Table II


006-684
 
1-9-2006
 
TSO Table II


006-685
 
2-13-2006
 
TSO Table III


006-687
 
2-13-2006
 
TSO Table III


006-868
 
2-13-2006
 
TSO Table III


006-688
 
2-27-2006
 
TSO Table III


006-692
 
4-24-2006
 
TSO Table III


006-693
 
5-8-2006
 
TSO Table V


06-694
 
--2006
 
TSO Table II


006-697
 
6-26-2006
 
TSO Table III


006-698
 
6-26-2006
 
TSO Table III


006-699
 
7-24-2006
 
115.01—115.08, 115.99


006-700
 
7-24-2006
 
TSO Table II


006-701
 
7-24-2006
 
TSO Table III


006-702
 
7-24-2006
 
TSO Table III


006-703
 
7-24-2006
 
TSO Table III


006-704
 
8-14-2006
 
TSO Table III


006-706
 
8-28-2006
 
TSO Table III


006-711
 
10-23-2006
 
TSO Table III


006-712
 
12-11-2006
 
157.01


006-713
 
12-11-2006
 
TSO Table III


006-714
 
12-11-2006
 
151.21


007-715
 
1-8-2007
 
151.05


007-716
 
2-12-2007
 
TSO Table III


007-717
 
3-12-2007
 
TSO Table III


007-722
 
6-11-2007
 
TSO Table III


007-724
 
6-25-2007
 
TSO Table III


007-727
 
7-23-2007
 
TSO Table III


007-728
 
8-13-2007
 
TSO Table III


007-732
 
9-10-2007
 
TSO Table IV


007-730
 
9-24-2007
 
TSO Table V


007-731
 
9-24-2007
 
TSO Table II


007-735
 
10-22-2007
 
TSO Table III


007-736
 
10-22-2007
 
TSO Table III


008-737
 
1-14-2008
 
TSO Table III


008-738
 
1-14-2008
 
91.35—91.44, 91.99


008-739
 
2-18-2008
 
TSO Table II


008-740
 
3-10-2008
 
TSO Table III


008-742
 
6-9-2008
 
TSO Table IV


008-741
 
6-16-2008
 
TSO Table IV


008-749
 
7-28-2008
 
TSO Table III


008-751
 
8-11-2008
 
TSO Table III


008-755
 
11-24-2008
 
157.01


008-756
 
11-24-2008
 
TSO Table II


008-757
 
11-24-2008
 
TSO Table II


008-758
 
12-8-2008
 
TSO Table III


008-760
 
12-8-2008
 
112.02


009-761
 
2-23-2009
 
TSO Table III


009-762
 
2-23-2009
 
TSO Table III


009-764
 
4-13-2009
 
TSO Table III


009-766
 
6-9-2009
 
TSO Table III


010-771
 
7-13-2009
 
TSO Table III


009-767
 
10-12-2009
 
TSO Table V


009-768
 
10-12-2009
 
TSO Table V


010-781
 
6-14-2010
 
91.99


010-779
 
6-28-2010
 
TSO Table III


010-780
 
6-28-2010
 
35.15—35.19


010-788
 
7-12-2010
 
TSO Table IV


010-784
 
7-26-2010
 
TSO Table V


010-785
 
7-26-2010
 
TSO Table V


010-786
 
7-26-2010
 
TSO Table V


010-787
 
7-26-2010
 
TSO Table II


010-789
 
8-23-2010
 
TSO Table II


011-794
 
3-28-2011
 
TSO Table V


011-795
 
5-2-2011
 
36.01


011-076
 
5-9-2011
 
TSO Table III


011-077
 
5-9-2011
 
36.02


011-087
 
9-26-2011
 
TSO Table III


011-088
 
9-26-2011
 
130.01—130.11, 130.99


011-091
 
11-28-2011
 
TSO Table III


011-092
 
11-28-2011
 
130.04


011-093
 
--2011
 
TSO Table II


012-094
 
1-23-2012
 
TSO Table III


012-095
 
2-23-2012
 
TSO Table III


012-096
 
2-23-2012
 
TSO Table III


012-097
 
2-23-2012
 
TSO Table III


012-098
 
3-12-2012
 
TSO Table III


012-099
 
3-12-2012
 
TSO Table III


012-101
 
3-26-2012
 
TSO Table II


012-100
 
4-9-2012
 
155.01—155.10, 155.25—155.27, 155.40—155.44, 155.55—155.60, 155.99


012-102
 
5-14-2012
 
TSO Table II


012-103
 
5-14-2012
 
TSO Table II


012-104
 
6-11-2012
 
TSO Table II


012-105
 
6-11-2012
 
TSO Table II


012-106
 
6-11-2012
 
TSO Table II


012-107
 
6-11-2012
 
TSO Table II


012-110
 
6-25-2012
 
TSO Table II


012-111
 
6-25-2012
 
TSO Table III


012-112
 
8-13-2012
 
TSO Table III


012-113
 
8-13-2012
 
TSO Table III


012-114
 
8-13-2012
 
TSO Table III


012-118
 
10-8-2012
 
154.001—154.005, 154.020—154.022, 154.035—154.038, 154.050—154.060,
154.075—154.079, 154.090—154.095, 154.110—154.118, 154.999


012-120
 
11-5-2012
 
TSO Table III


012-121
 
11-26-2012
 
70.01—70.05, 70.99


012-122
 
12-10-2012
 
TSO Table III


012-123
 
12-10-2012
 
TSO Table III


013-126
 
2-11-2013
 
TSO Table III


013-127
 
2-25-2013
 
36.15—36.20


013-128
 
4-8-2013
 
TSO Table V


013-129
 
4-8-2013
 
TSO Table III


013-130
 
6-10-2013
 
TSO Table III


013-131
 
6-10-2013
 
TSO Table III


013-132
 
6-10-2013
 
TSO Table V


013-137
 
6-24-2013
 
52.001—52.003, 52.015—52.019, 52.035, 52.036, 52.050—52.054,
52.065—52.074, 52.085—52.101, 52.115, 52.116, 52.130—52.133,
52.145—52.156, 52.999


013-138
 
7-22-2013
 
32.01


013-139
 
8-12-2013
 
TSO Table III


013-142
 
8-26-2013
 
52.020


013-145
 
9-23-2013
 
33.01—33.22


013-146
 
11-25-2013
 
TSO Table III


013-148
 
11-25-2013
 
112.01


014-149
 
1-13-2014
 
32.40—32.45


014-150
 
3-10-2014
 
TSO Table II


014-151
 
3-10-2014
 
112.03


014-153
 
6-23-2014
 
157.01


014-158
 
7-28-2014
 
TSO Table III


014-159
 
7-28-2014
 
TSO Table III


014-160
 
7-28-2014
 
TSO Table III


014-162
 
9-8-2014
 
32.25


014-165
 
10-13-2014
 
52.115, 52.116


014-166
 
10-13-2014
 
TSO Table III


014-167
 
10-13-2014
 
151.07, 151.99


014-168
 
10-27-2014
 
TSO Table II


014-170
 
12-29-2014
 
52.119


014-172
 
12-29-2014
 
TSO Table IV


014-171
 
12-30-2014
 
111.01—111.12, 111.99


015-173
 
--2015
 
TSO Table II


015-175
 
2-23-2015
 
34.001—34.005, 34.020—34.037, 34.050—34.055, 34.070—34.082, 34.999


015-177
 
4-13-2015
 
TSO Table II


015-178
 
4-13-2015
 
TSO Table II


015-179
 
4-13-2015
 
TSO Table II


015-180
 
4-13-2015
 
30.01


015-181
 
4-27-2015
 
TSO Table II


015-182
 
4-27-2015
 
TSO Table I


015-183
 
5-11-2015
 
113.01—113.12


015-184
 
5-11-2015
 
TSO Table III


006-709
 
6-8-2015
 
32.17


015-185
 
6-8-2015
 
32.16


015-188
 
6-22-2015
 
TSO Table II


015-189
 
6-22-2015
 
TSO Table II


015-190
 
6-22-2015
 
TSO Table II


015-192
 
6-22-2015
 
TSO Table I


015-191
 
7-28-2015
 
TSO Table V


015-193
 
8-11-2015
 
TSO Table III


015-194
 
8-11-2015
 
TSO Table III


015-197
 
10-5-2015
 
TSO Table III


015-198
 
10-5-2015
 
TSO Table III


015-199
 
11-24-2015
 
32.02


015-200
 
12-22-2015
 
32.60—32.66


016-202
 
1-4-2016
 
TSO Table II


016-202
 
2-9-2016
 
TSO Table III


016-203
 
3-22-2016
 
TSO Table III


016-204
 
3-22-2016
 
32.64


016-206
 
4-12-2016
 
157.01


016-207
 
4-12-2016
 
TSO Table V


916-208
 
4-26-2016
 
32.15


016-209
 
--2016
 
110.01—110.05, 110.99


016-210
 
5-10-2016
 
130.12, 130.99


016-211
 
5-16-2016
 
156.01—156.14, 156.25—156.31, 156.99


016-212
 
6-7-2016
 
TSO Table II


016-215
 
6-14-2016
 
TSO Table III


016-216
 
6-14-2016
 
TSO Table V


016-217
 
6-17-2016
 
TSO Table III


016-218
 
6-28-2016
 
152.35—152.41, 152.99


016-222
 
10-11-2016
 
TSO Table III


016-223
 
12-13-2016
 
TSO Table III


016-224
 
12-13-2016
 
TSO Table III


017-225
 
1-24-2017
 
30.01


017-227
 
4-10-2017
 
155.55—155.60, 155.99


017-228
 
4-10-2017
 
TSO Table III


017-229
 
4-10-2017
 
TSO Table III


017-230
 
5-8-2017
 
30.03


017-231
 
5-22-2017
 
TSO Table III


017-232
 
5-22-2017
 
TSO Table III


017-233
 
6-12-2017
 
Adopting Ordinance


017-237
 
6-26-2017
 
51.01, 51.02, 51.99


017-238
 
6-26-2017
 
TSO Table I


017-241
 
9-11-2017
 
TSO Table III


017-242
 
9-11-2017
 
TSO Table I


017-243
 
9-25-2017
 
TSO Table II


017-245
 
10-23-2017
 
TSO Table III


017-249
 
11-27-2017
 
TSO Table III


017-251
 
12-11-2017
 
52.002


2017-252
 
1-8-2018
 
TSO Table III


018-253
 
2-26-2018
 
TSO Table III


018-254
 
2-26-2018
 
TSO Table III


2018-255
 
3-26-2018
 
TSO Table III


018-256
 
4-23-2018
 
TSO Table III


018-257
 
4-23-2018
 
110.22


018-259
 
6-11-2018
 
TSO Table III


018-262
 
7-9-2018
 
10.99, 31.15—31.29


018-263
 
7-9-2018
 
151.06, 151.99


018-264
 
7-9-2018
 
51.03, 51.99


 
ZONING REGULATIONS
FOR BULLITT COUNTY AND THE CITIES OF HILLVIEW, LEBANON
JUNCTION, MOUNT WASHINGTON & SHEPHERDSVILLE
BULLITT COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION
REVISED APRIL 1987
Recorded in Fiscal Court Order
Book 23 Page 107
Recorded in County Ordinance
Book 1 Page 517
Note:
The zoning ordinance that is included in the body of this document is the zoning
ordinance as approved by Bullitt County Fiscal Court and in effect for unincorporated Bullitt
County. These regulations may or may not be in effect in all cities.
Amendments proposed to change the local zoning ordinances must be approved by
each local legislative body in order to become law. Oftentimes the amendments are
approved by some jurisdictions, but not by all.
For clarity and ease of reading the text included in the body of this document is the
zoning ordinance as approved by Bullitt County Fiscal Court. Any section that is not
consistent among all jurisdictions will be marked by an asterisk (*). The reader will be
referred to Appendices A and B to determine what language is in effect for each jurisdiction.
C O N T E N T S PAGE
ARTICLE 1 LEGAL STATUS & GENERAL PROVISIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... 1
Section 1.100 – Title ……………………………………………………….. 1
Section 1.200 – Authority ………………………………………………….. 1
Section 1.300- Purpose and Intent ………………………………………… 1
Section 1.400 – Jurisdiction ………………………………………………... 2
Section 1.500 – Conflict or Inconsistency
with State Law ……………………………………………. 2
ARTICLE 2 DEFINITIONS ………………………………………………………... 3
Section 2.100 – Interpretations ……………………………………………… 3
Section 2.200 – Words and Terms Defined ………………………………..... 3
ARTICLE 3 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES ……………………………………… 13
Section 3.100 – Zones……………………………………………………….. 13
Section 3.200 – Official Zoning Map ……………………………………….. 15
Section 3.300 – Rules for Interpretation of Zone Boundaries ………………. 16
ARTICLE 4 GENERAL REGULATIONS ………………………………………… 18
Section 4.100 – Application of Regulations ……………………………….. 18
Section 4.200 – Nonconforming Lots, Uses
and Structures ……………………………………………… 19
Section 4.300 – General Lot, Yard and Court
Requirements ………………………………………………. 22
Section 4.400 – Provisions of Water and Sewerage
Systems …………………………………………………….. 24
Section 4.500 – Public Utility Use or Structure …………………………….. 25
Section 4.600 – Use of Flood Areas ………………………………………. ... 25
Section 4.700 – Mineral Extraction and Regrading …………………………. 27
Section 4.800 – Off-Street Parking & Loading ……………………………… 30
Section 4.900 – Signs ………………………………………………………... 37
ARTICLE 5 ZONE REGULATIONS ………………………………………………. 44
Section 5.100 – Format of Zone Regulations ……………………………...... 44
Section 5.200 – Types of Application Review ……………………………… 44
Section 5.300 – Table of Type of Application
Review by Zone …………………………………………… 45
Section 5.400 – All Zones …………………………………………………... 54
Section 5.500 – Rural Zones ………………………………………………... 55
Section 5.600 – Residential Zones ………………………………………….. 58
Section 5.700 – Business Zones ……………………………………………. 67
Section 5.800 – Industrial Zones …………………………………………… 74
Section 5.900 – Planned Unit Development
Residential and Highway Business ……………………….. 83
ARTICLE 6 TYPES OF DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION REVIEW …………... 89
Section 6.100 – Site Plan Review …………………………………………. . 89
Section 6.200 – Conditional Use ……………………………………………. 93
ARTICLE 7 ADMINISTRATION ………………………………………………….. 96
Section 7.100 – Administration and Enforcement:
Building Permits and Certificate of Zoning Compliance…… 96
Section 7.200 – The Board of Adjustments Procedure ……………………… 97
Section 7.300 – The Board of Adjustments: Powers and Duties …………… 98
Section 7.400 – Duties of Administrative Official ………………………….. 102
Section 7.500 – Penalties for Violation ……………………………………... 102
ARTICLE 8 AMENDMENTS ……………………………………………………… 103
Section 8.100 – Amendment Application Procedure ………………………. 103
Section 8.200 – Text Amendment ………………………………………….. 103
Section 8.300 – Map Amendment ………………………………………….. 104
Section 8.400 – Planning Commission Recommendation
and Fiscal Court Decision ………………………………..... 105
ARTICLE 9 REGULATIONS PROVISIONS …………………………………….... 107
Section 9.100 – Interpretation ……………………………………………….. 107
Section 9.200 – Separability Clause ………………………………………… 107
Section 9.300 – Repeal of Conflicting Regulations ………………………… 107
Section 9.400 – Schedule of Fees, Charges and Expenses …………………. 107
Section 9.500 – Effective Date ……………………………………………… 113
APPENDIX A STATUS OF AMENDMENTS……………………………………... 114
APPENDIX B TEXT AMENDMENTS ……………………………………………. 116
ARTICLE 1 LEGAL STATUS AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 1.100 Title
Section 1.200 Authority
Section 1.300 Purpose and Intent
Section 1.400 Jurisdiction
Section 1.500 Conflict or Inconsistency with State Law
ARTICLE 1 LEGAL STATUS AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 1.100 Title
These regulations shall be known and referred to as the “Official Zoning Regulations of
Bullitt County and the Cities of Shepherdsville, Hillview, Lebanon Junction and Mount
Washington, Kentucky, 1982,” and may be cited as the County/City Zoning Regulations.
Reference to County, or Bullitt County, shall signify the county including the four above
mentioned political divisions, unless otherwise stated. (Note- This section was amended in
1991-see page 119 for the amended text)
Section 1.200 Authority
These zoning regulations are adopted in accordance with the authority granted by the
Kentucky Revised Statutes, Chapter 100, the Bullitt County Planning Commission and Fiscal
Court, and the City Councils of the above-mentioned political divisions, having fulfilled the
requirements set forth as a pre-requisite to the adoption of these regulations.
Section 1.300 Purpose and Intent
These zoning regulations are adopted by the Fiscal Court of Bullitt County, Kentucky, and
the City Council of each of the four above-mentioned political subdivisions for the following
purposes:
1.301 To promote the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the residents of
Bullitt County.
1.302 To help guide the future growth and development of Bullitt County in accordance with
a comprehensive plan of land use and population density that provides for beneficial and
convenient relationships among the residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, and
public areas within the county, to the best interest of the general public.
1.303 To provide adequate light, air, and privacy for future development, to secure safety
from fire, flood, and other dangers, and to prevent overcrowding of the land and undue
concentration of the population.
1.304 To regulate, maintain, and protect residential, commercial, industrial, and agricultural
areas from encroachment of incompatible uses, and to protect residential areas specifically
against hazards of fire, offensive noise, smoke, odors, vibration, glare or other objectionable
influences.
1.305 To reserve land most suited for agricultural use, restricting forms of development
which would interfere with agricultural activities, or inflict permanent damage to the
county’s natural resources.
-1-
1.306 To provide for the reservation of sufficient sites for future industrial development.
1.307 To provide a guide for public action in the orderly and efficient provision of public
facilities and services, and for private enterprise in building development, investment, and
other economic activity throughout the county.
1.308 To promote creative plans and designs allowing innovations and diversification in
residential and other types of developments in deviation from the typical and rigid layouts.
Section 1.400 Jurisdiction
The provisions of these regulations shall apply to all lands within Bullitt County, including
lands within any of its political subdivisions.
Section 1.500 Conflict or Inconsistency with State Law
Should any of these regulations conflict or be inconsistent with any provision of the
Kentucky State Law, including Kentucky Revised Statutes Chapter 100, such provisions of
the State Law shall apply.
-2-
ARTICLE 2 DEFINITIONS
Section 2.100 Interpretations
Section 2.200 Words and Terms Defined
Section 2.100 Interpretations
For the purpose of these regulations certain terms, phrases, words, and their derivatives shall
be interpreted as follows: words in the singular include the plural and plural the singular; the
word ‘building’ includes the word ‘structure’, the word ‘shall’ is mandatory and not
directory; the word ‘occupied’ or ‘used’ shall be considered as though followed by the words
‘or intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied’.
Section 2.200 Words and Terms Defined
ACCESSORY USE OR BUILDING: Any purpose for which a building or tract of land may
be designed, arranged, intended, maintained or occupied, which is customarily incidental and
subordinate in the areas extent or purpose to the principal building or use which it serves and
which is located on the same zoning lot as the principal building or use.
AGRICULTURAL USE: Land containing at least ten (10) acres which is used for raising
and harboring livestock or agricultural products, including farm buildings and the storage of
agricultural equipment; riding, livery and boarding stables, kennels and veterinaries; and as
an accessory use the sale of agricultural products raised on the property. Under this term, the
sale from roadside stands is limited to agricultural products and the products of home
industry which have been produced on the farm where located.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL: Any department, employee, or advisory elected or
appointed body which is authorized to administer any provision of the zoning regulations,
subdivision regulations, and if delegated, any provision of any housing or building
regulations or any other land use control regulations.
ALLEY: A dedicated public right-of–way other than a street, that affords a secondary means
of access to abutting properties.
ALTERATION: Any change, rearrangement, or addition to a building, its supporting
members, or its foundation other than repairs, and any modification in construction or in
building equipment.
AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR, MAJOR: Repair of motor vehicles or trailers, including
rebuilding or reconditioning of engines and/or transmissions; collision services including
body, frame or fender straightening or repair; overall painting or paint shop and vehicle
steam cleaning.
-3-
AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR, MINOR: Incidental minor repairs, upholstering, replacement of
parts and motor service to passenger cars and trucks not exceeding one and one half (1 ½)
tons capacity, but not including any operation named under ‘Automotive Repair,
Major,’ or any other similar thereto. Cars or trucks being repaired or under repair shall not
be so stored outside the building for more that 48 hours.
AUTOMOTIVE WRECKING: The dismantling or disassembling of used motor vehicles, or
the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled, obsolete, or wrecked vehicles or their parts.
BASEMENTS: That portion of a building located partially underground but having more
that one half (1/2) of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of adjoining
ground.
BOARD: The Board of Adjustment having jurisdiction unless the context indicates
otherwise.
BOARDING OR LODGING HOUSE: A dwelling or part there of occupied by a single
housekeeping unit where more than three people are sheltered for profit.
BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: Any covered structure for the support, shelter, or enclosure
of persons, animals or moveable property of any kind, and which is permanently affixed to
the land.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF: The vertical distance from the average contact ground level at
the front wall of the building to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck
line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level between the eaves and ridge for gable, hip
or gambrel roofs.
BUILDING LINE: A line parallel to the street right-of-way line at any story level of a
building, and set at a distance which all or any part of the building is to be set back to from
said right-of –way, except as otherwise provided by these regulations.
BUILDING PERMIT: A permit issued by the authorized officer allowing a proprietor or his
agent to construct, alter, or remove a building, etc., or engage in similar activity which would
alter the character of the building or lot in question.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building, including any permanently covered space such as
porches and carports, and attached garages in which is conducted the principal use of the lot
on which it is situated. In a residential district, any dwelling shall be deemed to be the
principal building on its lot.
CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE, ZONING CERTIFICATE, OR ZONING
PERMIT: A certificate issued by the authorized officer, before use or occupancy of any
building or land stating that the proposed use of the building or land conforms to the
-4-
requirements of these zoning regulations. This shall apply to any building, premises, or land,
or combination (except for the raising of crops and other agricultural activities)
hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its
use or structure.
COMMISSION OR PLANNING COMMISSION: Bullitt County Planning Commission.
CONDITIONAL USE: A use which is essential to or would promote the public health,
safety, or welfare in one or more zones, but which would impair the integrity and character of
the zone in which it is located, or in adjoining zones, unless special restrictions on location,
size, extent, and character of performance are imposed in addition to those imposed in the
zoning regulations.
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT: Legal authorization to undertake a conditional use, issued
by the Administrative Official pursuant to authorization by the Board of Adjustments,
consisting of two parts; (a) A statement of the factual determination by the Board of
Adjustments which justifies the issuance of the permit; and (b) A statement of the specific
conditions which must be met in order for the use to be permitted.
CONVALESCENT OR NURSING HOME: An establishment which provides full-time
convalescent or chronic care or both for three (3) or more individuals who are not related by
blood or marriage to the operator and who by reason of chronic illness or infirmity, are
unable to care for themselves. No care for the acutely ill or surgical or obstetrical services
shall be provided in such a home; hospital or sanitarium shall not be construed to be included
in this definition.
COURT: An open, unoccupied and unobstructed space other than a yard, on the same lot
with a building or a group of buildings.
DIMENSIONAL VARIANCE: A departure from the terms of the zoning regulations
pertaining to height or width of structures and size of yards and open spaces, where such
departure will not conflict with the public interest; and where, owing to conditions peculiar to
the property only because of its size, shape, or topography, and not as a result in unnecessary
and undue hardship.
DWELLING, OR DWELLING UNIT: Any building or portion thereof with one, or a suite
of two or more rooms occupied or intended to be occupied exclusively for residential
purposes, that is living and sleeping, by one family or housekeeping unit, and which includes
permanently installed cooking and lawfully required sanitary facilities. This definition shall
thus exclude a tent, cabin, trailer or trailer coach or other temporary or transient structure or
facility.
a. Single Family: A single independent building occupied or constructed to
to be occupied exclusively for residential purposes by one family or
housekeeping unit.
-5-
b. Two Family: a single independent building occupied or constructed to be
occupied exclusively by not more than two (2) families or housekeeping units.
c. Multi-Family: A building or portion thereof, or group of buildings on one lot
but containing separate living units, occupied or constructed to be occupied by
more than two (2) families or housekeeping units.
Note: See page 123 for a definition of construction.
DWELLING GROUP: A group of two (2) or more detached dwellings located on a parcel of
land in one ownership and having any yard or court in common.
FAMILY: One or more persons living, sleeping, cooking and eating on the same premises as
a single housekeeping unit, provided that, unless all members are related by blood, marriage,
or adoption, no such single housekeeping unit as distinguished from a group occupying a
boarding or lodging house, hotel or motel – shall contain more than five members.
*FARM: A place on which agricultural operations are conducted at any time under the
control or supervision of one person, partnership or a manager. Places of less than 10 acres
are counted as farms if the estimated sales of agricultural products for the year amounted or
normally would amount to at least $250.00.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An enclosed space for the storage of not more than four motor
vehicles owned or operated by the occupants of the principal building, and provided that no
business, occupation or service is conducted for profit therein.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: A building or land available to the public to use, operated for gain, and
which is used for storage, repair, rental, greasing, washing, painting, servicing or equipping
motor vehicles.
GRADE, FINISH: The completed surfaces of ground, lawns, walks, paved areas and roads
brought to grades as shown on plans or designs relating thereto, or in existence at the time the
certificate of zoning compliance is issued.
HOME OCCUPATION: An accessory use carried on in a dwelling unit or other structure
accessory to a dwelling unit, but in no case occupying more than twenty-five (25) percent of
the total floor area of the building or buildings, by a member or members of the bona fide
residents of the dwelling, except as permitted for a professional home occupation; and which
is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes, so
that the character thereof is not changed and it shall not have any exterior evidence of such
secondary use except as permitted in Section 4.900. Specifically, home occupation shall
include any of the following activities: dressmaking, home cooking, tutoring (limited to not
more that four (4) children simultaneously), musical instruction (limited to a single pupil at a
time) and the practice by an artist, insurance agent, musician, realtor, beauty parlor limited
to one license, one operator) photographer, or the sale of antiques. Also included and
*See Appendices A and B -6-
provided that no more than two (2) persons not bona fide residents of the dwelling are
engaged to perform related work. Home Occupation shall not be interpreted to include any
of the following: barber shop, commercial stables and kennels, animal hospitals, restaurants
or eating places, musical instructions to groups, convalescent homes, mortuary
establishments, garages or premises for the repair of motor vehicles on profit basis, TV radio
or electrical appliances.
HOSPITAL: Includes sanitarium, clinic, rest home, nursing home, convalescent home,
house for the aged and any other place for observation, diagnosis, treatment or care of two or
more individuals suffering from illness, injury, deformity or abnormality or from any
condition requiring medical services.
HOUSING OR BUILDING REGULATIONS: Any regulations incorporating any housing,
building, or safety code including, but not limited to such codes as plumbing, electrical,
elevator, boiler, fire safety, and minimum housing, or any other regulations.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY: The owner of the property, his wife, their children, and the parents
of the owners of such farm.
INDUSTRY: The processing of products or raw materials. The two categories of industry
are defined according to the following performance standards:
GENERAL INDUSTRY: That industry in which processing of products results in the
emission of any atmospheric pollution, visible light flashes or glare, odors, or noises or
vibration which may be heard or felt off the premises of that industry which constitutes a fire
or explosion hazard.
LIGHT INDUSTRY: That industry in which processing of products results in none of the
conditions described for above type industry.
JUNK YARD: A lot, land or structure, or part thereof of 200 square feet or more, used
primarily for the collecting, storage or sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal or discarded
material; or for the collecting, dismantling, storage and salvaging of machinery or vehicles
not in running condition and /or for the sale of parts thereof.
LEGISLATIVE BODY: The chief body with legislative power, whether it is a city council
or the county’s fiscal court depending on the location of zoning subject of concern.
LOADING SPACE: An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building or
contiguous to a group of buildings and accessory buildings, for the temporary parking of a
commercial vehicle while loading of unloading merchandise or materials, and which
-7-
abuts on a street, alley or other appropriate means of access, occupied or to be occupied by a
building and its accessory buildings, if any, together with such open spaces as are required,
having not less than the minimum area, width, and depth required for a lot in the zone in
which such land is situated, and having frontage on a street, or other means of access as may
be determined by the Planning Commission to be adequate as a condition of the issuance of a
building permit for a building on such land.
LOT AREA: The total area within the property lines excluding any part thereof lying within
the boundaries of a public street, or proposed public street.
LOT, CORNER: A lot which has an interior angle of less than 135 degrees at the
intersection of two street lines. A lot abutting upon a curved street shall be considered a
corner lot if the tangents to the curve at the points of intersection of the side lot lines intersect
at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.
LOT DEPTH: The average horizontal distance from the street line of the lot to its opposite
rear line measured at right angles to a straight front lot line, or the tangent to the middle of
the arc if it is a curved front line.
LOT FRONTAGE: The distance along the front lot line.
LOT LINE, FRONT: The line separating the lot from the street right-of-way, and in this
respect it constitutes a portion of the street right-of-way line.
LOT LINE, REAR: A lot line other than front or side lot lines contributing to the definition
of property boundaries.
LOT LINE, SIDE: A lot line starting from a point along the front lot line and other than a
rear lot line and contributing to the definition of property boundaries.
LOT WIDTH: The straight horizontal distance measured between the opposite two points of
the intersection of the building line with the two opposite site lot lines.
*MOBILE HOME: A detached residential dwelling unit designed for transportation as one
or two units after fabrication, on streets or highways on its own wheels or on flatbeds or other
trailers, and arriving at the site as one or two units where it is to be occupied as a dwelling
complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and minor
assembly operations, connections to utilities and the like. Removal of the wheels and/or
chassis and /or placement on a temporary or permanent foundation does not exempt a mobile
home from all requirements applicable to mobile homes in these regulations. Likewise, the
joining of two mobile homes units to form a single dwelling does not exempt a mobile home
from all requirements applicable to mobile homes in these regulations. A structure
manufactured with a serial number and requiring a license receipt for transporting is
presumed to be a mobile home under this definition.
*See Appendices A and B -8-
Excepted from this definition and not considered mobile homes are modular homes as
defined in these regulations, and travel trailers.
MOBILE HOME PARK: Any parcel of land developed, used or designed to be used for the
location, either temporary or permanent, of mobile homes, on rental basis.
MOTEL: A series of attached, semi-attached or detached sleeping or living units, each with
at least a bedroom and a bathroom, for the temporary accommodation of automobile transient
guests, said units having convenient access to off-street parking spaces, for the exclusive use
of the guests or occupants.
MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING: A building grouping a number of rooms or suite of rooms
with an independent entrance for each from outside or from a common hallway, and
consisting of at least one (1) habitable room, together with a kitchen or kitchenette and
sanitary facilities per each such room or suite of rooms.
NON-CONFORMING USE OR STRUCTURE: An activity or a building, sign, structure or
a portion thereof which lawfully existed before the adoption or amendment of the zoning
regulations, but which does not conform to all of the regulations contained in the zoning
regulations which pertain to the zone in which it is located.
OPEN SPACE: Parks, common greens, other recreation space or generally open areas
available to the public or yards or other open areas provided in connection with the
residential buildings occupied by more than two families per lot which are intended for the
sole use of the occupants of such buildings and their guests.
OUTDOOR ADVERTISING: A visible, immobile contrivance or structure in any shape or
form, the purpose of which is to advertise any product or service, campaign, event, etc.
PARKING SPACE: An off-street space used for the temporary location of one licensed
motor vehicle, which is at least two hundred (200) square feet in area and nine feet wide, not
including driveway, and having direct access to street or alley.
PERMIT: Refers to a written official document permitting an action relating to the use,
development, or improvement of land or building. Permit shall include the certification
indicating compliance with the requirements of these regulations as well as certification
permitting occupancy and/or use of the land or building in question.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: An area of land controlled by a single landowner and
developed as a single entity for a number of dwellings, the plan for which does not
necessarily correspond in lot size, bulk, type of dwelling unit, density, lot coverage or
required open space to any other residential or commercial zone.
PLAT: The map of a subdivision, recorded with the county courthouse.
-9-
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION: A city within the county.
PREMISES: A lot or other tract of land under one ownership and all structures on it.
PROCESSING: Manufacturing, reduction, extraction, packaging, repairing, cleaning, and
any other similar original or restorative treatment applied to raw materials, products, or
personal property. Processing does not refer to the fabrication of structures, however.
PROFESSION, OR PROFESSIONAL: A business in which gain or livelihood depends on
and requires specialized knowledge and often long intensive academic preparation; and
usually follows a line of conduct and required adherence to technical or ethical standards.
Included in this definition, but not limited, are the following professional business activities:
accounting, chiropractry, dentistry, practice of medicine, landscape architecture, land
surveying, practice of law, optometry, osteopathy, physiotherapy, podiatry, professional
planning, architecture, engineering, or psychology.
PROFESSIONAL RESIDENCE OFFICE: A residence in which the occupant has a
professional office which is clearly secondary to the dwelling use for living purposes and
does not change the residential character thereof, and where not more that three persons are
working.
PUBLIC FACILITY: Any use of land whether publicly or privately owned for
transportation, utilities, or communications, or for the benefit of the general public,
including, but not limited to libraries, streets, schools, fire or police stations, county
buildings, municipal buildings, recreational centers including parks, and cemeteries.
RETAIL SALES: Sale of any product of merchandise to customers for their own personal
consumption or use, not for resale.
SALES AREA: AUTOMOTIVE, MOBILE HOME, OR TRAILER: An enclosed or open
area, other than a street, used for the display, sale or rental of new or used motor vehicles,
mobile homes, trailers, or boats in operable condition, and where no repair work is done.
SERVICE AREA: Includes those parts of any lot which are used primarily to provide access
for servicing the use on the lot, including land used for delivery of goods, storage and
collection of wastes and provision for maintenance.
SLEEPING ROOM: A single room rented for dwelling purposes but without the amenities
for separate and independent housekeeping.
SIGN: A structure, building or part thereof, or pennant, for visual communication that is
used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of the public. A sign
does not include the flag or insignia of any nation, state or city; nor any political, education,
charitable, philanthropic, religious advertising campaign, provided that such
advertising shall not be displayed for a period exceeding thirty days.
-10-
STABLE: A building in which horses are kept for public or private use, renumeration, hire
or sale.
STATION, FILLING OR GASOLINE: An area of land, together with any structure thereon,
used for the retail sale of motor fuel and lubricants and incidental services, such as
lubricating and hand washing of motor vehicles, and the sale, installation or minor repair of
tires, batteries, or other automobile accessories, but not for painting or major repairs.
STORAGE OR STORAGE SPACE: Land or enclosed building used for the keeping of
goods, wares, supplies or equipment.
STORY: That part of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of
the floor next to it, or if there be no floor above it then the ceiling above it.
STREET: An improved public right-of–way fifty (50) feet or more in width which provides
a public means of access to abutting property consisting of more than one lot in more than
one ownership; or any such right-of-way more than thirty (30) feet and less than fifty (50)
feet in width provided it existed prior to enactment of these regulations and provided such
street has been accepted by Bullitt County or any of its political subdivisions. The term
street shall include avenue, drive, circle, road, parkway, boulevard, highway, thoroughfare or
any other similar terms.
STREET, CENTER LINE OF: The line which is usually at an equal distance from both
street lines, and right-of –way lines.
STREET GRADE: The officially established grade of the street upon which a lot fronts. If
there is no officially established grade, the existing grade of that street shall be taken as the
street grade.
*STRUCTURE: See “Building” above.
SUBDIVISION: A division of real property, improved or unimproved, or a portion thereof
shown, on the last preceding tax roll as a unit or as contiguous units, into two or more
parcels, lots, plots, sites or other division of land, with or without streets, for the purpose of
immediate or future sale, transfer of ownership, or building development, except that the
division of land for agricultural purposes in parcels of more than ten (10) acres not involving
any new streets or easement of access shall be exempted from the application of this term.
*See Appendices A and B
-11-
THEATER, DRIVE-IN: Open land with its appurtenant facilities, devoted primarily to the
showing of moving pictures or theatrical productions, to patrons seated in automobiles or on
outdoor seats.
TOURIST HOME: Same as “Boarding or Lodging House” above except where the
overnight accommodation is provided for compensation for transient type of guests.
TRAILER,TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicular portable structure built on a chassis and not
exceeding a gross weight of four thousand five hundred (4500) pounds when factory
equipped for the road or an overall length of thirty (30) feet and designed to be used as a
temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, and vacation uses.
VARIANCE: A modification from the literal provisions of these regulations by the Board of
Adjustments in cases where a literal enforcement of its provisions would result in
unnecessary hardship due to circumstances unique to the individual property or use for which
the variance is granted.
WILDLIFE RESERVE: Includes bird sanctuary, zoo, forest reserve, game reserve, botanical
garden.
YARD: That portion of the lot which is unoccupied and open to the sky and extends from a
lot line to its related yard line.
YARD, FRONT: The yard extending along the full length of the front lot line.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending the full length of the rear lot line.
YARD, SIDE: A yard extending along the side lot line or lines from the required
front yard to the required rear yard.
YARD LINE: A line drawn parallel to the corresponding lot line at a distance specified for
the required depth of yard in each respective case.
YARD LINE, FRONT: The line which bounds the front yard and is parallel to
the front lot line.
YARD LINE, REAR: The line which bounds the rear yard and is parallel to the rear
lot line.
YARD LINE, SIDE: The line or lines which bounds the side yard and is parallel to
the side lot line or lines.
ZONE: An established area within the community in which the provisions of these
regulations are applicable.
-12-
ARTICLE 3 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES
Section 3.100 Zones
Section 3.200 Official Zoning Map
3.201 Changes in Zoning Map
3.202 Replacement of the Official Zoning Map
Section 3.300 Rules for Interpretation of Zone Boundaries
ARTICLE 3 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES
Section 3.100 Zones
For the purpose of these regulations, the area of Bullitt County including the incorporated
areas of its political subdivisions is divided into the following thirteen (13) zones, or
zoning districts:
Rural Zones
A – Agricultural
C – Conservation
SR – Stream Valley Reserve
Residential Zones
R1 – Single-family
R2 – Single-family
R3 – Multi-family lower density
R4 – Multi-family higher density
Business Zones
B1 – Highway Business
B2 – Central Business
Industrial Zones
IL – Light industrial
IG – General and Extractive Industrial
Planned Unit Development Zones
PR – Planned Unit Development, Residential
PB – Planned Unit Development, Highway Business
-13-
Earth Products Zone
EP – Earth Products (see page 14A)
-14-
The City of Hillview has established an EARTH PRODUCTS zone. This zone was
created by Text Amendment Number 95T-01. The text amendment also made changes to
the following sections of the regulations:
Section 2.200 Words and Terms Defined
Section 3.100 Zones
Section 4.700 Mineral Extraction and Regrading
Section 4.701 Procedure for Mineral Extraction Operations
Section 4.702 Development Standards
Section 4.703 Rehabilitation Requirements
Section 5.301 Natural Resources Uses
Section 5.303 Business Uses
Section 5.305 Public and Semipublic Uses
Section 5.800 Industrial Zones
Section 5.802 General Industrial, IG
Section 9.400 Schedule of Fees, Charges & Expenses
The following sections were added:
Section 5.950 Earth Products Zone
A copy of the text amendment, showing deletions and additions to the text of these
regulations, is available upon request.
-14ASection
3.200 Official Zoning Map
The above zones are bounded and defined as shown on each of the maps titled ‘Official
Zoning Map, Bullitt County, Kentucky’; ‘Official Zoning Map City of Shepherdsville’;
and ‘Official Zoning Map, City of Lebanon Junction, Kentucky’; and ‘Official Zoning
Map, Mount Washington, Kentucky’ and ‘Official Zoning Map, Hillview, Kentucky’.
In addition to its title, the Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the
County Judge, or the respective City Clerk, and bearing the seal of the county or the
respective city under the following words: ‘This is to certify that this is the Official
Zoning Map referred to in Section 3.200 of regulations Number ---- of ---- (Bullitt
County, Kentucky, or respectively, the City of Shepherdsville, the City of Lebanon
Junction, City of Hillview, or the City of Mount Washington), adopted by the ---- (Fiscal
Court of the County of Bullitt, or respectively, the City Council of Shepherdsville,
Lebanon Junction, Hillview, or Mount Washington).
Section 3.201 Changes in Zoning Map
If, in accordance with the provisions of these regulations and Kentucky Revised Statutes,
changes are made in zoning boundaries or other matters portrayed on the Official Zoning
Map, such changes shall be made by the local governing body together with an entry on
the Official Zoning Map (brief description of nature of change), which entry shall be
signed by the County Judge or Mayor of the city concerned and attested by the County
Clerk or the City Clerk concerned. The amending regulation shall provide that such
changes or amendments shall not become effective until they have been duly entered
upon the Official Zoning Map of the subject political area. No amendment to these
regulations which involves matters portrayed on the Official Zoning Map shall become
effective until after such change and entry have been made on said map.
No changes of any nature shall be made on the Official Zoning Map or matter shown
thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth herein. Any unauthorized
change of whatever kind by any person or persons shall be considered a violation of these
regulations and punishable as provided under Section 7.500 herein.
Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the Official Zoning Map which may
from time to time be made or published, the Official Zoning Map which shall be located
in the office of the Bullitt County Clerk or the respective City Clerk for the area under his
jurisdiction shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land, buildings,
and other structures within the county.
-15-
Section 3.202 Replacement of the Official Zoning Map
In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, or difficult to
interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the legislative body
having jurisdiction may, by resolution, adopt a new Official Zoning Map which shall
supersede the prior Official Zoning Map. The new Official Zoning Map may correct
drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior Official Zoning Map, but no such
correction shall have the effect of amending the original zoning regulations or any
subsequent amendment thereof. The new Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the
signature of the County Judge or the Mayor of the city concerned, attested by County
Clerk or the City Clerk of the city concerned and bearing the seal of the county or city
concerned under the following words; ‘This is to certify that this Zoning Map supersedes
and replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted (date of adoption of map being replaced)
as part of regulation Number ---- of ---- (the County of Bullitt, Kentucky, or, respectively,
the City of Shepherdsville, City of Lebanon Junction, City of Mount Washington,
Kentucky or Hillview, Kentucky).
Section 3.300 Rules for Interpretation of Zone Boundaries
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of zones as shown on the Official Zoning
Map, the following rules shall apply:
a- Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such center lines;
b- Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be
construed as following city limits;
c- Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be
construed as following platted lot lines;
d- Boundaries indicated as approximately following railroad lines shall be
construed to be midway between the main tracks;
e- Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streams, rivers, valleys, ditches, gulleys, or other bodies of water shall be
construed to follow such center lines;
f- Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features listed in
Numbers ‘a’ through ‘e’ above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically
indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale of the map;
-16-
g- Where physical or cultural features existing on ground are at variance with
those shown on the Official Zoning Map or in other circumstances not covered by
‘a’ through ‘f’ above, the Board of Zoning Adjustment shall interpret the zone
boundaries.
h- If, after use of the above rules and the map, the zone classification of any
land is in question, it shall be deemed to be in the most restrictive of the adjoining
zones.
-17-
ARTICLE 4 GENERAL REGULATIONS
Section 4.100 Application of Regulations
4.101 Conformity with Regulations
4.102 Bulk and Density
4.103 Separability of Purposes Required
4.104 Minimum Lot and Yard
Section 4.200 Nonconforming Lots, Uses, and Structures
4.201 Nonconforming Lots of Record
4.202 Nonconforming Uses of Land
4.203 Nonconforming Structures
4.204 Nonconforming Uses of Structures
4.205 Repairs and Maintenance
4.206 Conditional Uses Not Nonconforming Uses
Section 4.300 General Lot, Yard and Court Requirements
4.301 Lot for Every Building
4.302 Subdivision of a Lot
4.303 Lot Access Requirement
4.304 Lots in Two or More Zones
4.305 Front Yards for Corner and Through Lots
4.306 Measurement of Front Yard Depths
4.307 Projections Into Yard Space
4.308 Fences, Walls, Hedges and Vegetation
4.309 Visibility at Intersections in Residential District
4.310 Court Requirements
Section 4.400 Provision of Water and Sewerage Systems
4.401 Approved Water and Sewerage Systems Required
4.402 Minimum Lot Area When Water and/or Sewage Facilities are Lacking
Section 4.500 Public Utility Use or Structure
Section 4.600 Use of Flood Areas
4.601 Types of Flood Areas
4.602 Uses Permitted in Floodways
4.603 Typical Uses that May be Allowed in Floodways
4.604 Uses Permitted in Floodway Plain
Section 4.700 Mineral Extraction and Regrading
4.701 Procedure for Mineral Extraction Operations
4.702 Development Standards
4.703 Rehabilitation Requirements
Section 4.800 Off-Street Parking and Loading
4.801 Application Procedure
4.802 Design of Parking Areas
4.803 Location of Parking Areas
4.804 Review and Approval by Commission Required
4.805 Schedule of Off-Street Parking Requirements
4.806 Off-Street Loading Space
4.807 Modification of Parking and Loading Requirements
Section 4.900 Signs
4.901 General Provisions
4.902 Zoning Certificate for Signs
4.903 Signs Permitted Without a Zoning Certificate
4.904 Limitations
4.905 Number and Area of Signs
4.906 Sign Design
4.907 Business Signs
4.908 Outdoor Advertising Signs
4.909 Condemnation for Removal of Signs
4.910 Municipal Signs
ARTICLE 4 GENERAL REGULATIONS
Section 4.100 Application of Regulations
The regulations established herein within each zone shall be minimum regulations and
shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure of land, except as hereinafter
provided and particularly:
Section 4.101 Conformity With Regulations
No building, structure, or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or
structure of part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or
structurally altered unless in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for
the zone in which it is located.
Section 4.102 Bulk and Density
No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered:
a- To exceed the height;
b- To accommodate or house a greater number of families;
c- To occupy a smaller lot area;
d- To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards, or other
open spaces
than herein required, or in any manner contrary to the provisions of these regulations.
Section 4.103 Separability of Purposes Required
No part of a yard or other open space or off-street parking or loading space required
about or in connection with any building for the purpose of complying with these
regulations shall be included as part of a yard, open space, or off-street parking or loading
space similarly required for any other building.
Section 4.104 Minimum Lot and Yard
No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of these regulations shall be reduced in
dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots
created after the effective date of these regulations shall meet at least the minimum
requirements established herein.
-18-
Section 4.200 Nonconforming Lots, Uses, and Structure
Within the zones established by these regulations, or amendments that may later be
adopted, there exist lots, structures, uses of land and structures, and characteristics of use,
which were lawful before these regulations were adopted or amended, but which would
be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of these zoning regulations or
future amendment. It is the intent of these regulations to permit these nonconformities to
continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. Such uses are
declared by these regulations to be incompatible with permitted uses and required
standards in the zones involved. It is further the intent of these regulations that
nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as
grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same zone. The
Board of Adjustment shall not permit change from one nonconforming use to another
unless the new nonconforming use is in the same or a more restrictive classification.
Such new nonconforming use shall not be reverted to the earlier nonconforming use or
any other nonconforming use of lesser restrictions. A nonconforming use of a structure, a
nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use of a structure and land shall not be
extended or enlarged after passage of these regulations by attachment on a building or
premises of additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises, or by the addition
of other uses of a nature which would be prohibited in the zone involved. The Board of
Adjustment shall not allow the enlargement of extension of a nonconforming use beyond
the scope and area of operation at the time these regulations, which make such use
nonconforming, were adopted. To avoid undue hardship, nothing in these regulations
shall be deemed to require a change in the plants, construction, or designated use of any
building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of
adoption or amendment of these regulations and upon which actual building construction
has been diligently carried on. Actual construction is hereby defined to include the
placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent
manner; except that where demolition or removal of a existing building has been
substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such demolition or removal shall be
deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be diligently carried on until
completion of the building involved.
Section 4.201 Nonconforming Lots of Record
Notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of these regulations, in any zone
in which single-family dwellings are permitted, a single-family dwelling and customary
accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of these regulations. Such lot must be in separate ownership and
not of continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership. This provision shall
apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that
are generally applicable in the zone, provided that yard dimensions and requirements
other than those applying to area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the
regulations for the zone in which such lot is located. Variance of yard requirements shall
be obtained only through action of the Board of Adjustment. In the event two or more
-19-
lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single
ownership are of record at the time of passage or amendment of these regulations, and if
all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements for lot width and area as established by
these regulations, the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the
purposes of these regulations and no portion of said parcel shall be used or sold which
does not meet lot width and area requirements established by these regulations, nor shall
be division of the parcel be make which leaves remaining any lot with width or area
below the requirements stated in these regulations.
Section 4.202 Nonconforming Uses of Land
Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of these regulations, lawful use of
land exists that is no longer permissible under the terms of these regulations as enacted or
amended, such use may be continued, so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to
the following provisions:
a- No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended
to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of these regulations.
b- No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any
other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date
of adoption or amendment of these regulations.
c- If any such nonconforming use of land is discontinued for any reason for a
period of more than 90 days, any subsequent use of such land shall
conform to the regulations specified by these regulations for the zone in
which such land is located.
Section 4.203 Nonconforming Structures
Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of these
regulations that could not be built under the terms of these regulations by reason of
restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, or other characteristics of the structure or
its location on the lot, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise
lawful, subject to the following provisions:
a- No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its
nonconformity.
b- Should such structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more
than 50 percent of its replacement cost at time of destruction as
determined by the Administrative Official, it shall not be reconstructed
except in conformity with the provisions of these regulations.
-20-
c- Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever,
it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the zone in which it is
located after it is moved.
Section 4.204 Nonconforming Uses of Structures
If a lawful use of a structure or of structure and premises in combination exists at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of these regulations, that would not be allowed
in the zone under the terms of these regulations, the lawful use may be continued so long
as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
a- No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by these regulations in
the zone in which it is located, except dwelling, shall be enlarged,
extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except
in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the zone in which
it is located.
b- Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a
building which were manifestly arranged or designed for use at the time of
adoption or amendment of these regulations, but no such use shall be
extended to occupy any land outside such building.
c- If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a
structure, or structure and premises, may be changed to another
nonconforming use provided that the Board of Adjustment, either by
general rule or by making findings in the specific case, shall find that the
proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the zone than
the existing nonconforming use, and is more restrictive. In permitting
such change, the Board of Adjustments may require appropriate conditions
and safeguards in accord with the provisions of these regulations.
d- Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a
nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter
conform to the regulations for the zone in which such structure is located,
and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.
e- When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in
combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six consecutive months or
for 18 months during any three-year period, the structure, or structure and
premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in
conformance with the regulations of the zone in which it is located.
-21-
f- Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in
combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the
nonconforming status of the land.
Section 4.205 Repairs and Maintenance
On any structure devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use, work may be
done in any period of 12 consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or
replacement of non bearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, to an extent not
exceeding 10 percent of the current replacement value of the building, provided that the
cubic content of the building, as it existed at the time of passage or amendment of these
regulations shall not be increased. In no case shall these regulations be deemed to
prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof
declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon
order of such official.
Section 4.206 Conditional Uses Not Nonconforming Uses
Any nonconforming use for which a conditional use is permitted as provided in these
regulations shall not be deemed a nonconforming use, but shall without further action be
deemed a conforming use in such zone.
Section 4.300 General Lot, Yard and Court Requirements
The following requirements are in addition to any regulations incorporated in any
adopted Subdivision Regulations. In the case of any inconsistency or conflict, the more
restrictive requirements shall govern.
Section 4.301 Lot for Every Building
Every building hereafter erected shall be located on a lot as herein defined. In any zone,
except as permitted in a Planned Unit Development Zone, only one main structure
housing a permitted use my be erected on a single lot, unless yard and other requirements
of these regulations shall be met for each structure as though it were on an individual lot.
Section 4.302 Subdivision of a Lot
Where a lot is formed hereafter from part of a lot already occupied by a building, such
separation shall be affected in such manner as not to impair conformity with any of the
requirements of these regulations with respect to the existing building and all yards and
other required spaces in connection therewith, and no permit shall be issued for the
establishment of a land use or the erection of a building on the new lot thus created unless
it complies with all the provisions of these regulations, and subdivision regulations as
they may be adopted.
-22-
Section 4.303 Lot Access Requirement
Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to a public street, or
with access to an approved public street, and all structures shall be so located on lots as to
provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection and required off-street
parking. In a Planned Unit Development, the lots may face on a common open space,
provided that the plan of such development is approved by the Planning Commission.
This requirement shall not apply to farm buildings.
Section 4.304 Lots in Two or More Zones
Where a lot in one ownership of record is divided by one or more zone boundary lines,
the regulations for the less restrictive zone may extend not more than fifty (50) feet into
the more restricted portion.
Section 4.305 Front Yards for Corner and Through Lots
In the case of corner lots, a front yard of the required depth shall be provided and a
second front yard of half the depth required generally for front yards in the zone shall be
provided on the other frontage. In the case of corner lots with more than two frontages,
the Administrative Official shall determine the front yard requirements, subject to the
following limitations: 1) at least one front yard shall be provided having the full depth
required generally in the zone; 2) no other front yard on such lot shall have less than half
the full depth required generally. In the case of through lots, i.e., two frontages on
opposite sides, unless the prevailing front yard pattern on adjoining lots indicates
otherwise, front yards shall be provided on all frontages. Where one of the front yards
that would normally be required on a through lot is not in keeping with the prevailing
yard pattern, the Administrative Official may waive the requirement for the normal front
yard and substitute therefore a special yard requirement which shall not exceed the
average of the yards provided on adjacent lots.
Section 4.306 Measurement of Front Yard Depths
Front yard depths, and side yards for corner lots, shall be measured from the road rightof-
way line. For purposes of such measurement, no local road shall be considered as
having a right-of-way less than fifty (50) feet wide and no major state road less than sixty
(60) feet wide. This provision shall not be construed as requiring the dedication of any
property to the state. After adoption of an official detailed plan by the state or county for
road widening or relocation, the right-of-way so established shall apply.
Section 4.307 Projections Into Yard Space
Steps, terraces, decks, carports, bay windows, fire escapes, balconies, open porches, and
other unenclosed architectural features, may extend into required yard areas not more
than nine (9) feet, provided that no such projection shall be less than five (5) feet from a
-23-
side lot line. Enclosing of such projections into yard areas is prohibited.
(Note – see page 120 for the latest text amendment of this section.)
Section 4.308 Fences, Walls, Hedges and Vegetation
In any required front yard, no fences or walls shall be permitted which materially impede
vision across such yard above the height of 30 inches. Except in required front yards, as
indicated above, fences, walls, and hedges are permitted in a yard or along the edge of the
yard. In Planned Unit Developments, requiring site plan review, the Planning
Commission may permit fences, walls, or hedges above 30 inches in the front yard when
the site and buildings are designed to accommodate such enclosure, or when required by
the Planning Commission as a condition for approval.
Section 4.309 Visibility at Intersections in Residential District
On a corner lot in any residential district, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, or
allowed to grow in such a manner as materially to impede vision between two and a half
(2-1/2) and ten (10) feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets in the area
bounded by the intersecting street centerlines for a distance of ninety (90) feet from their
point of intersection and the diagonal line joining the end points along existing trees,
provided that no branches are located closer than six (6) feet to the ground.
Section 4.310 Court Requirements
When an enclosed court is provided for the purpose of furnishing light and air to rooms in
which persons are to work, live, or sleep, the minimum court dimensions shall be as
follows:
a- Minimum Width: For residential buildings other than a single-family
dwelling, the minimum width shall be the sum of the heights of the opposite
building walls, but not less than forty (40) feet. For non-residential
buildings, two-thirds the sum of opposite building walls, but no less than
thirty (30) feet.
b- Minimum Depth: One and one-half times the width.
Section 4.400 Provision of Water and Sewerage Systems
The following requirements are in addition to any provisions incorporated in any adopted
Subdivision Regulations. In the event of inconsistency or conflict, the more restrictive
provisions shall govern.
Section 4.401 Approved Water and Sewerage Systems Required
Any new development in Bullitt County is to be provided with approved water and
sewage disposal systems, either through:
-24-
a- Connection with public utility systems;
b- Connection with approved private systems; or
c- Use of an approved individual water supply (wells), and, in other than
Planned Unit Development zones, individual sewage disposal facilities,
(septic tanks or similar method).
No zoning improvement permit shall be issued until the applicant indicates that sufficient
provision has been or will be made for water supply and sewage disposal, and that these
provisions have been approved by the Bullitt County Health Department. No zoning
certificate is to be issued until the Health Department certifies that approved systems for
water supply and sewage disposal have been provided.
Section 4.402 Minimum Lot Area When Water and/or Sewage Facilities are Lacking
Any lot to be served by an individual water supply (wells) and/or individual sewage
disposal system (septic tank) is to have a minimum area of 14,000 square feet and a
minimum frontage of 100 feet, or the minimum of such requirements set by the Bullitt
County Health Department. The minimum lot areas shall be increased to include any
additional area deemed necessary by the Bullitt County Health Department to insure
potable water supply and/or adequate sewage disposal. The Administrative Official shall
not issue zoning permits until adequate lot area and frontage is provided.
Section 4.500 Public Utility Use or Structure
Water, sewer, electric, gas and communications lines, and necessary incidental equipment
such as repeaters, transformers, switches, pumps, and regulators (when such equipment is
located on the lines) but not administration, construction, maintenance or storage use, are
permitted in all zones and shall not be subject to lot, yard, height, and lot coverage
requirements. All other public utility facilities not permitted in the zone regulations are
permitted only as conditional use in any zone when approved by the Board of Adjustment
which shall provide for adequate safeguards to the adjoining properties.
Section 4.600 Use of Flood Areas
Notwithstanding other provisions of these regulations, the use of land subject to flooding
shall be regulated so as to minimize flood damage and reduce danger to life. Before
issuing permits in such areas as defined hereunder, the Administrative Official shall refer
the application to the Planning Commission. The Commission shall discuss and may
review detailed plans before recommending design improvements, if needed, or issuance
of permits.
-25-
Section 4.601 Types of Flood Areas
‘Floodways’ are the flood areas that may be covered by two or more feet of water and
which are located in the main stream flood-plain where water velocities are likely to be
high enough to become dangerous. ‘Floodway Plains’ are the areas which lie outside the
open ‘floodway’ but within the fifty-year floodplain. In this Floodway Plain, flood
waters ‘pond’ but do not do serious damage by sheer velocity or force.
Section 4.602 Uses Permitted in Floodways
Uses permitted in floodways must always be those which do not endanger human life or
increase flood damage by raising water heights or increasing flood velocities. Sound
foundations and footings and adequate deviations to minimize flood damage are required
for any structure allowed in the floodway and no earth fills may be permitted which
would have the effect of raising flood heights elsewhere. The Administrative Official
may refer applications for a permit to build in a floodway to the Soil Conservation
District or other appropriate agencies for reports on floodway proposals. In cases where
uncertainty exists as to whether or not a use should be allowed in a floodway, the
applicant shall have prepared an engineering analysis by a licensed engineer before a
permit shall be issued.
Section 4.603 Typical Uses that May be Allowed in Floodways Include:
a- Open land uses such as parking lots, loading berths, airport landing strips, fish
and wildlife preserves, and open recreation uses;
b- Storage uses for equipment and material not seriously affected by floods and
which will not create additional danger by being dislodged;
c- Most agricultural uses, but not transient labor camps or any kind of temporary
residences, or structures housing farm animals.
Section 4.604 Uses Permitted in Floodway Plain
Floodway plain areas are not required for the passage of floodwaters and therefore most
kinds of structures can be permitted as long as they are built high enough and
substantially enough to withstand the flood. The following rules shall apply:
a- No building shall be allowed in the floodway plain area unless its main
floor is at least five (5) feet above the elevation of the maximum expected
flood.
b- Filling of land is permitted, provided that filling will not have the effect of
raising flood heights elsewhere.
-26-
c- Foundations and footings of all structures shall be designed to withstand
flood conditions.
d- Whenever possible, the site plan shall be designed so that principal
buildings will be located outside of flood plains, and, whenever necessary,
floodway plain uses shall be limited to accessory buildings.
In any cases where uncertainty exists as to whether or not proposed foundations or
footings are adequate to withstand flood conditions, or whether or not proposed filling
operations will increase floodway hazards, the applicant shall have prepared an
engineering or structural analysis by a licensed engineer before a permit shall be issued.
Section 4.700 Mineral Extraction and Regrading
The excavation of natural materials or filling of land shall be permitted without a
conditional use permit only to a degree necessary to permit construction of buildings,
streets, or accessory uses for which a zoning permit has been granted. Materials used for
fill shall be natural materials only, such as sand, gravel, or dirt, and shall not consist of
rubbish, refuse, garbage, or decomposable animal or vegetable materials. Regrading
shall be undertaken at a time which is customary to the overall construction timetable of
similar-type projects. Any excavation or filling which is not clearly necessary and
incidental to an approved construction project shall require a conditional use permit.
Section 4.701 Procedure for Mineral Extraction Operations
In addition to the conditional use permit requirements, two (2) copies of the following
information shall be submitted to the Board of Adjustment with the application.
a- Name of the owner or owners of land from which removal is to be made.
b- Name of the applicant making request for such a permit.
c- Name of the person or corporation conducting the actual mining
operations.
d- Location, description and size of the area from which the removal is to be
made.
e- Location of the processing plant to be used and any accessory or kindred
operations that may be utilized in connection with the operation of the
processing plant by the mining processor or any other firm, person or
corporation. The processing plant shall be located as to minimize the
problems of dust, dirt and noise, insofar as reasonably possible.
f- Type of resources or materials to be removed.
-27-
g- Proposed method of removal and whether or not blasting or other use of
explosives will be required.
h- General description of the equipment to be used.
i- Method of rehabilitation and reclamation of the mined-out area, including
a grading plan showing existing contours in the area to be excavated and
the proposed future contours showing the topography of the area after
completion. Such plan shall include the surrounding area within five
hundred (500) feet of the property boundary line, drawn to an appropriate
scale with contour lines at intervals of five (5) feet or less.
Section 4.702 Development Standards
The following required development standards shall be observed:
a- No mining of sand and gravel shall be carried on, or any stock pile placed
closer than fifty (50) feet to any property line, or such greater distance as
specified by the Board of Adjustment. Where such is deemed necessary
for he protection of adjacent property, except that this distance
requirement may be reduced by the written consent of the owner or
owners of abutting property, but in any such event, adequate lateral
support shall be provided for said abutting property.
b- In the event that the site of the mining operation is adjacent to the right-ofway
of any public street or road, no part of such operation shall take place
closer than fifty (50) feet to the nearest line of such right-of-way.
c- Any excavated area adjacent to a right-of-way of any public street or road
shall be back-filled for a distance of one hundred fifty (150) feet from the
right-of-way line.
d- Fencing or other suitable barrier, including the planting of mutiflora rose,
shall be erected and maintained around the entire site or portions thereof
where, in the opinion of the Board, such fencing or barrier is necessary for
the protection of the public safety and shall be of a type specified by the
Board.
e- All equipment and machinery shall be operated and maintained in such
manner as to minimize dust, noise and vibration. Access roads shall be
maintained in a dust-free condition by surfacing or other treatment as may
be specified by the Board.
-28-
f- Quarrying shall not be carried out closer than three hundred (300) feet to
any adjoining property line unless the written consent of such adjoining
property owner has first been obtained.
g- The Board is authorized to impose such requirements with respect to
providing adequate barriers as it may feel necessary to protect the public
safety.
Section 4.703 Rehabilitation Requirements
All mined-out areas shall, within a reasonable length of time, be reclaimed and
rehabilitated and the Board, at its discretion, may fix a bond in a reasonable amount to
assure that such rehabilitation and reclamation will be carried out. The Board shall be
guided by the following standards with respect to rehabilitation and reclamation of
mined-out areas:
a- All excavation shall be made either to a water producing depth, such depth
to be not less than five (5) feet below the water mark, or shall be graded or
back-filled with non-noxious noncombustible and nonflammable solids to
secure:
1. That the excavated area shall not collect and permit to
remain therein stagnant water; or,
2. That the surface of such area which is not
permanently submerged is graded or back-filled as
necessary so as to reduce the peaks and depressions
thereof so as to produce a gently rolling surface that
will minimize erosion due to rainfall and which will
be in substantial conformity to the adjoining land
area.
b- The banks of all sand and gravel excavations in a water producing
excavation, and to the pit bottom in a dry operation, shall be sloped to the
water line, at a slope which will not be less than three (3) feet horizontal to
one foot vertical and said banks shall be restored with vegetation in a
manner set forth in paragraph ‘c’.
c- Vegetation shall be restored by the spreading of sufficient soil and by
appropriate seeding of grasses or planting of shrubs and trees in all parts
of said mining area where the same is not submerged under water.
d- Proper drainage shall be provided for the mined-out area.
e- All equipment and structures shall be removed from the mined-out area
within six (6) months of the completion of the mining there from.
-29-
f- The Board may impose such other reasonable conditions and restrictions
as it may deem necessary for the protection of the public and to encourage
the mining and processing of the sand and gravel from the authorized area.
g- Due to the inherent difficulties in reclaiming and rehabilitating areas from
which stone has been quarried, the Board is hereby empowered, in the
issuance of a conditional use permit for quarrying operations, to impose
such reasonable standards for reclamation as may be necessary to protect
the public interest, without unduly restricting the operations of the mine
owner.
Section 4.800 Off-Street Parking and Loading
Permanent off-street automobile parking space and truck loading space shall be provided
for all new structures or uses and any enlargement of existing structures or uses.
Structures and uses in existence or under construction on the date these zoning
regulations first become effective shall not be subject to parking and loading
requirements. However, any parking and loading facilities now existing to serve such
structures or uses shall not, in the future, be reduced except where they exceed such
requirements, in which case they shall not be reduced blow such requirements. When a
structure or use which existed prior to the effective date of these zoning regulations shall
undergo any increase in intensity of use in a number of dwelling units, floor area, seating
capacity, number of employees or other unit of measurements specified hereinafter for
required parking facilities or from other causes, and when the increase would result in a
requirement for additional parking or loading facilities through application of the
requirements of this section, additional parking and loading facilities shall be provided on
the basis of the total units of measurements of the new use, or of the alteration or
expansion of the existing use.
Section 4.801 Application Procedure
No application for a zoning permit or certificate of occupancy shall be approved unless
there is included with the plan for such building, improvement, or use, a plot plan
showing the required space designated for off-street parking and loading, or that such
space is already provided, in accordance with these regulations. The plot plan shall
clearly show the size and location of parking and loading spaces, the width and
arrangement of access driveways, and arrangement of walls, fences and screen planting.
Section 4.802 Design of Parking Areas
Design of parking areas shall meet the following requirements.
a- Size of Parking Space: One automobile parking space shall consist of
two hundred (200) square feet of area, with a minimum width of nine (9)
feet. In addition, adequate interior driveways and entrance and exit
-30-
driveways shall be provided to connect each parking space into the
adjoining street. Parking spaces shall be clearly marked.
b- Setbacks and Landscaping: Parking areas shall be subject to the same
front yard requirements as a building in that zone, except that on the street
side of a corner lot, no side yard of more than ten (10) feet shall be
required for a parking area. The required yard areas shall be set off from
the parking area by a curb or bumper, and the yards shall be appropriately
landscaped.
c- Buffer Strips: When a parking area adjoins a residential zone, a
screening fence or wall at least five (5) feet high and ten (10) feet wide,
shall be maintained along the side and/or rear lot lines of the parking area.
d- Lighting: When lighting of such parking area is provided, installations
shall be arranged so as not to reflect or to cause glare into abutting
residential lots or adjacent streets.
e- Surfacing and Drainage: All parking areas shall be surfaced with
materials which will eliminate problems of dust and mud and shall be so
drained as to prevent erosion damage to abutting properties or streets.
f- Entrances: On corner lots, entrances to parking areas shall be set back at
least twenty (20) feet from the point of intersection of property lines. No
entrance or exit shall exceed twenty-five (25) in width.
Section 4.803 Location of Parking Areas
All automobile parking compounds shall be located on the site or conveniently near, and
in no case more than three hundred (300) feet distant from, the main building or use to
which parking facilities are appurtenant, except in the case of one and two-family
dwellings, where the required parking space shall be provided on the same lot as the
dwelling. However, industries employing five hundred (500) or more employees may
supply off-street parking at a distance greater than three hundred (300) feet from the main
industrial facilities served, upon approval of the Planning Commission. Land in any
residential zone adjacent to a commercial or industrial use may also be used for an
automobile parking area to serve these uses, provided that:
a- The land so used immediately adjoins or is directly across an alley or
street from the commercial or industrial zone for which such off-street
parking area is required;
b- No charge shall be made for the use of said parking area;
c- Only passenger vehicles (excluding buses) shall be permitted to use said
-31-
parking area;
d- No service of any kind shall be extended to persons occupying vehicles in
said parking areas; nor shall such area be used for automobile service or
repair;
e- When land in any residential zone used for off-street parking purposes
abuts the side and/or rear line of a lot in a residential zone, buffer strips
shall be provided as outlined above.
f- Additional protective conditions may be imposed in connection with the
use of such residential land for off-street parking when, in the judgment of
the Planning Commission, such are deemed necessary or desirable for the
protection, convenience, and quiet of surrounding properties.
Section 4.804 Review and Approval by Commission Required
The design of all off-street parking lots other than for one and two-family dwelling, and
means of access thereto shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Commission.
Section 4.805 Schedule of Off-Street Parking Requirements
The following off-street parking schedule indicates minimum requirements and may be
increased where necessary as a condition of site plan approval or conditional use permit
approval. Other uses operated in association with the uses listed must be provided for in
addition. The vehicle parking space on any lot as set forth and designated in these
regulations shall be deemed to be required open space on such lot, in addition to any yard
space required by the provisions of these regulations, and shall not be reduced or
encroached upon in any manner. In addition the following requirements shall be
observed:
a- Any vehicle parking space provided under those regulations in a
commercial or industrial zone shall be used for parking only. Any other
use of such space, including repair work or servicing of any kind other
than in an emergency or the requirement of any payment for the use of
such space shall be deemed to constitute a separate commercial use in
violation of the provisions of these regulations.
b- When the number of spaces calculated in accordance with these
regulations results in a number containing a fraction, the number shall be
rounded off to the nearest whole number.
c- The off-street parking requirements for two or more uses may be satisfied
by providing a common facility containing the sum of the number of
spaces required for each of the uses, except as provided in ‘e’ below.
-32-
d- Reasonable and appropriate off-street parking requirements for structures
and land uses which do not fall within the categories listed above, shall be
determined in each case by the Administrative Official to be comparable
to the requirements for uses of similar nature, after considering all factors
entering into the parking needs of each such use.
e- For integrated shopping centers, where the number of spaces required in a
common facility is five hundred (500) or more, the off-street parking
requirement may be reduced by one-fifth. Where the number of spaces
required is seven hundred fifty (750) or more, the off-street parking
requirement may be reduced by three-tenths.
NO. OF UNIT OF
USE SPACES MEASUREMENT
RESIDENTIAL USE:
ONE AND TWO- FAMILY ONE EACH DWELLING UNIT
DWELLINGS OR MIXED
OCCUPANCY
MULTIPLE DWELLING TWO EACH DWELLING UNIT
PUBLIC RESIDENTIAL USE:
TOURIST HOMES, CABINS ONE EACH SLEEPING ROOM
OR MOTELS OR SUITE INCLUDING THAT OF
THE OWNER OR MANAGER OF
RESIDENCE ON THE PREMISES
HOTELS* ONE EACH THREE (3) GUEST
SLEEPING ROOMS
PRIVATE CLUBS, ONE EACH TWO (2) GUEST
FRATERNITIES, BOARDING SLEEPING ROOMS OR
AND LODGING HOUSES EACH 200 SQUARE FEET OF
FLOOR AREA, WHICHEVER IS
GREATER
CULTURAL, HEALTH, AND RELIGIOUS USE:
HOSPITALS, SANITORIUMS, ONE EACH THREE (3) PATIENTS
CONVALESCENT HOMES +ONE EACH TWO (2) EMPLOYEES
FOR THE AGED OR AND STAFF MEMBERS
SIMILAR USE
-33-
ORPHANAGES OR ONE EACH TEN (10) BEDS
SIMILAR USE
COMMUNITY CENTERS, ONE EACH ONE HUNDRED (100)
LIBRARIES, MUSEUMS, SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA
POST OFFICES, CIVIC
CLUBS, ETC.
CHURCHES & SCHOOLS ONE EACH FOUR (4) SEATS IN A
PRINCIPAL AUDITORIUM,
OR EACH SEVENTEEN (17)
CLASSROOM SEATS,
WHICHEVER IS GREATER
SOCIAL AND RECREATIONAL USES:
THEATRES AND ONE EACH FOUR (4) SEATS,
AUDITORIUMS** (OTHER +ONE EACH TWO (2) EMPLOYEES
THAN INCIDENTAL TO
SCHOOLS)
DANCE HALLS, POOL AND ONE EACH ONE HUNDRED (100)
BILLIARD HALLS AND SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA
EXHIBITION HALLS USED FOR DANCING OR
WITHOUT FIXED SEATS ASSEMBLY
STADIUM OR SPORTS ONE EACH FOUR (4) SEATS
ARENAS**
BOWLING ALLEYS*** FIVE (5) PARKING SPACES FOR
EACH ALLEY
SALES AND SERVICE:
MORTUARIES OR ONE EACH FIFTY (50) SQUARE
FUNERAL HOMES FEET OF FLOOR SPACE IN THE
SLUMBER ROOMS, PARLORS,
OR INDIVIDUAL FUNERAL
SERVICE ROOMS
ESTABLISHMENTS FOR ONE EACH ONE HUNDRED (100)
SALE AND CONSUMPTION SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA
ON THE PREMISES OF +ONE EACH FOUR (4) EMPLOYEES
BEVERAGES, FOOD, OR
OTHER REFRESHMENTS
-34-
EXCLUDING DRIVE-IN
RESTAURANTS
MEDICAL OR DENTAL ONE EACH TWO HUNDRED (200)
CLINICS, BANKS, BUSINESS SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR
OR PROFESSIONAL OFFICE SPACE
BEAUTY PARLORS & TWO EACH BARBER AND/OR
BARBER SHOPS BEAUTY SHOP OPERATOR
ALL RETAIL STORES, NONE CENTRAL BUSINESS ZONE
INCLUDING DRIVE-IN
RESTAURANTS AND OTHER ONE HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL
SIMILAR ESTABLISHMENTS ZONE – EACH FOUR HUNDRED
EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE (400) SQUARE FEET OF
SPECIFIED HEREIN GROUND FLOOR AREA
AUTOMOTIVE SALES AND SERVICE:
MOTOR VEHICLE ONE FIVE HUNDRED (500) SQUARE
SALESROOMS, REPAIR SHOPS, FEET OF FLOOR AREA
PUBLIC GARAGES
GASOLINE FILLING ONE 150 SQUARE FEET FLOOR
STATIONS AREA, BUT NOT LESS THAN 10
SPACES, EACH CAR SERVICE
RACK MAY BE COUNTED AS
ONE SPACE, BUT DRIVEWAY
AREAS AND SPACE AT
GASOLINE PUMPS MAY NOT BE
COUNTED
WHOLESALING AND INDUSTRIAL USES:
WHOLESALE ONE 300 SQUARE FEET FLOOR
ESTABLISHMENTS, AREA, OR ONE SPACE PER
WAREHOUSES, EACH TWO EMPLOYEES ON
INDUSTRIAL PLANTS THE MAXIMUM WORKING
SHIFT, WHICHEVER IS
GREATEST
*REQUIREMENTS FOR RESTAURANTS, BALLROOMS, AND OTHER PLACE
OF ASSEMBLY MUST BE PROVIDED FOR IN ADDITION.
-35-
**WHERE THERE ARE NO FIXED SEATS, ONE SPACE PER TEN (10) SQUARE
FEET OF FLOOR AREA AVAILABLE TO THE PUBLIC.
***REQUIREMENTS FOR RESTAURANTS MUST BE PROVIDED IN ADDITION.
4.806 Off-Street Loading Space
Any building used for commercial, office, industrial or institutional purposes shall
provide indoor and outdoor space for the loading and unloading of goods and materials
according to the following requirements and schedule.
a- Each loading space shall have a minimum width of twelve (12) feet, a
minimum length of thirty-five (35) feet, and a minimum height, if covered,
of fourteen (14) feet. Adequate space shall be provided for driveways,
entrances, and exits. Access to an alley or street shall be provided.
b- Integrated shopping centers of five (5) acres or more may be excluded
from the requirements for minimum dimensions of loading berths and
from the requirements for minimum numbers of off-street loading spaces
listed hereunder, provided other satisfactory loading arrangements are
provided.
NO. OF FLOOR AREA
USE SPACES (SQUARE FEET)
HOSPITAL OR OTHER NONE FIRST 10,000
INSTITUTION ONE 10,001 TO 20,000
+ONE EACH ADDITIONAL 200,000 OR
FRACTION THEREOF
RETAIL SALES AND NONE FIRST 5,000
SERVICES ONE 5,001 TO 10,000
TWO 10,001 TO 40,000
+ONE EACH ADDITIONAL 150,000 OR
FRACTION THEREOF
OFFICE BUILDING NONE FIRST 10,000
INCLUDING BANKS ONE 10,001 TO 100,000
+ONE EACH ADDITIONAL 150,000 OR
FRACTION THEREOF
WHOLESALE OR NONE FIRST 3,000
WAREHOUSING ONE 3,001 TO 10,000
+ONE EACH ADDITIONAL 40,000 OR
FRACTION THEREOF
-36-
INDUSTRY OR NONE FIRST 5,000
MANUFACTURING ONE 5,001 TO 25,000
+ONE EACH ADDITIONAL 50,000 OR
FRACTION THEREOF
OTHER COMMERCIAL NONE FIRST 10,000
USES ONE 10,001 TO 100,000
+ONE EACH ADDITIONAL 100,000 OR
FRACTION THEREOF
Section 4.807 Modification of Parking and Loading Requirements
The following modifications are permitted only with the approval of the Board of
Adjustment.
a- Hardship: In cases of development or redevelopment of properties where
application of the Schedule of Parking Requirements or Loading
Requirements would create undue hardship, the applicant may appear
before the Board of Adjustment to present a modified plan for the
provision of off-street parking or loading space. The Board is authorized
to approve such plans, when appropriate, after referral to the Planning
Commission.
b- Joint Use of Parking Areas: In cases of development of properties where
several uses could effectively utilized the same parking area, because of
different periods of peak demand, the applicant may appear before the
Board of Adjustment to present a modified parking plan. An example
would be a church adjacent to a shopping center, where peak use hours
would not coincide. The Board is authorized to approve such plans, when
appropriate, after referral to the Planning Commission. The Board shall
require written evidence of an agreement for joint use and may impose any
necessary additional conditions.
Section 4.900 Signs
Section 4.901 General Provisions
No sign shall be erected, hung, placed, or painted in any zone, except as provided in this
section. No sign erected before the enactment of these regulations shall be structurally
altered or moved except in accordance with these regulations. No permit shall be
required for the repainting or repapering of a sign which conforms to the provisions of
these regulations, or having existed before the adoption of these regulations and are thus
established as a nonconforming use.
-37-
Section 4.902 Zoning Certificate for Signs
No sign shall be erected or displayed until the sign has been approved by the
Administrative Official and a zoning certificate issued, except as permitted in Section
4.903. Application for certificate shall be submitted on forms provided at the office of
the Administrative Official. Each application shall be accompanied by plans showing the
sign area, size, character, and color of letters; designs proposed; method of illumination,
if any; proposed location; and, if a projecting business sign, proposed method of
fastening such sign to the building or structure. The certificate number and date of
issuance shall be affixed to each sign in conspicuous manner. Signs erected without
conformance to these standards may be removed on order of the Administrative Official.
Section 4.902 Zoning Certificate for Signs, Revised
No sign shall be erected or displayed, except as set forth in Section 4.910, until the sign
has been approved by the Administrative Official and a zoning certificate issued, except
as permitted in Section 4.903. Application for certificate shall be submitted on forms
provided at the office of the Administrative Official. Each application shall be
accompanied by plans showing the sign area, size, character, and color of letters; designs
proposed; method of illumination, if any; proposed location; and, if a projecting business
sign, proposed method of fastening such sign to the building or structure. The certificate
number and date of issuance shall be affixed to each sign in conspicuous manner. Signs
erected without conformance to these standards may be removed on order of the
Administrative Official.
Note: Section 4.902 Zoning Certificate for Signs, Revised is in effect in the City of
Hillview only. This section was amended by Text Amendment 97T-01.
Section 4.903 Signs Permitted Without a Zoning Certificate
The types of signs listed below are permitted in any zone without a certificate, subject
only to the requirements outlined for each type of sign and the construction and lighting
standards of this section:
a- Incidental identification sign, indicating the name or number of the
building or premises or the accessory use of a dwelling for a home
occupation or for professional purposes. Such sign shall not exceed two
(2) square feet in area;
b- Farm signs, identifying the farm and advertising the sale of farm products
grown or produced on the premises. Such sign shall not exceed eight (8)
square feet in area and shall be at least fifteen (15) feet from any public
right-of-way;
c- Construction signs, identifying the contractors, engineers, or architects on
-38-
building projects under construction, limited to a total area for all such
signs of one hundred and fifty (150) square feet. The signs shall be
confined to the construction site and removed when construction is
completed;
d- Temporary real estate signs, not to exceed six (6) square feet for a tract
under two (2) acres, or fifty (50) square feet for a tract over two acres; and
in any case, they shall follow the requirements set forth in the following
table establishing a relationship between sign size and its distance from
property/right-of-way line.
DISTANCE FROM PROPERTY/
AREA IN SIGNS RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE
12 SQUARE FEET OR LESS 12 FEET
13 TO 20 SQUARE FEET 50 FEET
21 TO 40 SQUARE FEET 100 FEET
41 TO 50 SQUARE FEET 150 FEET
e- Temporary subdivision identification signs, not exceeding fifty (50)
square feet in area, for each subdivision of five lots or more;
f- Temporary subdivision approach signs, not to exceed twenty (20) square
feet. Each subdivision limited to four such signs;
g- Political campaign signs to be removed within ten (10) days after last day
of the event;
h- Street banners advertising a public event to be removed within ten (10)
days after last day of the event;
i- Temporary business signs, not to exceed twenty (20) square feet, and not
to be displayed longer than fifteen (15) days;
j- Window signs, provided that such signs shall not exceed thirty (30)
percent of the glass area;
k- Direction and information signs of a public or quasi-public nature;
l- Zoning signs required by these regulations;
m- Project identification signs of a permanent nature identifying the name of
a subdivision or other residential development, not to exceed twenty-four
(24) square feet.
n- Integral signs, giving the name of the building, date of erection or the like,
when made an integral part of the structure;
-39-
o- Institutional signs, giving the name or announcement of any public,
charitable or religious institution. Such sign shall be set back at least
fifteen (15) feet from the property line and shall not exceed twenty-four
(24) square feet in area;
p- Private traffic direction signs, for directing traffic onto or within a
property. Such signs shall not include any advertising and shall not
exceed four (4) square feet in area for each sign;
q- Tourist home sign, for a tourist home permitted as a conditional use, shall
not exceed six (6) square feet in area;
r- Home occupation and small professional or announcement signs for
permitted activities in residential zones, shall not exceed five (5) square
feet in area. Such signs shall be located not closer than one (1) foot from
any street right-of-way line and so placed that they will not obstruct the
view of traffic in any way. Any illumination of such signs shall be shaded
so that they in no way interfere with the vision of motorists of adjoining
property owners.
Section 4.904 Limitations
Any individual person or firm erecting, placing or hanging any signs shall apply for a
zoning certificate showing that such sign is in conformance with the zoning regulations.
Loud speakers, juke boxes, public address systems and electric amplifiers shall be
permitted if the use of the same is for the occupants of the building only within which
such equipment is installed and does not create a nuisance and disturb the peace of other
persons or adjoining properties in its own or any other zone. Signs or other outdoor
advertising which involves lighting or motion resembling traffic or directional signals,
warnings such as ‘stop’ and ‘danger’ are prohibited. Additionally, no sign, outdoor
commercial advertising device constituting a nuisance because of light, glare, focus,
animation of flashing, or any illuminated signs of such intensity of illumination as to
unduly disturb the use of residential property shall be erected or continue in operation.
Section 4.905 Number and Area of Signs
For the purpose of determining number of signs, a sign shall be considered to be a single
display surface or display device containing elements organized, related, and composed
to form a unit. The surface area of a sign shall be computed as including the entire area
within a regular geometric form or a simple combination of regular geometric forms
comprising all of the display area of the sign and including all of the elements of the
matter displayed. Frames and structural members not bearing advertising matter shall not
be included in computation of surface area. Only one side of a two face sign shall be
used for computing sign area.
-40-
Section 4.906 Sign Design
a- Lighting: Lighted signs shall not reflect or result in glare in adjacent
streets. Lighting or wording on a sign shall not be of a nature to be
confused with public traffic and directional signs.
b- Placement on Building: Signs shall not be erected on the roofs of
buildings and signs erected on the sides of buildings shall not extend more
than twelve (12) feet above the roof line. Signs shall not obstruct any
window, door, fire escape, stairway, or other opening intended to provide
light, air, ingress, or egress for any building or structure. Projecting signs
shall not project any more than sixty (60) inches, but in no case shall such
a sign extend closer than one foot to the vertical plane of the street curb
line. The bottom of a projecting sign shall be at least twelve (12) feet
above the finished grade of the sidewalk.
c- Construction and Maintenance: Signs shall be constructed to be
structurally sound and shall be maintained in good order. Whenever a
sign becomes structurally unsafe or endangers the safety of a building or
premises or the public safety, in the opinion of the Administrative Official,
he shall order that such sign be made safe or removed. Such order shall be
complied with within five (5) days of receipt thereof by the person, firm,
or corporation owning or using the sign or the owner of he building or
premises on which such unsafe sign is affixed or erected.
d- Location of Signs: No sign shall be located in a public right-of-way. No
sign shall be erected closer than fifty (50) feet to an intersection, with the
exception of public safety and directional signs and signs attached to
buildings.
Section 4.907 Business Signs
Business signs may be erected in Business and Industrial zones in accordance with the
following regulations:
a- Central Business Zone: The total area of signs on any one building shall
not exceed one (1) square foot for each lineal foot of principal frontage of
the building or lot, but in no case shall the total area of signs exceed two
hundred (200) square feet.
b- Business Planned Unit Development: The total area of signs on any one
building shall not exceed two (2) square feet for each lineal foot of
principal frontage of the building or lot, but in no case shall the total area
of signs exceed four hundred (400) square feet.
-41-
c- Freestanding Sign: In addition to signs attached to buildings, each
separate commercial or industrial lot may have one freestanding
identification sign. The sign area shall not exceed two hundred (200)
square feet and the height of the sign structure shall not exceed thirty (30)
feet. Businesses or industries having frontage on more than one street
may have an additional freestanding sign for each street frontage.
d- Signs for Nonconforming Businesses: Signs for non-conforming
businesses shall be governed by the sign regulations for the Central
Business Zone.
Section 4.908 Outdoor Advertising Signs
The design and location of outdoor advertising shall conform to all state regulations, and
the following county regulations. Outdoor advertising signs shall be permitted only in
Highway Business, Light, and General Industrial Zones. A zoning certificate shall be
required for all outdoor advertising signs, and shall meet the following design
requirements.
a- The maximum area of any outdoor advertising sign shall be one thousand
and two hundred (1,200) square feet, with a maximum height of twentyfive
(25) feet and a maximum length of sixty (60) feet, inclusive of cutouts
and extensions, but excluding border, trim, decorative bases, and structural
supports. The overall height of an outdoor advertising sign shall not
exceed thirty (30) feet. A sign may contain one or two advertisements per
facing, not to exceed the maximum area. Back-to-back or 1-type signs
will be permitted and shall be treated as one structure with an area of one
thousand and two hundred (1,200) square feet permitted for each facing.
b- An outdoor advertising sign shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from
any street or highway right-of-way line.
c- No two outdoor advertising signs shall be spaced less than three hundred
(300) feet apart on the same side of the highway. No outdoor advertising
sign shall be located closer than two hundred (200) feet to a public park,
school, or other public building; nor be located in any place where, in the
opinion of local officials, the sign would be a menace or hazard to
highway traffic safety.
Section 4.909 Condemnation for Removal of Signs
If any reaches a state of disrepair and is deemed unsightly or unsafe by the
Administrative Official or Building Inspector, and is not properly renovated, it shall be
condemned and an order issued for removal immediately at the expense of the sign or
building owner.
-42-
Section 4.910 Municipal Signs
Any sign which is leased, partially owned and/or owned by any government (Federal,
State, County, City) is exempt from the terms and/or requirements of these regulations,
and shall be exempt from obtaining any review and/or approval of the Bullitt County
Administrative Official and/or Bullitt County Planning Commission and/or Bullitt
County Board of Adjustments.
-43-
ARTICLE 5 ZONE REGULATIONS
Section 5.100 Format of Zone Regulations
Section 5.200 Types of Application Review
Section 5.300 Table of Type of Application Review by Zone
5.301 Natural Resources Uses
5.302 Residential Uses
5.303 Business Uses
5.304 Industrial Uses
5.305 Public and Semi-Public Uses
Section 5.400 All Zones
5.401 Uses Permitted Throughout
5.402 Accessory Use and Buildings
5.403 Uses and Buildings by Temporary Permits
Section 5.500 Rural Zones
5.501 Agricultural Zone, ‘A’
5.502 Conservation Zone, ‘C’
5.503 Stream Valley Reserve Zone, ‘SR’
Section 5.600 Residential Zones
5.601 Residential Zone, ‘R-1’
5.602 Residential Zone, ‘R-2’
5.603 Residential Zone, ‘R-3’
5.604 Residential Zone, ‘R-4’
Section 5.700 Business Zones
5.701 Highway Business, ‘B-1’
5.702 Central Business, ‘B-2’
Section 5.800 Industrial Zones
5.801 Light Industrial, ‘I-L’
5.802 General Industrial, ‘I-G’
Section 5.900 Planned Unit Development, Residential and Highway Business
5.901 Site and Plan Requirements
5.902 Procedure
5.903 Documentation Required for Planned Unit Development Application
5.904 Permitted Uses and Variations
ARTICLE 5 ZONE REGULATIONS
No land shall be used or occupied and no structure shall be designed, erected, altered,
used or occupied except for the primary uses permitted for each of the several
following zones together with lawfully permitted home occupation and temporary
uses as listed below and permitted accessory uses.
Section 5.100 Format of Zone Regulations
In this article, the purpose of each zone is outlined, and the permitted principal uses,
accessory uses, conditional use together with development design standards, i.e.
heights, lot areas, frontage and yards, and maximum lot coverage are stated by zone.
These uses and requirements are subject to the General Regulations in Article IV.
Special provisions, when applicable, are outlined for each zone. Uses allowed in each
zone are listed in Section 5.300, Table of Zone Use Review Requirements.
Section 5.200 Types of Application Review
In the zoning process, each use requires some form of application review. For
purposes of establishing review procedures, uses are divided into the following three
main groups:
a- Permitted Use: A use permitted by right in the zone, subject to the zone
requirements and the General Regulations in Article IV. In the case of an
application for a permitted use, the Administrative Official will check the
application to see that its requirements have been met and, if so, will issue the
necessary permit. The Administrative Official is also empowered to issue
temporary permit not to exceed sixty (60) days for carnivals, fairs, and similar
temporary activities.
b- Site Plan Review Use: A use permitted by right in the zone, subject to the
zone requirements and the General Regulations in Article IV, but requiring
site plan review and approval by the Planning Commission. The Planning
Commission may require changes in the proposed site plan of the
development before directing the Administrative Official to issue a building
permit. Site Plan review procedures and requirements are outlined in Article
VI.
c- Conditional Use: A use permitted in a zone only under certain conditions,
after approval as a conditional use by the Board of Adjustment. All
conditional use applications are referred to the Planning Commission for site
plan review and recommendation before the public hearing by the Board of
Adjustment.
-44-
The Board is also empowered to grant temporary conditional use for certain
uses. General conditions for granting a conditional use are outlined in Article
VI.
Section 5.300 Table of Type of Application Review by Zone
In the following table this key shall apply:
P---Permitted Subject to Development Standards
S---Permitted Subject to Site Plan Review
C---Permitted as a Conditional Use
TC-Permitted as a Temporary Conditional Use
T---Permitted as a Temporary Use
Absence of the above letters for a use in a zone shall be interpreted that such use is
not to be permitted in any way in that zone.
-45-
46
5.301 NATURAL RESOURCES USES A C SR R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 PR B-1 B-2 PB I-L I-G
AGRUCULTURAL AND FORESTRY
Agricultural Uses P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Commercial Greenhouses and Nurseries P P C C C C C C S C S S
Storage and Processing of Agricultural
Products
P P C S S
Vacation Farm P P C C C C C C C C C C C
Forestry P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Sawmill C C C TC TC TC TC TC TC TC TC TC S
MINERAL EXTRACTION
Mineral Extraction C C C C C C C C C C C C S
Mineral Processing and Related Uses C C C C C C C C C C C C S
Mineral Based Manufacturing S
5.302 RESIDENTIAL USES
STANDARD HOUSING
Single Family Dwelling P P C P P P P S
Vacation Dwelling P P C
Single Family Semidetached Dwelling P P S
*Two Family Dwelling P P P P S S S
Multiple-Family Dwelling P P S
Multiple-Family Group Development P P S
Mobile Home P P C P
Mobile Home Park C S
*See Appendices A&B
47
A C SR R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 PR B-1 B-2 PB IL IG
TRANSIENT HOUSING
Agricultural Labor Camp C C P
Boarding House C C C P P
Motel, Hotel, Tourist Camp S C S
Tourist Home C C C P P P
Travel Trailer Park C C C S S
Vacation Lodge or Camp C C C
5.303 BUSINESS USES
RETAIL TRADE
Antique Shop C C C S S S
Apparel Store S S S
Appliance Sales and Service S S S S
Auction House S S S S
Bakery Retail S S S
Boat Sales and Service S S S S
Books and Magazine Store S S S
Camera Shop S S S
Department Store S S S
Discount Store S S S
Drug Store S S S
Dry Goods Store S S S
Farm Equipment Sales S S S S
Feed and Grain Sales C C S S S S
Florist S S S
Food and Drink Sales Store S S S
Ice, Coal, Wood Sales S S S S
Furniture Sales and Repair S S S S
48
A C SR R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 PR B-1 B-2 PB I IL IG
Garden Center C C C S S S
Gift Shop S S S
Hardware Store S S S
Hobby Shop S S S
Household Furnishings S S S
Jewelry Store S S S
Mobile Home Sales S S
Music and Record Store S S S
Newsstand S S S
Office Equipment S S S
Paint Store S S S
Pawn Shop S S S
Radio and TV Sales S S S
Shoe Store S S S
Specialty Shop S S S
Souvenir Shop S S S
Sporting Goods Store S S S
Stone Monument Sales S S S S
Tobacco Store S S S
Toy Store S S S
Variety Store S S S
Watch Sales and Repair S S S
Wayside Stand, Temporary P P P TC TC TC TC TC S TC S TC TC
BUSINESS AND PERSONAL SERVICES
Bank S S S
Barber and Beauty Shop S S S
Carpentry, Electrical, Plumbing, Sheet Metal
Printing, Upholstery and Similar Services
S S S S
Commercial or Business School S S S
49
Dance or Music Studio S S S
A C SR R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 PR B-1 B-2 PB IL IG
Dry Cleaning, Retail S S S
Food Locker S S S S
Film Processing S S S S
Fortune Teller S S S
Funeral Home C C C C C S S S
Health Club S S S
Home Occupation P P P P P P P S
Laundry, Retail S S S
Laundromat S S S
Medical Clinic S S S
Office, Business S S S
Office, Professional S S S
Photography Studio C C C C C C C C S S S
Private Club, Commercial S S S
Restaurant S S S
Shoe and Luggage Repair S S S
Tailor, Dressmaker S S S
Tavern S S S
Bakery, Non-retail C C C S S S
Blacksmith Shop C C C S S C
Bottling Plant S S
Building Materials Storage Yard
Excluding Asphalt or Concrete Mixing
Including Asphalt or Concrete Mixing
S S
S
Bulk Materials Storage C C C S S
Carpet or Rug Cleaning S S
Catering Service S S S S
Contractors Storage Yard C C C S
Contractors Temporary Buildings TC TC TC TC TC TC TC TC TC TC TC TC TC
Fuel Oil Storage Yard S S
50
Laboratory, Medical or Dental S S S S S
A C SR R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 PR B-1 B-2 PB IL IG
Laboratory, Research, Experimental,
or Testing
C S S S S S
Laundry and Dry Cleaning, non –retail S S
Machinery Storage Yard C S S
Motor Rail Freight Terminal C S S
Stone Monuments Processing S S
Warehouse, Completely Enclosed C S S
Warehouse with Open Storage S S
Welding Shop C S S
Wholesale, Enclosed Building S S S
Wholesale, with Open Storage S S
AUTOMOTIVE AND RELATED
SERVICES
Accessory Sales, No Installation S S S
Accessory Sales, Installation C C C
Driving School S S S
Laundry (Carwash) C C C
Parking Garage or Lot C C C C C S S S S S
Rental S S S
Repairs (Body Shop) C C S
Sales S S S S
Service Station S S S
Showroom, no repairs S S S
Storage S C S S S
Truck Service Center S S S
ANIMAL SALES AND SERVICE
51
Animal Hospital C C C
A C SR R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 PR B-1 B-2 PB IL IG
Animal Ranch C C C
Kennel C C C C C C C
Pet Store C C C
Riding Stable, Commercial C C C C
Veterinarian C C C C C C C C
COMMERCIAL AMUSEMENTS
Amusement Park C C C C C
Billiard Parlor S S S
Bowling Alley S S S
Carnival, Circus TC TC TC TC TC TC TC TC TC TC TC TC TC
Children’s Amusement Center C C C
Commercial Recreation Area C C C S S S
Commercial Sports Stadium or Area C C C C
Dance Hall C C C S S S
Go Kart Race Track C C C C
Golf, Driving Range TC TC TC TC TC TC TC TC
Golf, Miniature C C C
Marina C C C
Race Track C C
Skating Rink S S S
Swimming Pool, Commercial C C C C C C
Theater, Drive-In C C C S
Theater, Indoor S S S
Theater, Summer or Tent C C C C C C
5.304 INDUSTRIAL USES
Light Industrial Use C S S
52
General Industrial Use C S
A C SR R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 PR B-1 B-2 PB IL I IG
River –oriented Industrial Use C
Salvage Yard C S
5.305 PUBLIC AND SEMIPUBLIC USES
Open Space Use
Airport or Heliport C C C
Cemetery C C C C C C C C
Country Club C C C C C C C C
Fairgrounds C C
Game Refuge P P P P P P P P
Golf Course C C C C C C C C
Park or Recreation Area S S S S S S S S S S S
Shooting Range C C C TC TC
Swimming Pool Community C C C C C C C C
Vacation Camps C C C
Public and Institutional Uses
Arena, Stadium C C C C C C C C C
Church S S C S S S S S S S S
Cultural Facility S S C S S S S S S S S
Fire and Police Stations S S C S S S S S S S S
Medical Care Institution
Hospital C C C C C C C C S C C
Nursing Home C C C C C C C C C C C
Sanitarium C C C C C C C C C C C
Private Club, Social C C C C C C C C C C C
Public Buildings S S C S S S S S S S S
53
A C SR R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 PR B-1 B-2 PB IL IG
Schools
College or University C C C C C C C C C C C
Elementary or High School S S S S S S S S S S S
Nursery School C C C C C C C C C C C
Private School C C C C C C C C C C C
Tent or Temporary Meeting TC TC TC TC TC TC TC TC TC TC TC TC TC
Public Utility Uses
Dump C C S S
Public Utility Use and Structures C C C C C C C C C C C S S
In the above table an attempt has been made to list the uses, individually or
collectively, that are likely to occur in Bullitt County; however, inevitably there will
always exist a chance that other uses may be applied for. In such case, the
Administrative Official shall decide the zone in which the use is permitted, and the
type of development review required.
Section 5.400 All Zones
The following applies to all zones:
Section 5.401 Uses Permitted Throughout
Public Park, playground, and other open public recreation areas not requiring any
permanent construction are permitted by right in all zones.
Section 5.402 Accessory Use and Buildings
Accessory uses and buildings are permitted in all zones, provided they comply with
all provisions contained herein. In Residential Zones, accessory building or use may
be located to within five (5) feet of the rear and side property line. In all other zones,
accessory buildings must comply with all land requirements established for the
principal permitted uses.
Section 5.403 Uses and Buildings by Temporary Permits
a- Temporary permits not to exceed six months, renewable for additional
periods of six (6) months for a total maximum of eighteen months (18)
months may be issued by the Administrative Official for site construction
needs, including non-commercial concrete-batching plant, and temporary
office and yard facilities for construction management purposes.
b- Non-renewable temporary permits not to exceed sixty (60) days may be
issued by the Administrative Official for carnivals, circuses, tent revival
meetings, and similar special event activities. Before issuing a temporary
permit, the Administrative Official shall determine that the site is adequate for
the proposed activity, and that the proposed use, including related traffic and
parking will not be detrimental to the surrounding area. Temporary dinners,
sales and similar activities by school, church, or civic groups shall not require
a permit.
c- Temporary conditional use permit may be authorized by the Board of
Adjustment for temporary wayside stands intended for the sale of farm
products grown or produced on the premises being permitted by right in rural
zones.
-54-
In all other zones, the Board of Adjustment may permit similar stands as
temporary conditional uses, for a period not to exceed six (6) months. The
wayside stand and display of all goods shall be located at least twenty-five
(25) feet form the edge of roadway pavement.
Section 5.500 Rural Zones
Three types of zones are included under this rural grouping: Agricultural, symbolized
by ‘A’, which covers prime areas for agricultural activities; Conservation, symbolized
by ‘C’, comprising woodland and land of topographic characteristics less favorable
for agricultural purposes, and possible potential for wildlife reserve; and Stream
Valley Reserve, symbolized by ‘SR’, being rivers and streams and their adjacent
areas, considered potential recreational resources for the count residents and
outsiders, and desirable to preserve in their natural river landscape condition. The
common theme in those zones is preservation of especially valuable assets to Bullitt
County against the anticipated urban and suburban types of development which are
occurring in the county.
Section 5.501 Agricultural Zone ‘A’
a- Principal permitted uses and structures are basically agricultural activities
including agricultural crop, dairying, and the raising of farm animals and
feeding, and nurseries together with their pertaining structures.
b- Accessory uses and structures permitted are:
1. Single-family dwelling occupied by the owner or operator of the farm and
such additional single-family dwellings as are necessary for occupancy by
the tenant farmers, provided that there shall be at least two (2) acres for
every dwelling unit.
2. One (1) mobile home is permitted on each farm for the use of the owner
or his tenant, and one (1) additional mobile home is permitted on each farm
for the use of each member of the owner’s immediate family, provided that
there shall be at least five (5) acres for every mobile home, and provided
that each shall conform to the section pertaining to mobile homes in these
regulations.
2 (a) Mobile home permits being granted under the above section shall be
subject to a 300 foot setback line from the following major roadways:
Kentucky Highway 44 and Kentucky Highway 61. Access from such
mobile homes unto the main road shall be through the access for the main
farm only onto the public right-of-ways.
-55-
3. Sale on the premises, and the pertaining needed structures for the sale of
agricultural products produced on the premises.
*c- To fulfill the purpose of the establishment of this zone, no division of land
into less than ten (10) acres for use as residential or uses other than listed in
Section 5.300 shall be permitted in an Agricultural Zone. A dwelling
constructed as an accessory use on a farm tract which is later subdivided must
meet the area requirements of the zone. Subdivision of land into lots of less
than ten (10) acres is permitted for non-residential uses permitted in the “A”
zone.
d- The only yard restriction in this zone is a minimum setback required for
any building of forty (40) feet from the right-of –way line.
e- No height restrictions are imposed on any structures of the principal and
accessory use categories.
f- Land which is used solely for agricultural farming, dairying, stock raising or
similar purposes shall have no regulations imposed as to building permits,
certificates of zoning compliance, height, yard, locations of court
requirements for agricultural buildings, except that:
1. A setback line of forty (40) feet or greater shall be required of all
buildings for the protection of existing and proposed streets and highways.
2. All buildings or structures in a designated floodway or floodway plain
which tend to increase flood height or obstruct the flow of flood waters
shall be regulated by the Planning Commission, and therefore require the
site plan review and approval of the Bullitt County Planning Commission.
Section 5.502 Conservation Zone ‘C’
*a- Principal permitted uses and structures include, in addition to those
agricultural activities regulated in ‘A’ zone, forestry, single-family, homes,
vacation-oriented services, vacation bungalows, and cabins. To fulfill the
purpose of the establishment of this zone, the division of property into less
than three (3) acres shall not be permitted.
b- Accessory uses and structures permitted include group eating facilities for
group lodging camps, and travel trailer parks, sale and roadside stands for the
sale of agricultural products grown on the premises, picnicking and rest
facilities.
*See Appendices A & B
-56-
c- Single-family homes on one (1) acre minimum. A single mobile home on a
three (3) acre lot minimum. Group lodging, camps, and travel trailer parks for
a temporary stay not exceeding three (3) months, are also permitted provided
they are located on a single tract of not less than ten (10) acres, and resulting
in an overall net density not exceeding five (5) units per acre.
d- Same setback and yard requirements regulating ‘A’ zone shall apply.
e- No building or structure shall exceed two and one-half (2 ½) stories or
thirty five (35) feet in height.
f- Special development standards: no roofed building or buildings shall cover,
individually or collectively, more than twenty (20) percent of lot area.
Vacation dwellings, used only on a seasonal basis may be exempted from the
requirements of direct access to a public road; however, the Planning
Commission shall require appropriate design features for vacation home
subdivisions as these may become permanent dwellings.
Section 5.503 Stream Valley Reserve Zone ‘SR’
a- Principal permitted uses are similar to those regulated in the ‘A’ zone, and
public and private open space recreation areas which are being defined to
include only recreation land retained primarily in the natural state and used
only as picnic areas, trails, and similar uses which do not change the natural
landscape pattern. Construction of recreation buildings or other related
intensive development (swimming pools, parking lots, and paved game areas)
which materially changes the natural landscape shall require a conditional use
permit. This shall include vacation lodges and camps and their accessories,
research laboratories and non-polluting water oriented industries.
b- Accessory uses and structures are the same as those regulated by a ‘C’
zone.
c- To fulfill the purposes of establishing this zone, in any and all cases where
construction of buildings is involved a minimum area of ten (10 acres shall be
required, except for industrial use, in which case a minimum of thirty (30)
acres shall be required. In any and all cases development shall not be allowed
where natural features, such as floodway plains or steep slopes, make such
development unsafe or undesirable. As a general policy, in sections of the
zone where level land borders a river or stream, permanent development shall
not be permitted closer than one hundred and fifty (150) feet to the normal
high water line, except for such facilities which must be located at the waters
edge, as docks or fishing jetties.
-57-
d- Same setback and yard requirements as regulated in ‘A’ zone shall apply.
e- Same height requirements regulating a ‘C’ zone shall apply.
f- Special development standards: same lot coverage restrictions. Vacation
home subdivision regulating a ‘C’ zone shall apply.
Section 5.600 Residential Zones
Four types of zones are included under this grouping, ‘R-1’, ‘R-2.’, ‘R-3’, and ‘R-4’.
Intensity of land utilization for residential purposes is permitted to intensify
progressively from the first zone to the last.
Section 5.601 Residential Zone ‘R-1’
a- Principal permitted uses are:
1. Single-family dwellings
2. Two-family dwellings
b- Accessory uses and structures permitted are:
1. Garage, or other buildings not used as a dwelling, and which is not for
rent by any outside non-bona fide resident of the dwelling unit.
2. Private swimming pools and other private recreational facilities.
3. Home occupation as defined in section 2.200.
c- The following area requirements shall apply:
1. Every single-family dwelling shall be located on a single lot of not less
than fourteen thousand (14,000) square feet in area. The minimum lot
width at the building line shall not be less than one hundred (100) feet.
2. Two-family dwellings or duplexes shall require a minimum lot size of
not less that seventeen thousand five hundred (17,500) square feet with a
minimum lot width measured at the building line of not less than one
hundred twenty-five (125) feet.
-58-
d- The following setback and yard requirements shall apply:
1. Front Yards: The minimum front yard setback line shall be fifty (50)
feet from the right-of-way line.
2. Side yards: There shall be a minimum side yard on each side of any
principal structure of fifteen (15) feet as measured from the property line
to the nearest such building. Accessory building or use may be located to
within five (5) feet of the side and rear property lines.
3. Rear Yards: There shall be a minimum rear yard building line of not
less than twenty-five (25) feet as measured from the rear property line to
the nearest building or structure.
4. Corner Lot Yards: The minimum side yard line on any street not
having lots fronting upon it shall be fifteen (15) feet from the right-of –
way line. Where the street on the side of a corner lot has lots fronting
upon it within the same block and on the same side of the street, the side
yard on the corner lot shall be equal to the front yard requirements for lots
fronting on the street.
5. Yards for Public and Semi-Public Buildings: all public and semipublic
buildings, including accessory buildings, shall have the same front
yard required for all other buildings in the same zone. There shall be a
minimum side yard and rear yard for such buildings of fifty (50) feet from
any lot line.
e- No building or structure shall exceed two and one-half (2 ½) stories or
thirty five (35) feet in height.
Section 5.602 Residential Zone, ‘R-2’
a- Principal permitted uses include, in addition to those regulated in R-1 zone,
tourist homes.
b- Accessory uses and buildings permitted are:
1. The same as regulated in R-1 zone.
2. Renting or sleeping rooms, three (3) being the maximum number of
people to be sheltered in such a building.
-59-
c- The following areas and lot width requirements shall apply:
1. Every single-family dwelling shall be located on a single lot of not less
than nine thousand (9,000) square feet. The minimum required lot
width at the building line for single-family dwellings shall be seventyfive
(75) feet.
2. Two-family dwellings or duplexes shall be located on a single lot of
not less than eleven thousand (11,000) square feet. The minimum
required lot width at the building set back line for two-family dwellings
shall be one hundred (100) feet.
d- The following setback and yard requirements shall be observed:
1. Front Yards: forty (40) feet setback shall be required from rightof-
way line.
2. Side Yards: there shall be a minimum side yard on each side of any
building or structure of fifteen (15) feet measured from the side lot line to
the nearest building or structure, except that garages and accessory
buildings may extend an additional ten (10) feet into one side yard. (Note:
see page 116 for the latest text amendment of this section)
3. Rear Yards: there shall be a minimum rear yard building of not less
than twenty-five (25) feet, except that garages and other accessory
buildings and uses may extend up to within five (5) feet from rear property
line.
4. Corner Lot Yards: the minimum side yard line on any street not having
lots fronting upon it shall be fifteen (15) feet from the right-of-way line
except that a garage or carport may extend an additional five (5) feet into
the side yard adjacent to the street. Where the street on the side of a
corner lot has lots fronting upon it within the same block and on the same
side of the street the building setback on the side of the corner lot shall be
equal to the front yard setback requirements of such street.
5. Yards for Public and Semi-Public Buildings: all public and semipublic
buildings, including accessory buildings, shall provide the same
front yard setback as required for all other buildings in this zone. There
shall be a minimum side yard and rear yard for such buildings of fifty (50)
feet wide from any lot line.
e- No building shall exceed three (3) stories or forty-five (45) feet in height.
-60-
Section 5.603 Residential Zone ‘R-3’
a- Principal uses permitted include, in addition to those regulated in ‘R-1’ and
‘R-2’ Zones, multi-family dwellings.
b- Accessory uses and buildings permitted are the same as those regulated in
‘R-2’ Zone.
c- The following minimum lot area required shall be provided:
1. Every single-family dwelling shall be located on a single lot of not less
than seven thousand two hundred (7,200) square feet for the first dwelling
unit. The minimum required lot width at the building line shall be sixty
(60) feet.
2. Every two-family and multi-family dwelling shall be located on a
single lot of not less that six thousand (6,000) square feet for the first
dwelling unit plus one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet for each
additional unit up to four (4). Each unit beyond four (4) in a multi-family
dwelling shall be located on a two thousand five hundred (2,500) square
foot lot. The minimum required lot width at the building line for twofamily
and multi-family dwellings shall be eighty (85) feet.
d- The following setback and yard requirements shall be provided:
1. Front Yards: thirty (30) feet required from right-of–way line.
*2. Side Yards: there shall be a minimum combined side yards lot line
equal to eighteen (18) feet. With one (1) side yard line being a minimum
of ten percent (10%) of the overall lot width and the remaining side yard
line being the difference between the opposite yard line but with both side
yard lines adding up to a combined eighteen (18) feet.
3. Rear Yards: there shall be a minimum rear yard building setback of not
less than twenty-five (25) feet; except that accessory buildings and uses
may extend up to five (5) feet from rear lot lines.
4. Corner Lot Yards: the minimum side yard on any street not having lots
fronting upon it shall be fifteen (15) feet from the right-of-way line except
that a garage or carport may extend an additional five (5) feet into the side
yard adjacent to the street. Where the street on the side of a corner lot has
lots fronting upon it within the same block and on the same side of the
street, the building line on the side of the corner lot shall be equal to the
front yard line requirements of such street.
*See Appendices A & B -61-
5. Yards for Public and Semi-Public Buildings: all public and semi-public
buildings, including accessory buildings shall provide the same front yard
setback as required for all other buildings in this zone.
There shall be a minimum side yard line and rear yard line for such buildings
of fifty (50) feet from any lot line.
e. No building shall exceed three (3) stories or forty five (45) feet in height.
*f. The following special development standards shall apply to Row House
Developments:
1. Subdivision requirements: A Row House Development shall be
submitted as a subdivision plat and if it is recorded in sections, each section
shall meet all requirements of this regulation. Each dwelling unit shall be
located on a separate lot of record fronting on a dedicated street.
2. Yard Requirements:
a. Front Yard: 30 feet from right-of-way line
b. Side Yard: For end developments a minimum of 9 feet
c. Street Side Yard: a minimum of 15 feet
d. Rear Yard: A minimum of 25 feet
3. Maximum building height: no building shall exceed three (3) stories or 45
feet in height.
4. Maximum area requirements:
a. No recorded lot in a Row House Development shall contain less than
1800 square feet.
b. Land area requirements:
2 units – 7500 square feet
3 units – 9000 square feet
4 units – 10,500 square feet
Each additional unit - add an additional 2500 square feet.
c. The difference between the total land area required for the entire Row
House Development and the total land area of the development’s
recorded lots for residential purposes shall be provided as an open lot
to be used for parking, recreational or scenic purposes. Any such open
space lot shall be owned in common and maintained by the owners of lots
in the Row House Development.
*See appendices A & B -62-
5. Lot size: The minimum width of interior lots shall be 18 feet and the
minimum width of end lots shall be 27 feet. The minimum depth of any lot
shall be 80 feet.
6. Other requirements:
a. No group of attached dwelling units in a Row House Development
shall be longer than 200 feet.
b. Maximum lot coverage shall be 60 percent.
c. A statement shall be included on the plat of the subdivision and in all
deeds of transfer of property of any land located therein, which will
prevent the subdivision and resubdivision of land into a greater number
of lots than originally approved.
d. a minimum of two parking spaces per dwelling unit shall be provided.
Section 5.604 Residential Zone, ‘R-4’
a- Principal permitted uses and buildings include:
1. Any Principal uses and buildings permitted in ‘R-3’.
2. Mobile homes on subdivisions for individual lot ownership, and
mobile home parks providing rental space. Mobile homes for
individual ownership shall comply with ‘R-3’ zone requirements and
any subdivision regulations as they may be adopted. No mobile home
development on a subdivision for ownership, or on lots made available as
rental space comprising less than five (5) mobile home units, shall be
permitted. Rental space for mobile home temporary parking for less
than six (6) months shall be prohibited. Mobile home parks with lots
available for rental shall comply with the requirements specified herein.
b. Accessory uses and buildings permitted are those customarily incidental and
subordinate to the principal uses permitted above and complying with the
requirements specified herein. For mobile home parks, paragraph ‘f4’ shall be
observed.
c. Lot area requirements are as follows:
1. For those uses and buildings permitted in ‘R-3’ and individual mobile
homes, and other than mobile home parks for rental purposes, the same
requirements set for that zone shall apply.
-63-
2. No mobile home park shall be permitted on an area of less than three (3)
acres in size, although the developer shall be permitted to develop the
park in stages as long as he complies with an overall plan approved by
the Planning Commission for the entire tract. The number of mobile
homes permitted in the mobile home park shall not exceed a density of seven
(7) mobile homes per gross acre. Individual lots within a mobile home park
shall not be less than thirty-six hundred (3,600) square feet in area, and in no
instance shall more than one (1) mobile home be permitted on a
single lot. The minimum lot width shall be forty (40) feet.
d. Setback, yard and space requirements are as follows:
1. For those uses and buildings permitted in ‘R-3’, including individual
mobile homes, and other than mobile home parks, the same
requirements set for that zone shall apply.
2. No mobile home or accessory building or structure shall be located
closer to any street than the minimum front yard setback for
permanent residential structures along said street. Where the mobile
home park is not bounded by a dedicated street the minimum setback
shall be thirty (30) feet. No mobile home shall be located closer than
fifteen (15) feet to any building or street within the park or to any
property line of the park. All mobile home parks shall front on a
public street or road for at least one hundred (100) feet. In cases where
the mobile home park is removed from the public highway, an access
road with a minimum right-of-way of fifty (50) feet shall be provided.
No mobile home shall be located within thirty (30) feet from another
mobile home, except that a minimum end-to-end clearance of not less
than ten (10) feet shall be permitted, and in instances where the sides
opposite the entrance of two (2) mobile homes face each other, the
amount of space between the two mobile homes may be reduced to
not less than twenty (20) feet.
e. No building shall exceed three (3) stories or forty five (45) feet in height.
f. The following special development standards shall apply to mobile home park
development.
1. Street: All mobile home spaces shall abut upon a street, within the
mobile home park. All streets within the mobile home park shall have
a right-of-way of not less than twenty-five (25) feet and a pavement of
not less than twenty (20) feet. Each park shall have at least one street
which gives access to a public street. Such access streets in either a
single mobile park or adjoining parks, shall not be less than one
hundred (100) feet apart nor be less than one hundred twenty-five (125)
-64-
feet from an intersection of two or more public streets. All streets
within the park shall be hard-surfaced and well-lighted. No street rightof-
way within the mobile home park shall be within three (3) feet of
the property line. The owner of the mobile park shall maintain the
streets within the mobile home park.
2. Parking: One paved automobile parking area shall be provided on every
mobile home lot, plus one (1) parking space for each family’s mobile
home lot. This additional parking may be in a central location.
3. Utilities: All lots within the mobile home park shall be provided with
sewer, water, and electrical facilities meeting the standards specified by
local building regulations, and each mobile home shall be properly
connected with said utilities.
4. Accessory Uses and Buildings: Convenience commercial
establishments, including convenience food stores, laundry and
dry cleaning establishments, beauty and barber shops, and similar trades
and services shall be permitted as accessory uses and buildings. These
establishments and their related parking spaces shall not occupy more
than ten (10) percent of the mobile home park area and this area shall not be
included in calculations of the park density. They shall be subordinate to the
residential use and character of the park, shall be designed to serve only
the residents of the mobile home park, and shall present no visible
evidence of their commercial character from any area outside of the
park. No accessory structure including patios and pads shall be located within
five (5) feet from any mobile home lot line. The maximum floor area
shall be one hundred (100) square feet and the maximum height shall be
no greater that ten (10) feet. It shall be built in compliance with the
local building regulations.
5. Foundation: All mobile homes must have their wheels removed and placed on
concrete blocks. The bottom of the mobile home must not be more than four (4)
feet above the ground at any point. A solid form of a permanent material must be
built between the ground and the bottom outside edge of the mobile home.
6. Connecting Structures: Only porches, stairs, and other open structures
may be attached to a mobile home. This must be built in compliance with
the local building requirements and must be easily removed. No structure
for human occupancy or for storage shall be built to the mobile home.
g- The steps listed hereunder shall be followed:
1. Procedures: In applying for a building permit for a mobile home park,
the applicant shall submit his plan to the Planning Commission for its
-65-
approval of any adopted Subdivision Layout approval of any adopted
Subdivision regulations. The plan shall show the following information:
- Name and address of applicant
- Name and location of mobile home park
- Dimensions and locations of all lot lines, roads, and easements;
each mobile home lot shall be numbered
- Contour lines to indicate slope and drainage
- Location of all utilities, public and private water, sewerage, drainage, and
electrical facilities and easements.
- Public areas such as visitor’s parking, recreational areas, etc.
- Large-scale plan of one typical mobile home lot showing mobile home
locations, automobile parking space, etc.
- Location of planting for landscaping purposes or as required for protective
buffer purposes as a special condition
2. Issuance of Building Permit: The Planning Commission may require
reasonable modifications prior to its approval of a mobile home park and
may direct the Administrative Official to issue a building permit from the
State Department of Health, Division of Environmental Health, Sanitation
Program, Frankfort, Kentucky, as required by Kentucky Revised Statutes
219.150. The Administrative Official shall not issue the building permit
until he has received written authorization from the Planning Commission,
and until the valid construction permit is presented.
3. Issuance of Certificate of Zoning Compliance: The Administrative
Official shall issue a certificate of zoning compliance only after he has
determined that the mobile home park has been prepared according to all
applicable regulations and special conditions and only after the applicant
presents a valid permit to operate from the State Department of Health as
required by Kentucky Revised Statutes 219.130.
4. Enforcement: The Administrative Official shall insure that all mobile
home parks maintain valid permits to operate and maintain conformance
with all applicable regulations of these zoning regulations and all special
conditions.
-66-
h- All existing mobile homes within Bullitt County which complied with all existing
regulations at the time of passage of these regulations shall be allowed to remain in
their present location as long as the mobile home is occupied by the present residents.
Should a present mobile home resident renter decide to move elsewhere or to replace
his present mobile home, the right to maintain a mobile home outside a mobile home
park shall terminate and the owner shall be required to move the mobile home into a
mobile home park before the mobile home can be re-occupied. No mobile home shall
be permanently re-located on another lot. It is further provided that the existing
mobile home parks legally operating at the time shall be required to maintain a lot
size of three thousand and six hundred (3,600) square feet per mobile home and
comply with other provisions of this regulation or be regarded and certified as a
nonconforming use. No future mobile homes shall be permanently located unless
complying with the provisions as prescribed in Sub-section 5.604, paragraph ‘a2’.
i – Exception: The Planning Commission may reject any proposed mobile home park
even though it meets all the above requirements if the Planning Commission
determines that existing mobile home parks are not fully occupied and /or utilized and
the development of more land to this use is not the public welfare of the community.
j – The regulations shall not be constructed so as to prohibit the location or storage of
a single mobile home on a lot in addition to a principal building, provided the mobile
home is owned by or has permission from the occupant of the principal building or
dwelling unit on the lot and provided the mobile home is parked on the rear of the lot
and the setback and yard requirements for an accessory building in the zone are
observed, and provided that the mobile home is not connected to any service utility
nor used for sleeping purposes for more that two (2) weeks, per year.
Section 5.700 Business Zones
Two types of zones are included under this grouping: Highway Business, symbolized
by ‘B-1’, is a zone established to provide locations for businesses oriented primarily
towards serving the motoring public and for those businesses which due to their
nature are best suited to locations along major streets or highways; and Central
Business, symbolized by ‘B-2’, is a zone established to provide for the development
of commercial and related activities serving an urban center and its neighborhoods
and the adjoining parts of Bullitt County. Uses permitted in this zone will serve
daily shopping needs of adjacent neighborhoods and their outlaying areas.
Section 5.701 Highway Business, ‘B-1’
a- Principal permitted uses and structures pertaining, as examples but not limited to
the following activities:
1. Agricultural implement sales and service.
-67-
2. Animal hospitals, kennels or pounds, provided the kennel structure and
runs are fifty (50) feet from any ‘B’ district.
3. Antiques.
4. Appliance sales and service.
5. Art and school supplies.
6. Auction house.
7. Automobile accessories.
8. Automobile and truck sales, new and used.
9. Automobile rental and lease.
10. Automobile repair garages.
11. Automobile service stations and laundries.
12. Bakeries, retail.
13. Banks and financial institutions.
14. Barber and beauty schools.
15. Barber and beauty shops.
16. Bicycle sales, rental, repair.
17. Billiard rooms.
18. Blue printing, photo copying and photo finishing service.
19. Boat and marine equipment sales, rental, and service.
20. Book stores and card shops.
21. Bowling alleys.
22. Bridal consultants.
23. Business machines, sales and service.
-68-
24. Cameras – photo supplies.
25. Carpet and floor covering.
26. Catering services.
27. China, glassware.
28. Clothing stores and shoes.
29. Community centers.
30. Dancing studios.
31. Delicatessen.
32. Department stores.
33. Dressmaking, seamstress.
34. Driver training schools.
35. Drug stores.
36. Dry Cleaning and Laundromats (self service).
37. Dry Goods.
38. Data processing centers.
39. Eating places.
40. Eating places (carry out).
41. Eating places (drive-in).
42. Equipment rental services (but not including automobiles, trucks and
Trailers.
43. Exterminating services.
44. Florists.
45. Food stores.
-69-
46. Frozen food lockers.
47. Furniture and home furnishings.
48. Furniture and upholstery repair.
49. Garden stores, garden centers, greenhouses and nurseries.
50. Gifts and novelties.
51. Hardware.
52. Hay, grain and feed stores.
53. Health studios.
54. Heating, air conditioning, electrical and plumbing sales.
55. Heating, air conditioning, electrical and plumbing service and repair.
56. Hobby shops.
57. Hospitals.
58. Hotels and motels.
59. Indoor recreation (wholly enclosed places of recreation or amusement
not heretofore appearing as a permitted use).
60. Lawn mower sales.
61. Magazine distribution agency.
62. Mail order catalogue store.
63. Mobile Home sales, rental and service.
64. Motorcycle sales and service.
65. Music, musical instruments.
66. News-stand.
67. Office furniture and supplies.
-70-
68. Outdoor recreation (nonenclosed places of recreation or amusement not
heretofore appearing as a permitted use).
69. Paint, glass and wallpaper.
70. Party supply.
71. Pet sales and supplier.
72. Photo studios.
73. Radio and television sales and services.
74. Research and development laboratories.
75. Schools and educational services.
76. Sporting goods.
77. Taxidermists.
78. Theaters, including drive-in theaters.
79. Trading stamp redemption stores.
80. Utility trailer sales and rentals.
81. Veterinarians offices provided that offices shall be housed in a
completely enclosed and soundproof building.
*82. Single family dwellings and multiple family dwelling if combined with a
B-1 Commercial use.
*See Appendices A & B
b- Accessory uses and buildings permitted shall include those customarily incidental
to the above permitted uses.
c- 1. Where not serviced by sanitary sewers a minimum of one (1) acre for each lot
and no lot shall be developed for highway business use which is less than one
hundred and fifty (150) feet wide at the building line.
2. Where serviced by sanitary sewers, a minimum of 6,000 square feet for each lot
and no lot shall be developed for highway business use which is less than one
hundred and fifty (150) feet wide at the building line.
-71-
d- The following setback and yard requirements shall be provided:
1. Front Yards: the front yard building line for all building and accessory
buildings shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any existing or proposed
right-of-way line of any street or road. In case of service stations, all gas pumps,
gas pump islands, grease pits or racks and other similar facilities shall be located
no closer than twenty-five (25) feet from a street of highway right-of-way line.
2. Side Yards: a minimum side yard of twenty-five (25) feet shall be required for
all structures in the B-1 Highway Commercial Zone as measured from the side
property line to the nearest building or structure.
3 Rear Yards: a minimum rear yard of thirty (30) feet shall be required for all
structures in the B-1 Highway Commercial Zone as measured from the rear
property line to the nearest building or structure.
e- No building shall exceed two and one half (2 ½) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in
height.
f- Special development standards: where the property lines separate a Business Zone
from a Residential one, a visual and mechanical barrier a minimum of six (6) feet in
height shall be provided along the common lines, which may consist of any of the
following:
1. An evergreen hedge with a chain link fence not less than three (3) feet in
height.
2. A fence of non-deteriorating material
3. A masonry wall
*g- When residential uses are mixed with other uses on the same lot in business
zones, the density requirements of the R-3 zone as stated in Section 5.603 (c) (2) shall
be used to determine the number of allowable units on each lot.
*See Appendices A & B
Section 5.702 Central Business, “B-2”
a- All types of retail sales and services excluding automobile repair garages, service
stations, drive-in theaters, drive-in restaurants, and bait shops, but including and not
necessarily limited to the following:
1. All types of financial institutions.
2. All types of offices and office buildings.
-72-
3. Department stores, variety stores, clothing stores, and other similar stores and
shops.
4. Recreation and entertainment facilities, except drive-in theaters.
5. Theaters except as otherwise specified.
6. Restaurants and other food establishments except drive-in eating places.
7. Souvenir shops, gift shops.
8. Commercial parking lots.
*9. Single family dwelling and multiple family dwelling if combined with B-2
Commercial use.
b- Accessory uses and buildings permitted shall include those customarily incidental
to the above permitted uses.
c- There shall be no minimum area or lot width requirements within the “B-2” zone.
d- There shall be no minimum front, side or rear yard requirements in this zone
e- There shall be no height limitations in this zone.
f- Special development standards: where the property lines separate a Business Zone
from a Residential one, the same requirements for a visual and barrier separation shall
be required as regulated under the sub-section 5.701, paragraph “f”.
g- No off-street parking facilities are required only for retail sales and retail service
establishments of less than five hundred (500) square feet of floor area within this ‘B-
2’ zone. All similar uses of larger floor area and other structures including public and
semi-public uses and structures shall comply with the parking requirements
established in Section 4.800.
*h- When residential uses are mixed with other uses on the same lot business zones,
the density requirements of the R-3 zone as stated in Section 5.603 (c) (2) shall be
used to determine the number of allowable units on each lot.
-73-
Section 5.800 Industrial Zones
Two types of zones are included under this industrial grouping; Light Industrial,
symbolized by ‘IL’, the purpose of which is to provide for industrial uses with limited
objectionable external effects in areas that are suitable for industrial development by
reason of location, topography, soil conditions and the availability of adequate
utilities and transportation systems. The intent is to permit most manufacturing,
wholesaling and warehousing activities that can be operated in a clean and quiet
manner, subject only to those regulations necessary to prohibit congestion and for the
protection of adjacent residential and business activities. The second industrial zone
is the General and Extractive Industrial, Symbolized by ‘IG’, the purpose of which is
to provide for industrial and other uses that by virtue of their external effects, noise,
glare, fumes, smoke, dust, odors, truck and/or rail traffic should be isolated from
residential uses. These perform essential functions for the community, are best suited
for industrial development by reason of location topography, soil considerations and
the availability of adequate utilities and transportation systems.
Section 5.801 Light Industrial, ‘IL’
a- The following are examples of principal permitted uses in this ‘IL’ Zone:
1. Assembly plants except automobile assembly plants or plants of a similar
nature.
2. Automobile repair, but no commercial wrecking, dismantling or salvage yard.
3. Auto service station.
4. Automobile, truck, boat sales.
5. Bottling works.
6. Builders’ supply store.
7. Building and trades, including contractor’s yard and utilities storage yard.
8. Carpet Cleaning, dry cleaning and dyeing, laundry.
9. Cold storage plant.
10. Commercial greenhouses.
11. Dairy products manufacture.
-74-
12. Fabrication, processing, packaging and/or manufacture of food
products and condiments excluding fish products, slaughterhouses and
rendering and refining or fats, oils, fish, vinegar, yeast and sauerkraut.
13. Fabrication, processing, packaging and/or manufacture of cosmetics, drugs,
perfumes, pharmaceuticals and toiletries.
14. Fabrication, processing, packaging and/or manufacture of articles or
merchandise from the following previously prepared materials: bone, canvas,
cellophane, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber, horn, leather, paint, paper,
plastics, precious or semi-precious metals or stones, textiles, tobacco, wax,
wood and yarn.
15. Fabrication, processing, packaging and/or manufacture of musical
instruments, toys, novelties, rubber or metal stamps.
16. Fabrication, processing, and packaging and/or manufacture of ice, cold
storage plant, bottling plant.
17. Farm implements and contractor equipment sales and service.
18. Foundry casting light weight nonferrous metals, or electric foundry, not
causing noxious fumes or odors.
19. Fuel or Coal Company.
20. Furniture reupholstering and repair.
21. Industrial research laboratories.
22. Inflammable liquids, underground storage only.
23. Lumber Yards including incidental millworks: coal, brick, stone.
24. Monument sales including incidental mechanical operations.
25. Motor freight depot or trucking terminal: provided the truck entrances and
exits are onto streets whose pavements width is at least thirty (30) feet
between curbs.
26. Painting, varnishing shops.
27. Plumbing supply and contracting shops including storage yards.
28. Cattle, sheep, swine, and poultry killing and dressing.
-75-
29. Public garages, motor vehicle and bicycle repair shops, auto paint and body
shops.
30. Publishing and printing.
31. Railroad freight stations, but not including switches, storage freight yards,
siding or maintenance or fueling facilities.
32. Repair, rental and servicing for appliance and equipment.
33. Sign Contractor.
34. Stone grinding, dressing and cutting.
35. Storage yard for building supplies and equipment, food, fabrics, hardware and
similar goods when located entirely within a building, provided such buildings
shall not be used for wrecking or dismantling of motor vehicles.
36. Television and radio broadcasting towers.
37. Theatre (drive-in).
38. Tin and sheet metal shop.
39. Tool and die shop, wrought iron shop, blacksmith or machine shop, excluding
punch presses over twenty tons rated capacity, drop hammers and screw
machines.
40. Trailer rental and sales.
41. Truck terminal.
42. Used car lot.
43. Veterinary clinics or kennels, animal hospital, provided that all animals are
housed in buildings or enclosures which are at least one hundred (100) feet
from any residential zone.
44. Warehouses.
45. Wholesale distributors.
-76-
46. Uses similar to the above uses and any other manufacturing or industrial
enterprise, operation or process whether making, assembling, repairing,
buffing, finishing, plating, polishing, tempering, packing, shipping or storing;
provided, that any resulting cinders, dust flashing, fumes, gas noise, odor,
refuse, matter, smoke, vapor or vibration is no greater or more detrimental to
the neighborhood than the proposed use as determined by the Board of
Adjustments as similar in character to one of the specified uses in the section.
b- Accessory uses and buildings permitted shall include those customarily incidental
to the above permitted uses.
c- A minimum lot size of one (1) acre shall be required for any industrial use in this
‘IL’ zone. No lot shall be less than one hundred (100) feet in width at the building
line.
d- The following setback and yard requirements shall apply:
1. Front Yards: the front yard building setback line shall be a minimum of
fifty (50) feet from any existing right-of-way line of any street or road.
2. Side Yards: there shall be a minimum side yard on each side of any
building or structure of twenty-five (25) feet measured from the side lot line to
the nearest building. Where said use abuts any residential zone, there shall be
a side yard setback on the side abutting the residential district of fifty (50)
feet. Such space shall remain open and unoccupied by any building or
accessory building or use, except that any portion of a side yard in excess of
twenty-five (25) feet from a side property line must be included in the
required parking space.
3. Rear yards: there shall be a minimum rear yard as measured from the rear
property line to the nearest building of twenty-five (25) feet, except where the
property abuts a residential zone, and then such rear yard shall be not less than
fifty (50) feet wide. Such space shall not be occupied by any building or
accessory use.
e- No building shall exceed three stories or forty (40) feet in height; provided an
additional one foot of building height may be permitted for each foot the building is
set back from all required yard lines.
f- Special development standards: inasmuch as all industrial uses permitted in this
industrial zone require a site plan review by the Planning Commission, or if they are
applied for in another zone, they shall be subject to a review by the Board of
Adjustments as a application for a conditional use permit, no zoning certificate shall
be issued for a ‘IL’ use, until the applicant shall have Certified to the Administrative
Official and the reviewing body that:
-77-
1. The industrial activity will be conducted wholly within a completely
enclosed building, except for automobile service stations, drive in restaurants
and theaters, equipment rentals services, including automobiles, truck and
trailers; truck and motor freight terminals and hauling services.
2. No noise from any operation conducted on the premises, either continuous
or intermittent, shall cause any nuisances to the immediately neighboring
properties so that there shall be no emission of odors or odor causing
substances, nor vibrations which can be detected without the use of
instruments at or beyond the lot lines.
3. No emission of toxic or noxious matter, which is injurious to human
health, comfort or enjoyment of life and property or to animal or plant life,
shall be permitted. Where such emissions could be produced as a result of
accident or equipment malfunction, adequate safeguards considered suitable
for safe operation in the industry involved shall be taken.
4. Where the property lines separate an industrial zone from a residential
zone, a visual and mechanical barrier, a minimum of six (6) feet in height,
shall be provided along the common lot line, which may consist of any of the
following:
- An evergreen hedge used with a chain link fence, not less than three
(3) feet in height.
- A fence of a nondeteriorating material
- Masonry wall
*5. All activities involving the use and/or storage and/or disposal of
flammable liquids or materials which produce flammable or explosive vapors
or gases shall be provided with adequate safety and protective devices against
hazards of fire and explosion, as well as with adequate fire fighting and
suppression equipment and devices standard to the industry involved. All
above ground storage shall be enclosed fireproof vaults. The storage
utilization or manufacture of flammable radioactive and explosive materials
and products which decompose by detonation is prohibited in the ‘IL’ Zone.
*6. The storage and utilization of flammable liquids or of materials that
produce flammable or explosive vapors or gases shall be permitted on any lot
in accordance with the following table:
*See appendices A & B
-78-
Total Permitted Quantities Closed Cup Flashpoint in
Of Flammable Materials in Degrees F
Gallons
Above Ground Below Ground
Class I Class I
Not Permitted 20,000 Below 100 Degrees F
Class II Class II
1,000 40,000 Above 100 Degrees F and
Below 140 Degrees F
Class III Class III
5,000 80,000 Above 140 Degrees F
Section 5.802 General Industrial, ‘IG’
a- Principal permitted uses in this ‘IG’Zone include as examples, but not limited to
the following:
1. Any use first permitted in IL Light Industrial Zone.
2. Acetylene, oxygen manufacture.
3. Acid manufacture including all corrosive acids and materials.
4. Alcohol manufacture.
5. Ammonia, chlorine or bleaching powder manufacture.
6. Animal black, lamp black or graphite manufacture.
7. Asphalt products, manufacture or refining.
8. Automotive wrecking, junk or salvage yard, if in a completely enclosed
building, or the premises on which such use is conducted is entirely enclosed
within a solid fence or masonry wall not less than six (6) feet in height.
9. Automotive, tractor, trailer, farm implement assembly or manufacture.
10. Battery, manufacture, tire recapping or retreading.
11. Bleaching, cleaning and dying plant.
-79-
12. Boiler shops, machine shops, structural steel fabricating shops, metal
working shops.
13. Celluloid or proxyline products, manufacture or storage.
14. Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster manufacture.
15. Cement products manufacture, including ready-mix concrete batching
plants.
16. Coke ovens.
17. Crematory.
18. Creosote manufacture or treatment.
19. Dexatrine, starch or glucose processing.
20. Distillation of coal, petroleum, refuse, grain, wood or bones.
21. Electric power manufacture.
22. Emery cloth or sandpaper manufacturing.
23. Enameling, lacquering or japanning.
24. Explosives manufacturing or storage.
25. Extractive industry, gravel or sand.
26. Flour or grain mill.
27. Fat rendering.
28. Fertilizer, compost, manufacture or storage.
29. Fish curing, smoking or packing.
30. Fish oil manufacture or refining.
31. Forging plants.
32. Glass products, pottery, figurines or manufacture of similar products using
previously pulverized clay.
-80-
33. Glue manufacture.
34. Gelatin manufacture.
35. Landfill or incinerator.
36. Livestock feeding yards or market.
37. Paint, linseed oil, shellac, turpentine, lacquer, or varnish manufacture.
38. Petroleum or inflammable liquids production, refining.
39. Rock crushing.
40. Sanitary landfill for refuse disposal in conformance with the standards set
forth in the Kentucky Department of Health Manual, ‘Recommendations for
the Disposal of the Refuse by the Sanitary Landfill Methods’. Approval of the
sanitary landfill by the State Board of Health shall also be obtained.
41. Sodium compounds manufacture.
42. Slaughtering of animals.
43. Smelting.
44. Wholesale storage of petroleum, gasoline, oil.
45. Wire rod drawing, nut, screw or bolt manufacturing.
46. The Board of Adjustment may allow any use similar in character to one of
the specified uses listed above if such use is equally in harmony with the
character of the district as a permitted use.
b- Accessory uses or buildings permitted shall include those customarily incidental to
the above permitted uses.
c- A minimum lot size of two (2) acres shall be required for any industrial use of the
above categories or types in this ‘IG’ zone. No lot shall be less than one hundred
(100) feet in width at the building line.
d- The following setback and yard requirements shall apply:
1. Front Yards: the front yard building setback line shall be a minimum of
seventy-five (75) feet from any existing right-of-way line of any street or
road.
-81-
2. Side Yards: there shall be a minimum side yard on each side of any
building or structure of twenty-five (25) feet measured from the side lot line to
the nearest building. Where said use abuts any residential zone, there shall be
a side yard setback on the side abutting the residential district of one hundred
(100) feet. Such space shall remain open and unoccupied by any building or
accessory building or use, except that any portion of a side yard in excess of
twenty-five (25) feet from a side property line may be used and included in
the required parking space.
3. Rear Yards: there shall be a minimum rear yard as measured from the rear
property line to the nearest bldg. of twenty-five (25) feet except where the
property abuts a residential zone, and then such rear yard shall not be less than
fifty (50) feet wide. Such space shall not be occupied by any building or
accessory use.
e- There shall be no building height limitations.
f- Special development standards: inasmuch as all industrial uses permitted in this
industrial zone require a site plan review by the Planning Commission, or if they are
applied for in another zone, they shall be subject to a review by the Board of
Adjustment as an application for a conditional use permit, no zoning certificate shall
be issued in this ‘IG’ zone until the applicant shall have verified to the reviewing
body and the Administrative Official the same items 1 through 4 in paragraph ‘f” of
Subsection 5.801 and that:
4. The storage, utilization or manufacture of solid materials or products
ranging from free or active burning to intense burning is permitted only if said
materials or products are stored, utilized or manufactured within completely
enclosed buildings having incombustible exterior walls and protected
throughout by an automatic fire extinguishing system.
5. All activities involving the use and/or storage and/or disposal of flammable
liquids or materials which produce flammable or explosive vapors or gasses
shall be provided with adequate safety and protective devices against hazards
of fire and explosion, as well as with adequate fire fighting and suppression
equipment and devices standard to the industry involved. All above ground
storage shall be in enclosed fireproof vaults.
*6. The storage and utilization of flammable liquids, or of materials that
produce flammable or explosive vapors or gasses shall be permitted on any lot
in accordance with the following table.
*See appendices A & B
-82-
Total Permitted Quantities of Closed Cup Flashpoint in
Flammable Materials in Gallons Degrees F
Above Ground Below Ground
Class I Class I
Not Permitted Unlimited Below 100 Degrees F
Class II Class II
Unlimited Unlimited Above 100 Degrees F and
Below 140 Degrees F
Class III Class III
Unlimited Unlimited Above 140 Degrees F
Section 5.900 Planned Unit Development, Residential and Highway Business
This section is intended to permit creation of new Residential and Highway Business
Planned Unit Development Zones. Such zones are to be permitted as amendments to
the Zoning Maps, on application and approval of specific and detailed plans, where
tracts suitable in location and character for the uses and structures proposed are to be
planned and developed as integrated units. A Planned Unit Development may be
referred to and cited hereafter as a Planned Development or Development.
Regulations set forth herein are adapted to unified planning and development in such
zones. Nothing herein should be construed to mean that the land owner has the
inherent right to develop a Planned Unit Development. The Planning Commission
has the power to decide whether or not to allow Planned Unit Development based on
their experience, public hearing and the standards set forth herein. Applications for
Planned Unit Development rezoning will be granted only when the plan for the
project is such that the public health, safety and morals will not be jeopardized by a
departure from the restrictions on corresponding uses in the standard zone. In
addition, the purposes of this section is: to permit a more varied, efficient, attractive
and economical residential development pattern; to increase the flexibility in the
location and arrangement of homes; to provide a more usable pattern of open space;
to provide an opportunity to preserve areas of natural values; to provide for different
for different types of dwellings in the same general area; to allow for increased
residential densities; and, to encourage innovations in developmental designs.
-83-
Section 5.901 Site and Plan Development
The legislative body having jurisdiction shall not approve an application for a
Planned Unit Development unless the Planning Commission has recommended such
approval after it had, in each specific case, made specific findings of fact directly
based upon the particular evidence presented to it, which shall provide proof of
meeting the requirements and support the conclusions set hereafter, while remaining
subject to all other provisions of this sections:
a- The property for which the application for a reclassification to a Planned Unit
Development is located only in an R-2 zone for a residential type of such
development, or in a B-1 zone for a business type of development.
b- The property applied for measure a minimum of ten (10) acres for a residential
development, and five (5) acres for a business development, provided that such
acreage is under a single ownership.
c- No building permit shall be issued for any structure in any portion of a Planned
Development unless and until the final Subdivision Plat for that portion has been
approved by the Planning Commission and recorded.
d- The site will be accessible from public roads that are adequate to carry the traffic
that will be imposed upon by the proposed Development and the streets and the
streets and driveways on the site of the proposed Development will be adequate to
serve the residents or occupants of the proposed Development. Traffic control signals
will be provided without expense to Bullitt County or the political subdivision
concerned when the Planning Commission or its assigned planner or engineer
determines that such signals are required to prevent traffic hazards or congestion in
adjacent streets.
e- The Development will not impose an undue burden on public services and
facilities, such as fire and police protection.
f- The Development plan contains such proposed covenants, easements and other
provisions relating to the proposed development standards, as reasonably are required
for the public health, safety and morals.
-84-
g- The location and arrangement of structures, parking areas, walks, lighting and
appurtenant facilities shall be compatible with the surrounding land uses, and any part
of a Planned Development not used for structures, parking and loading areas, or
accessways, shall be landscaped or otherwise improved. When business structures or
uses in a Planned Development Zone abut a Residential Zone, screening shall be
provided as provided in Sub-section 6.105 Paragraph‘d’ and by the requirements of
the Planned Unit Development Zone in question. In no event shall a business
structure in a Planned Development Zone be located nearer than one hundred (100)
feet to a residential building.
h. The Planned Unit Development can be substantially completed within the period of
time specified in the schedule of development submitted by the developer and
approved by the Planning Commission.
Section 5.902 Procedure
The following procedure shall be followed in placing land in a Planned Unit
Development Zone.
a- The owner(s) or lessee(s) of a tract of land meeting the requirements set in Subsection
5.901 may request that the Zoning Map be amended to include such tract in a
Planned Unit Development Zone.
b- The applicant is encouraged to engage in informal consultations with the Bullitt
County Planning Commission or its assigned planner or engineer prior to preparing
his final plans, it being understood that no statement or representation by a member of
the Commission or its representative planner shall be binding upon the Planning
Commission or upon any zoning body.
c. The request shall then be referred to the Planning Commission for formal review
before being forwarded with the Commission’s recommendations to the legislative
body having jurisdiction for final action.
d. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed
Development Plan as provided by KRS 424 and Sub-section 3.201 and Article VIII,
of these regulations. Such public hearing shall consider all aspects of the
Development plan including all proposed stages and/or units of development. Within
thirty days after the last public hearing on such plan, the Commission shall prepare
and transmit to the legislative body having jurisdiction and to the applicant specific
findings of fact with respect to the extent to which the Planned Development
complies with the standards set out in this section and the zone for which the change
has been requested, together with its recommendations to the Fiscal Court or City
Council concerned with respect to the action to be taken on the application for the
-85-
Planned Development. The Commission may recommend disapproval, approval, or
approval with amendments, conditions or restrictions. Copies of the findings and
recommendations of the Commission shall be made available to any other interested
persons.
e. The legislative body having jurisdiction shall have a period of sixty (60)
days to reject or approve by resolution, a residential or business Planned Unit
Development Zone application. If the application is rejected, the written reasons for
such rejection shall be made available. The final decision of the legislative body
having jurisdiction may be appealed directly to the Board of Adjustment. If
approved, such resolution shall incorporate the Development plan, including any
condition or restriction that may be imposed by the legislative body having
jurisdiction. In any case, approval of all applications shall be based on conformance
of the Planned Development to the stated intentions and objectives of this section.
f- The approval of a single stage Development shall become null and void and the
land shall revert to its former zoning classification, unless within two (2) years the
Subdivision Plat shall have been recorded in the records of Bullitt County.
g- When the recording of the Subdivision Plat for the successive stages of a multistage
plan falls more than two (2) years behind the schedule submitted under Subsections
5.903 Paragraph ‘e’ the Planned Development shall become null and void as
to that portion of the tract for which no Subdivision Plat shall have been recorded;
and that portion of the tract shall revert to its former zoning classification.
h- An extension of the time limit or the modification of the approved Planned
Development may be approved by the legislative body having jurisdiction. Such
approval shall be given upon a finding of the purpose and necessity for such
extension or modification, and evidence of reasonable effort toward the
accomplishment of the original Planned Development. Such modification shall
follow the procedure of Article VIII of these regulations.
Section 5.903 Documentation Required For Planned Unit Development Application
Two (2) copies of a Planned Unit Development plans shall be submitted with the
application and shall include in text and map form:
a- A survey of the tract that is to be developed showing of all existing features of the
property including streets, alleys, easements, utility lines, existing land use, general
topography and physical features.
b- A site plan showing the location and arrangement of all existing and proposed
structures, the proposed traffic circulation pattern within the Development, the areas
to be developed for parking, the points of ingress and egress, including access streets
-86-
where required, the relationship of abutting land uses and zoning districts, proposed
lots and blocks, if any, and proposed public or common open space, if any, including
parks, playgrounds, school sites, and recreational facilities.
c. A statement of the anticipated land use density, and the percentage of the
development which is to be occupied by structures.
d- Preliminary sketches of the proposed structures and landscaping.
e- When a Planned Unit Development is to be constructed in stages or units, a
schedule for the development of such stages or units shall be submitted.
No such stage or unit shall have a land density that exceeds by more than twenty (20)
percent of the proposed land use density of the entire Planned Unit Development.
When a Planned Unit Development provides for common open space, the total area of
common open space provided at any stage of development shall, at a minimum, bear
the same relationship to the total open space to be provided in the entire Planned Unit
Development as the stages or units completed or under development bear to the entire
Planned Development.
f- Evidence that the applicant has sufficient control over the tract to effect the
proposed plan, including a statement of all the ownership and beneficial interests in
the tract of land and proposed Development.
g- In the case of Business Planned Unit Development, a statement identifying the
principal types of official business uses that are to be included in the proposed
Development.
h- When a Planned Development included provisions for common open space or
recreational facilities, a statement describing the provision that is to be made for the
care and maintenance of such open space or recreational facilities. If it is proposed
that such open space be owned and/or maintained by any entity other than a
governmental authority, copies of the proposed Articles of Incorporation and By-laws
of such entity shall be submitted.
i- Copies of any restrictive covenants that are to be recorded with respect to property
included in the Planned Unit Development Zone.
Section 5.904 Permitted Uses and Variations
In a Planned Unit Development, only those uses permitted in the original zone shall
be permitted in the new classification with the following variations allowed:
a- In a ‘PR’ residential type development, while the original ‘R-2’ zone permits
only single-family and two-family dwellings, a mixture of dwellings unit
types shall be permitted resulting in a maximum of fifty (50%) percent of the
-87-
units in multi-family or two-family type, with a minimum of fifty (50%) percent
in single-family type units.
b- Each single and two family dwelling lot area requirement in the original zone may
be reduced by one-fifth.
c- Multi family lot area requirements shall be those of ‘R-3’ with a permitted
reduction of one-fifth for each requirement.
d- a minimum of twenty (20) percent of the total acreage of the property shall be left
as landscaped open space, other than streets, easements, and similar right-of-ways.
e- In a B-1 business type development twenty (20) percent increase shall be permitted
in the lot coverage allowed in the original B-1 zone if front yard requirements under
original zone are doubled while maintaining other yard requirements.
The resulting open space must be convenient to the dwellings, of reasonable
configuration and slope, and shall be appropriately designed as part of the
compliance.
-88-
ARTICLE 6 TYPES OF DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION REVIEW
Section 6.100 Site Plan Review
6.101 Site Plan Review Limitation
6.102 Required Information
6.103 Procedure for Preparation
6.104 Procedure for Processing
6.105 General Standards for Site Plan Approval
6.106 Specific Standards and Conditions for Site Plan Approval
6.107 Appeal of Site Plan Review Decision
Section 6.200 Conditional Use
6.201 Special Exception Procedure
6.202 General Requirements for Granting a Conditional Use
6.203 Additional Provisions
6.205 Conditional Use – Off Street Parking (see page 120)
ARTICLE 6 TYPES OF DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION REVIEW
This Article Outlines procedures and requirements for Site Plan and Conditional Use
Reviews.
Section 6.100 Site Plan Review
Routine administration of the Zoning Regulations is the responsibility of the Zoning
Administrative Official. However, sound future development of Bullitt County and its
political subdivisions requires that certain high intensity development, and development
in certain critical areas, receive special site plan review by the Planning Commission.
Site plan review and approval are required for uses which are not intrinsically
objectionable but which have inherent characteristics that, if not properly handled, have
the potential for yielding unsatisfactory results of some type. They are uses which
depend upon sound site planning and design to prevent them from becoming detrimental
to the health, safety, morals, or general welfare of the public, or to neighboring land uses.
For uses and areas which require site plan review, no building or use shall be established
or continued except in conformity with a site development plan approved by the Planning
Commission, and no zoning certificate shall be issued until all of the requirements of this
section have been met. Continued conformance with such a plan and such requirements
shall be a condition of any zoning permit. The Administrative Official shall be
responsible for certifying that the requirements of this section have been met.
Section 6.101 Site Plan Review Limitation
Uses requiring site plan review are indicated in Section 5.300, Table of Types of
Application Review by Zone. Site plan review is required for all development in
business and industrial zones, for all uses requiring conditional use permits, and for
certain other uses which are listed in the table. Site plan review is intended only for
construction of buildings or other improvements on the land. After a site plan has been
approved and construction of the development has been completed in accordance with the
site plan, a permitted change in use which does not materially affect the design of the
development and which requires no new construction, other than minor remodeling and
changing of permitted signs, shall not require an additional site plan review by the
Planning Commission. Such a use change may be processed by the Administrative
Official. The Administrative Official may refer uncertain cases to the Planning
Commission. Any major expansion or modification of a use with an approved site plan
shall be subject to a new site plan review by the Planning Commission.
Section 6.102 Required Information
An application for a building permit requiring site plan approval by the Planning
Commission shall be made to the Administrative Official and shall be accompanied by
the following information:
-89-
a- Map of applicant’s entire holding at a convenient scale;
b- Vicinity map at a scale of six hundred (600) feet or more to the inch
indicating the location of the property with respect to surrounding property
and streets. The map shall show all streets, easements, subdivisions, and
properties within one thousand (1,000) feet of the applicant in the area
shall be identified.
c- Topographic map of the property, at two (2) foot contour intervals, unless
otherwise specified by the Planning Commission, showing the existing
and proposed regarded surface of the land and the location of natural
features, such as streams, swamps, rock outcrops, and major trees.
d- A site plan showing location, proposed use and height of all buildings;
location of all parking and truck loading areas with access and egress
drives thereto; location of outdoor storage if any; location and type of
recreation facilities, if any; location of all existing or proposed site
improvements including drains, culverts, retaining walls and fences; the
proposed grading, landscaping, and screening plans; description of method
of water supply and sewage disposal and location of such facilities;
location and proposed development of buffer areas and landscaping where
required; location and design of lighting facilities; and location, size and
type of all signs;
e- A computation of total lot area, of building floor area for each type of
proposed use, building coverage, roads, and parking;
f- For commercial uses, specific uses proposed; number of employees for
which buildings are designed; type of power to be used, if any; type of
wastes or by-products to be produced; and proposed method of disposal of
such wastes or by-products.
Section 6.103 Procedure For Preparation
a- It is recommended that applicants acquaint themselves with the
Subdivision Regulations, as they may be adopted by Bullitt County and
any of the Cities of Shepherdsville, Hillview, Lebanon Junction and
Mount Washington, so that documentation for site plan review by the
Planning Commission, when required, may be prepared simultaneously.
b- Site plans or any portion thereof, involving engineering, architecture or
land surveying, shall be prepared and certified by an engineer, architect,
landscape architect, or land surveyor duly authorized by the State or
practice as such.
-90-
c- Site plans shall be prepared to a scale of not smaller than one-inch equals
one hundred feet; the sheet or sheets shall be twenty-four inches by thirtysix
inches, including a 1-1/2 inch margin for binding along left edge. A
site plan may be prepared in one or more sheets, in which case match lines
and an index sheet shall be provided.
d- Six clearly legible, blue or black line copies of a site plan shall be
submitted to the Administrative Official, accompanied by payment of all
site plan fees as established by the Fiscal Court, or the legislative body of
the city concerned.
Section 6.104 Procedure For Processing
Each application involving site plan approval, together with the required information
described in Sub-sections 6.102 and 6.103 above shall be submitted to the Administrative
Official for review. Action shall be taken by the Planning Commission and a decision
rendered thereon within sixty (60) days of the date the application is received by the
Administrative Official. The Administrative Official shall route copies of the application
to reviewing agencies and officials during the reviewing period.
a- Prior to approval of any site plan, there shall be executed by the owner or
developer and submitted with the site plan an agreement to construct such
required physical improvements as are made conditional to site plan
approval in form and substance as approved by the Planning Commission.
b- Approval of a site plan submitted under the provisions of this article shall
expire two years after the date of such approval unless construction has
begun at that time.
c- Any site plan may be revised in the same manner as originally approved,
and any requirements of this article may be waived by the Planning
Commission in specific cases where such requirement is found to be
unreasonable and such waiver will not be adverse to the purpose of this
section.
d- Upon satisfactory completion of the installation of required improvements
as shown on the approved site plan or a section thereof, the developer shall
submit to the Administrative Official six copies of ‘as-built’ site plan,
certified by the engineer of surveyor, at least one week prior to anticipated
occupancy of any building, for the review and approval for conformity
with the approved site plan. The Administrative Official shall not process
the zoning use and certificate of zoning compliance until the appropriate
‘as-built’ site plan has been reviewed and approved.
-91-
Section 6.105 General Standards For Site Plan Approval
In acting upon any site development plan, the Planning Commission shall determine that
the proposed use, site layout and overall appearance of all building in the proposed
development are such that they will have a harmonious relationship with existing or
permitted development of contiguous land and of adjacent neighborhoods, and that the
proposed development is in harmony with the development policies outlined in the
‘Bullitt County Comprehensive Plan’, as it may be approved, and in these zoning
regulations. The Planning Commission shall seek to provide for the conservation of
woodland and the protection of water courses from erosion and siltation, and a maximum
of safety, convenience, and amenity for the residents or users of the proposed
development. To these ends, the Planning Commission shall consider the location of
buildings, parking areas, points of egress and ingress, and other features such as streams
and large trees, the efficiency, adequacy and safety of the proposed layout of internal
streets and driveways; the adequacy and location of open space; the adequacy, location,
and screening of the parking lots; and such other matters as the Planning Commission
may find to have a material bearing upon the stated intent of the site plan review
procedure. In reviewing individual development proposals in the mobile home, business
an industrial zones, the Planning Commission shall attempt to promote a modern,
harmonious development pattern such as is achieved through unified site planning in the
PR and PB Zones. The Planning Commission shall encourage such development by
promoting common frontage roads, development of shared parking areas, and
coordinated building arrangements, landscaping, and signing.
Section 6.106 Specific Standards And Conditions For Site Plan Approval
The following specific standards shall be met in site development plans, in addition to the
standards in other sections of these regulations.
a- No parking space shall be located within any required setback areas.
b- All lighting shall be so shielded that there will be no objectionable glare,
especially to residential areas, observable from surrounding properties or
streets.
c- The County Health Department shall certify that water and sewage
services are adequate to service the proposed development, or shall certify
the adequacy of any on-site water supply or sewage treatment proposal.
d- The Planning Commission may require screening along the property lines
when necessary, as a condition for site plan approval. Minimum standards
for all screening when required shall be a strip at least four (4) feet wide,
densely planted with shrubs or trees which are at least four (4) feet high at
the time of planting, and which are of a type which may be expected to
form a year-round dense screen at least six (6) feet high within three (3)
-92-
years.
e- The capacities of existing streets shall be adequate for the volume of
traffic which the proposed development is expected to generate.
f- If the plan of development includes common areas, property, and/or
facilities, the Planning Commission as a condition of approval shall
establish such conditions on the ownership, use, and maintenance of such
lands or property as it deems necessary to insure the preservation of such
areas, property and facilities for their intended purpose.
Section 6.107 Appeal of Site Plan Review Decision
The applicant for a use involving site plan review shall have the right to appeal the
decision of the Planning Commission to the Board of Adjustment. The Board shall
review the entire record of the application and may affirm, modify, or establish such
other or additional conditions to the decision as may seem appropriate, consistent with
the intent of the regulations.
Section 6.200 Conditional Use
The regulations of this Section deal with certain unusual uses which need special
consideration to achieve compatibility with existing or planned future development. The
effects of such uses on the surrounding environment cannot be foreseen until a specific
site has been proposed. They must be given special consideration and located properly
relative to the existing and planned future development pattern. They are not permitted
automatically, but are subject to the general regulations, and the conditions imposed in a
Conditional Use Permit issued by the Board of Adjustment under these regulations.
Section 6.201 Conditional Use Procedure
The Board of Adjustment has the authority to grant a conditional use permit after referral
of the conditional use application to the Planning Commission for site plan review and
recommendation, and the holding of a legally advertised public hearing. A conditional
use application shall therefore include the plans and data required for site plan review. In
addition, the requirements outlined in Article VII, Sub-section 7.302, and the procedures
outlined hereafter shall be followed. When approving a conditional use, the Board of
Adjustment shall incorporate the site planning recommendations of the Planning
Commission. The Board may add additional conditions.
a- A written application for a conditional use is submitted indicating the
section of these regulations under which the conditional use is sought and
stating the grounds on which it is requested.
-93-
b- The Planning Commission has reviewed application and has stated its
recommendations to the Board.
c- A public hearing has been held.
d- The Board determines that the conditional use requested meets the general
and specific conditions of these regulations.
e- Upon receipt of a notice of grant of conditional use permit, the
Administrative Official shall indicate the same in the proper place on the
Zoning Map by use of appropriate code number of symbol.
f- No use or activity permitted as a conditional use shall be enlarged or
extended beyond the limits authorized in the grant of conditional use
permit. All such enlargements or extensions shall require grants of
conditional use, as in the case of an original application.
g- If a grant of conditional use is denied, no new application for the denied
use on the same property shall be accepted by the Board of Adjustment
until one year after the date of hearing on the denied application.
h- Notice of action taken by the Board on each application for a conditional
use shall be transmitted to the petitioner and to the Planning Commission.
In cases where conditional use has been granted, the notice shall set forth
the conditions, standards, and rules to which the conditional use is subject.
*See appendix A & B
Section 6.202 General Requirements For Granting A Conditional Use
A grant of conditional use is basically a matter of development policy, rather than an
appeal based on administrative error or on hardship in a particular case. The Board of
Adjustment should therefore consider the relation of the proposed use to existing and
future development patterns. In general, a conditional use may be granted when the
Board finds that:
a- The proposed use is in harmony with the purpose and intent of the
‘County Comprehensive Plan’, as it may be adopted, and of these zoning
regulations.
b- The location and size of the use, the nature and intensity of the operations
involved in or conducted in connection with it, the size of the site in
relation to it, and the location of the site with respect to streets giving
access to it, are such that it will be in harmony with the appropriate and
orderly development of the zone in which it is located.
-94-
c- The location, nature and height of buildings, walls, and fences, and the
nature and extent of the landscaping on the site are such that the use will
not hinder or discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent
land and buildings.
d- Operations in connection with any conditional use will not be more
objectionable to nearby properties by reason of noise, fumes, vibration, or
other characteristics, than would be the operations of any permitted use
not requiring a conditional use permit.
e- Parking areas will be of adequate size for the particular use, properly
located and suitably screened from adjoining residential uses, and the
entrance and exit drives shall be laid out to achieve maximum safety.
f- Public utility service (electricity, sewerage, storm drainage and water) will
be adequate to service the proposed use and will have suitable access
thereto, and the proposal will not overburden existing facilities; or, any
on-site water supply, sewage treatment, or storm drainage disposal system
will be adequate to service the proposed use.
Section 6.203 Additional Provisions
A conditional use permit may be granted in accordance with the general and specific
requirements enumerated in the preceding sections. The Board may, and is herby
authorized, to add to the specific requirements any additional conditions that it may deem
necessary to protect adjacent properties, the general neighborhood, and the residents
and/or workers therein. Violation of such additional conditions, when made a part of the
terms under which the conditional use permit is granted, shall be deemed a violation of
these regulations and may be grounds for termination of the conditional use permit.
Section 6.205 Conditional Use – Off Street Parking – see page 120
-95-
ARTICLE 7 ADMINISTRATION
Section 7.100 Administration and Enforcement: Building Permits and Certification of
Zoning Compliance
7.101 Administration and Enforcement
7.102 Certificate of Zoning Compliance for New, Altered, or Nonconforming
Uses and/or Structures
7.103 Construction and Use to be as provided in Applications, Plans, Permits, and
Certificates of Zoning Compliance
Section 7.200 The Board of Adjustment: Procedure
7.201 Meetings of Board; Quorum; Minutes; Bylaws
7.202 Procedure for all Appeals to Board
7.203 Public Notice of Appeal Hearing
7.204 Stay of Proceedings
Section 7.300 The Board of Adjustment: Powers and Duties
7.301 Administrative Review
7.302 Conditional Use Permits
7.303 Dimensional Variance
7.304 Procedure for all Appeals to Board
7.305 Decisions of the Board of Adjustment
7.306 Appeals from Commission or Board of Adjustment
Section 7.400 Duties of Administrative Official
7.401 Administrator of Zoning Regulations: Powers
Section 7.500 Penalties for Violation
ARTICLE 7 ADMINISTRATION
Section 7.100 Administration and Enforcement: Building Permits and Certification of
Zoning Compliance
Section 7.101 Administration and Enforcement
An Administrative Official designated by the Fiscal Court and with the approval of the
respective City Councils shall administer and enforce these regulations. He may be
provided with the assistance of such other persons as the respective legislative body may
direct. If the Administrative Official shall find that any of the provisions of these
regulations are being violated, he shall notify in writing the person responsible for such
violations, indicating the nature of the violations and ordering the action necessary to
correct it. He shall order discontinuance of illegal work being done: or shall take any
other action authorized by these regulations or KRS Chapter 100 to insure compliance
with or to prevent violations of their provisions.
Section 7.102 Certificate of Zoning Compliance For New Altered, or Non-Conforming
Uses and/or Structures
It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any building or
premises, or both, or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, or
wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use of structure until a certificate of zoning
compliance shall have been issued therefore by the Administrative Official stating that
the proposed use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of these
regulations. No non-conforming structure or use shall be maintained, renewed, changed,
or extended until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued by the
Administrative Official. The certificate of zoning compliance shall state specifically
where-in the non-conforming use differs from the provisions of these regulations
provided that upon enactment or amendment of these regulations, owners or occupants of
non-conforming uses or structures shall have three (3) months to apply for certificates of
zoning compliance. Failure to make such application within three (3) months shall be
presumptive evidence that the property was in conforming use at the time of enactment or
amendment of these regulations. A temporary certificate of zoning compliance may be
issued by the Administrative Official for a period not exceeding six (6) months during
alterations or partial occupancy of the building pending its completion, provided that
such temporary certificate may require such conditions and safeguards as will protect the
safety of the occupants and the public.
The Administrative Official shall maintain a record of all certificates of zoning
compliance, and copies shall be furnished upon request to any person. Failure to obtain a
certificate of zoning compliance shall be a violation of this regulation and punishable
under Section 7.500 of these regulations.
-96-
Section 7.103 Construction and Use to be as Provided in Applications, Plans, Permits,
and Certificates of Zoning Compliance
Certificates of zoning compliance issued on the basis of plans and applications approved
by the Administrative Official authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set
forth in such approved plans and applications and any other use, arrangement, or
construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed violation of this regulation
and as provided by Section 7.500 hereof.
Section 7.200 The Board of Adjustment: Procedure
A Board of Adjustment is hereby established, which shall consist of seven (7) members,
but, not more than two (2) of which shall be members of the Bullitt County Planning
Commission. Members shall be appointed pursuant to KRS 100.217. The County shall
have three (3) and the four cities within the County shall have one (1) member each on
the Board of Adjustment.
Section 7.201 Meeting of Board; Quorum; Minutes; Bylaws
a- The Board of Adjustment shall conduct meetings at the call of the
chairman who shall give written or oral notice to all members of the Board
at least seven days prior to the meeting, which notice shall contain the
date, time and place for the meeting, and the subject or subjects which will
be discussed.
b- A simple majority of the total membership of the Board of Adjustment as
established by regulation or agreement shall constitute a quorum. Any
member of the Board of Adjustment who has any direct or indirect
financial interest in the outcome of any question before the body shall
disclose the nature of the interest and shall disqualify himself from voting
on the question.
c- The Board of Adjustment shall adopt bylaws for the transaction of
business and shall keep minutes and records of all proceeding, including
regulations, transactions, findings, and determinations and the number of
votes for and against each question, and if any member is absent of
abstains from voting indicating the fact, all of which shall, immediately
after adoption be filed in the office of the Board. If the Board has no
office, such records may be kept in custody of an officer of the Board and
shall be available to the general public. A transcript of the minutes of the
Board of Adjustment shall be provided if requested by a party, at the
expense of the requesting party, and the transcript shall constitute the
record.
-97-
Section 7.202 Procedure For All Appeals to Board
Appeals to the Board may be taken by any person, or entity claiming to be injuriously
affected or aggrieved by an official action or decision of any zoning enforcement officer.
Such appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) days after the appellant or his agent receives
notice of the action appealed from, by filing with said officer and with the Board a notice
of appeal specifying the grounds thereof, and giving notice of such appeal to any and all
parties of record. Said Officer shall forthwith transmit to the Board all papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken and shall be
treated as and be the respondent in such further proceedings. At any hearing by the
Board any interested person may appear and enter his appearance, and all shall be given
an opportunity to be heard.
Section 7.203 Public Notice of Appeal Hearing
The Board shall fix a reasonable time for hearing the appeal and give public notice in
accordance with KRS Chapter 424, as well as written notice to the appellant and the
Administrative Official at least one (1) week prior to the hearing, and shall decide it
within sixty (60) days from the date of appeal. The affected party may appear at the
hearing in person or by attorney.
Section 7.204 Stay of Proceedings
An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the
Administrative Official from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of
Adjustment after the notice of appeal is filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in
the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause eminent peril to life and property. In
such case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by a restraining order which may be
granted by the Board of Adjustment or by a court of record on application, or on notice to
the Administrative Official from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
Section 7.300 The Board of Adjustment: Powers And Duties
Section 7.301 Administrative Review
The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to hear and decide cases where it is
alleged by an applicant that there is error in any order, requirement, decision, grant, or
refusal made by an Administrative Official in the enforcement of these zoning
regulations. Such appeal shall be taken within sixty (60) days.
Section 7.302 Conditional Use Permits
The Board shall have the power to hear and decide applications for conditional use
permits to allow the proper integration into the community of uses which are specifically
named in the zoning regulations which may be suitable only in specific locations in the
-98-
zone and only if certain conditions are met:
a- The Board may approve, modify, or deny any application for a conditional
use permit. If it approves such permit it may attach necessary conditions
such as time limitations, requirements that one of more things be done
before the request can be initiated, or conditions of a continuing nature.
any such conditions shall be recorded in the Board’s minutes and on the
conditional use permit, along with a reference to the specific section in the
zoning regulations listing the conditional use under consideration. The
Board shall have power to revoke conditional use permits, or variances for
non-compliance with the condition thereof. Furthermore, the Board shall
have a right of action to compel offending structures or uses removed at
the cost of the violator and may have judgment in personam for such cost.
b- Granting of a conditional use permit does not exempt the applicant from
complying with all of the requirements of building, housing, and other
regulations.
c- In any case where a conditional use permit has not been exercised within
the time limit set by the Board, or within one year if no specific time limit
has been set, such conditional use permit shall not revert to its original
designation unless there has been a public hearing. Exercised, as set forth
in this section, shall mean that binding contracts for the construction of the
main building or other improvement has been let; or in the absence of
contracts that the main building or other improvement is under
construction to a substantial degree, or that prerequisite conditions
involving substantial investment shall be under contract, in development,
or completed. When construction is not a part of the use, exercised shall
mean that the use is in operation in compliance with the conditions as set
forth in the permit.
d- The Administrative Official shall review all conditional use permits,
except those for which all conditions have been permanently satisfied, at
least once annually and shall have the power to inspect the land or
structure where the conditional use is located in order to ascertain that the
landowner is complying with all of the conditions which are listed on the
conditional use permit. If the landowner is not complying with all of the
conditions listed on the conditional use permit, the Administrative Official
shall report the fact in writing to the chairman of the Board of Adjustment.
The report shall state specifically the manner in which the landowner is
not complying with the conditions on the conditional use permit, and a
copy of the report shall be furnished to the chairman of the Board of
Adjustment. The Board shall hold a hearing on the report within a
reasonable time, and notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be
furnished to the landowner at least one (1) week prior to the hearing. If
-99-
the Board of Adjustments finds that the facts alleged in the report of the
Administrative Official are true and that the landowner had taken no steps
to comply with them between the date of the report and the date of the
hearing, the Board of Adjustment may authorize the Administrative
Official to revoke the conditional use permit and take the necessary legal
action to cause the termination of the activity on the land which the
conditional use permit authorizes.
e- Once the Board of Adjustment has completed a conditional use permit and
all the conditions required are of such type that they can be completely
and permanently satisfied, the Administrative Official, upon request of the
applicant, may, if the facts warrant, make a determination that the
conditions have been satisfied, and enter the facts which indicate that the
conditions have been satisfied and the conclusion in the margin of the
copy of the conditional use permit which is on file with the County Clerk
or City Clerk concerned, as required in KRS 100.344. Thereafter said use,
if it continues to meet the other requirements of the regulations, will be
treated as a permitted use.
Section 7.303 Dimensional Variance
(See page 121 for the latest text amendment on this section)
The Board shall have the power to hear and decide on applications for dimensional
variances where, by reasons of the exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or unusual shape
of a site on the effective date of these zoning regulations or by reason of exceptional
topographic conditions, or some other extraordinary situation or condition of that site, the
literal enforcement o the dimensional requirements (height or width of building or size of
yards, but no population density) of the zoning regulation would deprive the applicant of
reasonable capacity to make use of the land in a manner equivalent to the use permitted
other landowners in the same zone. The Board may impose any reasonable conditions or
restrictions on any variance it decides to grant. The following shall govern the granting
of a variance:
a- Before any variance is granted, the Board must find all of the following,
which shall be recorded along with any imposed conditions or restrictions
in its minutes and records and issued in written form to the applicant to
constitute proof of the dimensional variance.
1. The specific conditions in detail which are unique to the
applicant’s land and do not exist on other land in the same
zone.
2. The manner in which the strict application of the provisions
of the regulation would deprive the applicant of a reasonable
use of the land in the manner equivalent to the use permitted
other landowners in the same zone.
-100-
3. That the unique conditions and circumstances are not the
result of actions of the applicant taken subsequent to the
adoption of these zoning regulations.
4. Reasons that the variance will preserve, not harm the public
safety and welfare, and will not alter the essential character
of the neighborhood.
b- The Board shall not possess the power to grant a variance to permit a use
of any land, building, or structure which is not permitted by the zoning
regulations in the zone in question, or to alter density requirements in the
zone in question.
Section 7.304 Procedure For All Appeals to Board
Appeals to the Board may be taken by any person, or entity claiming to be injuriously
affected or aggrieved by an official action or decision of any zoning Administrative
Official. Such appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) days after the appellant or his
agent receives notice of the action appealed from, by filing with said officer and with the
Board a notice of such appeal to any and all parties of record. Said officer shall forthwith
transmit to the Board all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed
from was taken and shall be treated as and be the respondent in such further proceedings.
At any hearing by the Board any interested person may appear and enter his appearance,
and all shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The Board shall fix a reasonable time
for hearing the appeal and give public notice in accordance with KRS Chapter 424, as
well as written notice to the appellant and the Administrative Official at least one (1)
week prior to the hearing and shall decide it within sixty (60) days from the date of
appeal. The affected party may appear at the hearing in person or by attorney.
Section 7.305 Decisions of The Board of Adjustment
In exercising the above mentioned powers, the Board of Adjustment may, so long as such
action is in conformity with the terms of these regulations, reverse or affirm, wholly or
partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from;
and, may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made,
and to that end shall have powers of the Administrative Official from whom the appeal is
taken.
Section 7.306 Appeals From Commission or Board of Adjustment
Any appeal from Commission action may be taken in the following manner:
a- Any person or entity claiming to be injured or aggrieved by any final
action of the Planning Commission or Board of Adjustment may appeal
from the action to the Circuit Court of the county. Such appeal shall be
-101-
taken within thirty (30) days after the final action of the Commission or
Board. Final action shall not include Commission’s recommendations
made to other governmental bodies.
b- All appeals shall be taken in the appropriate Circuit Court within thirty
(30) days after the action or decision of the Planning Commission or
Board of Adjustment and all decisions which have not been appealed
within thirty (30) days shall become final. After the appeal is taken, the
procedure shall be governed by the rules of civil procedure. When an
appeal has been filed, the clerk of the Circuit Court shall issue a summons
to all parties, including the Planning Commission in all cases, and shall
cause it to be delivered for service as in any other law action.
Section 7.400 Duties of Administrative Official
It is the intent of these regulations that all questions of interpretation and enforcement
shall be first presented to the Administrative Official, and that such questions shall be
presented to the Board of Adjustment only on appeal from the decision of the
Administrative Official, and that recourse from the decision of the Board of Adjustment
shall be to the courts as provided by law.
Section 7.401 Administrator of Zoning Regulations: Powers
An Administrative Official shall be designated by Bullitt County to administer the zoning
regulations, and, if delegated, housing or building or other related regulations. The
Administrative Official may be designated to issue building permits or certificates of
zoning compliance, or both, in accordance with the literal terms of the regulations, but
may not have the power to permit any construction, or to permit any use or any change of
use which does not conform to the literal terms of these zoning regulations.
Section 7.500 Penalties For Violation
Any person or entity who violates any of the provisions of KRS 100.201 to 100.347 and
100.991; or any of the regulations adopted pursuant hereunder for which no other penalty
is provided, shall upon conviction be fined not less than ten (10) dollars but no more than
five hundred (500) dollars for each conviction. Each day of violation shall constitute a
separate offense.
-102-
ARTICLE 8 AMENDMENTS
Section 8.100 Amendment Application Procedure
8.101 Qualified Applicants
8.102 Submission of Application
8.103 Public Hearing Required
Section 8.200 Text Amendment
Section 8.300 Map Amendment
8.301 Findings Necessary for Map Amendment:
Board of Adjustment Required
8.302 Application Format
Section 8.400 Planning Commission Recommendation and Fiscal Court Decision
ARTICLE 8 AMENDMENTS
For the purpose of establishing and maintaining sound, stable and desirable development
within Bullitt County and its political subdivisions these regulations or any part thereof,
and as here used the term regulations shall be deemed to include the official zoning maps
shall not be amended except as follows:
Section 8.100 Amendment Application Procedure
Section 8.101 Qualified Applicants
A proposal for amendment to any zoning regulation may originate with the Planning
Commission, with the Fiscal Court or legislative body which is a member of the planning
unit, or with the owner of the property in question.
Section 8.102 Submission of Application
Regardless of the origin of the proposed amendment, it shall be referred to the Planning
Commission before adoption. Applications for zoning text or map amendments shall be
submitted in duplicate to the Planning Commission, through the Administrative Official,
on forms supplied by the Planning Commission. The Administrative Official shall not
accept an application if it fails to conform to all applicable requirements of this Article,
including the payment of any fee established by the County Fiscal Court or the council of
the respective city concerned, nor if the application is for reclassification of the whole or
any part of land, the reclassification of which has been approved or denied on its merits
within twelve (12) months prior to the date of submission of the application.
Section 8.103 Public Hearing Required
Upon accepting an amendment application, the Planning Commission shall hold at least
one public hearing after notice as required by KRS Chapter 424 and make
recommendations to the legislative body having jurisdiction, and it shall take a majority
of the entire legislative body having jurisdiction to override the recommendation of the
Planning Commission. All procedures for public notice and publication as well as for
adoption shall be the same as for the original enactment of a zoning regulation.
Section 8.200 Text Amendment
Application for amendment of the zoning order text may be made by any interested
person or governmental agency. The application shall set forth the new text to be added
and the existing text, if any, to be deleted.
-103-
Section 8.300 Map Amendment
Section 8.301 Finding Necessary for Map Amendment:
Board of Adjustment Required
Before any map amendment is granted, the Planning Commission, and the legislative
body having jurisdiction must find that the map amendment is in agreement with the
community’s comprehensive plan, or in the absence of such a finding, that one or more of
the following apply and such finding shall be recorded in the minutes and records of the
Planning Commission and the legislative body or Fiscal Court.
a- That the original zoning classification given to the property was
inappropriate or improper.
b- That there have been major changes of an economic, physical or social
nature within the area involved which were not anticipated in the
community’s Comprehensive Plan and which have substantially altered
the basic character of such area.
*c- The zoning regulations or map shall not be amended, changed, or
modified in such manner as to create a free-standing zone of less than five
(5) acres, except for B-1 Highway Commercial which may be as small as
three (3) acres.
*This acreage requirement for rezoning shall not apply within the
municipal boundary of any incorporated city within Bullitt County. The City
Council of each respective City shall have the authority to rezone property
containing less than the above stated acreage with their boundary.
Section 8.302 Application Format
The zoning map application shall be in duplicate in such a form as prescribed by the
Planning Commission, and shall include:
a- A written statement, specifying the following:
1. The location of the land proposed to be reclassified, including the
street number, if any;
2. A description by metes and bounds, courses and distances, of the land,
or if the boundaries conform to lot boundaries within a subdivision for
which a plat is recorded in the county land records, a lot, block, and
subdivision designation with appropriate plat reference;
3. The present classification and classification proposed for such land;
* See Appendices A & B -104-
4. The name and address of the owner of the land;
5. The area of the land proposed to be reclassified, stated in square feet if
less than one (1) acre and in acres if one (1) acre or more.
b- An identification plat, prepared by a civil engineer, surveyor, or other
competent person, and certified thereon by him to be correct and in
conformity with this section, showing by metes and bounds, courses and
distances the land proposed to be reclassified, or if the boundaries conform
to boundaries within a subdivision for which a plat is recorded among the
county land records, then a copy of such plat, the land proposed to be
reclassified appearing in a color distinctive from that of other lands shown
on the plat.
c- A vicinity map, covering the area within at least one thousand (1,000) feet
of the boundaries of the land proposed to be reclassified showing the
existing zoning classification of all land appearing on the map.
Section 8.400 Planning Commission Recommendation and Fiscal Court Decision
After the public hearing the Planning Commission shall, by resolution, recommend or
reject the proposed zoning amendment and shall forward their recommendation to the
legislative body having jurisdiction. The Planning Commission shall also forward the
complete application record, including the transcript of the public hearing. At the
meeting of the legislative body having jurisdiction following receipt of the
recommendation from the Planning Commission, the legislative body having jurisdiction
shall proceed to consideration of the proposed zoning amendment. An application for the
Official Zoning Map or Text Amendment shall be decided on the basis of the evidence of
record. Such application shall be approved, denied, dismissed, withdrawn, or decided in
any manner as provided by Chapter 100 of Kentucky Revised Statutes. The legislative
body having jurisdiction may dismiss any such application if it finds that:
a- The application does not conform to any stated procedure requirement of
this Article;
b- The application is not acceptable for filing because filed within twelve
(12) months as hereinbefore provided, or;
c- The application is frivolous or filed for purposes of harassment.
-105-
If application is not dismissed or allowed to be withdrawn as herein provided, it shall be
approved, denied, or decided in any manner as provided by Chapter 100 of Kentucky
Revised Statutes. In any case, no application for the reclassification of all or any part of
the land which is the subject of the application shall be accepted for filing for twelve (12)
months following the date of such decision. No application for the Official Zoning Map
amendment shall be approved for a class of district other than that applied for. No
application for a map amendment shall be approved for a greater area than that applied
for, but an application may be approved for a smaller area than that applied for if the
reclassification of such smaller area is supported by the evidence or record and if such
smaller area is accurately delineated in the record. The decision of the Fiscal Court or
City Council concerned, on any application for an Official Zoning Map or Text
amendment shall be rendered within sixty (60) days of the original hearing (unless such
time is extended by resolution of the legislative body having jurisdiction) and shall be in
the form of a resolution adopted by the legislative body having jurisdiction in open
session by a majority of those voting on roll call by yeas and nays and appearing in the
minutes of the meeting. The resolution shall be promptly mailed by the Administrative
Official to the applicant and to all persons who appeared at the hearing as shown by the
hearing transcript.
-106-
ARTICLE 9 REGULATION PROVISIONS
Section 9.100 Interpretation
Section 9.200 Separability Clause
Section 9.300 Repeal of Conflicting Regulations
Section 9.400 Schedule of Fees, Charges and Expenses
Section 9.500 Effective Date
ARTICLE 9 REGULATION PROVISIONS
Section 9.100 Interpretation
In interpreting and applying the provisions of these regulations, said provisions shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of public health, safety, morals
and general welfare. Wherever these regulations require a greater width or size of yards
or open spaces or require a lower height of building or less number of stories or require a
greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied or require a lower density of population, or
require a more restricted use of land, or impose other higher standards than are required
in any other ordinance or regulation, private deed restrictions or private covenants, these
regulations shall govern, but if the requirements of the other ordinance, regulation,
private deed restriction or private covenant is more restrictive, then those requirements
shall govern.
Section 9.200 Separability Clause
If for any reason any one or more section, headings, clauses of parts of these orders are
held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect, impair or
in validate the remaining provisions, but shall be confined to the specific section,
headings, clauses or parts held invalid and the invalidity of any section, heading, clauses
or part of these orders in any one or more instances shall not affect or prejudice in any
way the validity of the orders in any other instance.
Section 9.300 Repeal of Conflicting Regulations
The existing zoning regulations now in effect in Bullitt County, Kentucky and each of the
Cities of Shepherdsville, Hillview, Lebanon Junction and Mount Washington, and in
conflict with the zoning regulations as they are established herein, are hereby repealed.
However, all suits at law or in equity and or all prosecutions resulting from violation of
any zoning regulations heretofore in effect, which are now pending in any of the Courts
of the State of Kentucky or of the United States, shall not be abated or abandoned by
reason of the adoption of these zoning regulations; but shall be prosecuted to their finality
the same as if these zoning regulations had not been adopted, and any and all violations
of existing zoning regulations, prosecutions for which have not yet been instituted, may
be thereafter filed and prosecuted; and nothing in these zoning regulations shall be so
construed as to abandon, abate, or dismiss any litigation or prosecuting now pending,
and/or which may have heretofore been instituted or prosecuted.
Section 9.400 Schedule of Fees, Charges & Expenses
The Fiscal Court of the County of Bullitt and each of the legislative bodies of the Cities
of Shepherdsville, Hillview, Lebanon Junction and Mount Washington shall establish a
schedule of fees, charges and expenses, and a collection procedure for building permits,
certificates of zoning compliance, appeals, and other matters pertaining to these
-107-
regulations. The schedule of fees listed below shall be posted in the office of the
Administrative Official, and may be altered or amended only by the local legislative body
having jurisdiction. No permit, certificate, conditional use permit, or variance shall be
issued unless or until such cost, charges, fees, or expenses listed below have been paid in
full, nor shall any action be taken or proceedings before the Board of Adjustment unless
or until preliminary charges and fees have been paid in full.
SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES & EXPENSES
ZONING TEXT AMENDMENT: $50.00
ZONING MAP AMENDMENT:
A- $50.00 R2- $125.00 B2- $250.00
SC- $50.00 R3- $150.00 IL- $300.00
C- $50.00 R4- $200.00 IG- $400.00
R1- $100.00 B1- $225.00 PUD- $250.00
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
CONDITIONAL USE: $50.00
DIMENSIONAL VARIANCE: $50.00
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
SITE PLAN REVIEW: Administrator Review: $50.00
Commission Review: $100.00
APPEAL EACH ADMINISTRATIVE STEP: $50.00
ZONING COMPLIANCE: $10.00
SIGN CERTIFICATION:
FREESTANDING AND ATTACHED BUSINESS:--$25.00
OUTDOOR ADVERTISING-----------------------------$50.00
WIRING PERMIT: $2.00
ZONING REGULATION BOOK: $10.00 each
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN BOOK: $25.00
-108-
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
BUILDING PERMITS:
Over Less Than Over Less Than
$ 0 $ 10,000 - $ 15 $ 100,000 $ 150,000 - $175
$ 10,000 $ 25,000 - $ 50 $ 150,000 $ 250,000 - $250
$ 25,000 $ 50,000 - $ 75 $ 250,000 $ 500,000 - $350
$ 50,000 $ 75,000 - $ 100 $ 500,000 $1,000,000 - $500
$ 75,000 $100,000 - $150 $1,000,000 and up - $750
LATE FEE: (Note: See page 121 for the latest text amendment on this section.)
In addition to the regular building permit fee, there shall be a LATE FEE, assessed by the
Administrative Official, of $10.00 for all building permits purchased after construction
has started.
Section 9.400 Schedule of Fees, Charges and Expenses (Revised)
The Fiscal Court of the County of Bullitt and the legislative bodies of the Cities of
Shepherdsville, Hillview, Lebanon Junction, Mt. Washington, and Hebron estates, shall
establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses, and a collection procedure for
building permits, zoning compliances, appeals, and other matters pertaining to these
regulations. The Schedule of fees listed below shall be posted in the office of the
Administrative Official, and may be altered or amended only by the local legislative body
having jurisdiction. No permit, zoning compliance, certificate, conditional use permit, or
variance shall be issued unless, or until such cost, charges, fees or expenses listed below
have been paid in full, nor shall any action be taken or proceedings before the Board of
Adjustment unless or until preliminary charges and fees have been paid in full.
Zoning Text Amendment: $200.00
Zoning Map Amendment:
The zoning map amendment fee for Agricultural, Conservation, Stream Reserve, R-1, R-
2, R-3 and R-4 zones are as follows:
Acreage Fee
.99 and under $100.
1.0 to 2.99 150.
3.0 to 4.99 200.
5.0 to 9.99 250.
-109-
10.0 to 14.99 300.
15.0 to 19.99 350.
20.0 to 24.99 400.
25.0 to 29.99 450.
30.0 to 34.99 500.
35.0 to 39.99 550.
40.0 to 44.99 600.
45.0 to 49.99 650.
50.0 to 54.99 700.
55.0 to 100.00 750.
100.0 to 149.99 800.
150.0 to 199.99 850.
200.0 and above $850. plus $10 per acre for
Every acre over 200
The zoning map amendment fee for B-1 Highway Business, B-2 Central Business, and
Planned Unit Development (PUD) zones are as follows:
Acreage Fee
.99 and under $200.
1.0 to 2.99 300.
3.0 to 4.99 400.
5.0 to 9.99 500.
10.0 to 14.99 600.
15.0 to 19.99 700.
20.0 to 24.99 800.
25.0 to 29.99 900.
30.0 to 34.99 1000.
35.0 to 39.99 1100.
40.0 to 44.99 1200.
45.0 to 49.99 1300.
50.0 to 54.99 1400.
55.0 to 100.00 1500.
100.0 to 149.99 1600.
150.0 to 199.99 1700.
200.0 and above $1700. plus $20. per acre for
each acre over 200
-110-
The zoning map amendment fee for IL Light Industrial, IG General Industrial and Earth
Products (EP) zones are as follows:
Acreage Fee
.99 and under $300.
1.0 to 2.99 450.
3.0 to 4.99 600.
5.0 to 9.99 750.
10.0 to 14.99 900.
15.0 to 19.99 1050.
20.0 to 24.99 1200.
25.0 to 29.99 1350.
30.0 to 34.99 1500.
35.0 to 39.99 1650.
40.0 to 44.99 1800.
45.0 to 49.99 1950.
50.0 to 54.99 2100.
55.0 to 100.00 2250.
100.0 to 149.99 2400.
150.0 to 199.99 2550
200.0 and above $2550 plus $30 per acre for
each acre over 200
Special Meetings:
Planning Commission: $1000.
Board of Adjustments: 600.
Printed Material:
Official Zoning Regulations $25.
Comprehensive Plan Book 25.
Subdivision Regulations 12.
Building Permit/Zoning Compliance:
New Buildings
Single family Dwelling $100.
Relocated single family dwelling 100.
Multi family dwelling 50. per unit
-111-
Building Permit/Zoning Compliance:
New Buildings
Row Houses 100. per unit
Mobile Home 100.
Garage/Accessory Bldgs. (attached and detached) 50.
Accessory Buildings (less than 200 sq. ft.) 25.
Commercial Building 400.
Industrial/Earth Products Buildings 500.
Public Facility 200.
Other (pools, carports, decks,dtc.) 15.
Additions or alterations to existing buildings, ½ the fee of a permit for a new building.
Sign Permits:
$1.00 per square foot of sign area
For signs exceeding 30’ in overall height, for which a variance has been granted by the
Board of Adjustments, the following fee schedule, based on height of the sign, will apply
in addition to the $1.00 per square foot of sign area.
Sign Height *Cost per linear foot of sign height
30.01’ to 50.00’ $100 per foot
50.01’ to 70.00’ $150 per foot
70.01’ to 85.00’ $200 per foot
85.01’ to 100.00’ $250 per foot
100.01’ and above $300 per foot
(*as measured from the finished grade of the earth,
immediately adjacent to the base, to the top of the sign face)
Plat /Survey Review Fee:
Plats/Surveys containing two tracts or less $25.00
Plats/Surveys containing 3 tracts or less $50.00
Plats containing 4 or more tracts $75.00 plus $10.00 per lot
Revision of Plat/Survey Review Fee:
Plats/Surveys containing two tracts or less $5.00
-112-
Revision of Plat/Survey Review Fee: (cont)
Plats/Surveys containing 3 tracts of less $10.00
Plats containing 4 or more tracts $25.00
Conditional Use Permits:
Conditional Use Permit application $125.00
Annual review fee for Conditional Use Permits $ 50.00
Temporary Conditional Use Permits $ 50.00
Dimensional Variance:
Variance applications fee $125.00
Appeals:
Appeal fee: $100.00
Site Plan Review Fee:
Site Plan Review fee $100.00
Late Fee and Penalty Fee:
In addition to the regular building permit and or compliance fee established herein, there
shall be a LATE FEE, assessed by the Administrative Official, for obtaining a building
permit and or compliance after construction has commenced of One Hundred Dollars
($100.00) minimum plus and additional Penalty fee of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00)
per day for each day, after the first day occurs without a building permit and or
compliance being issued with the total sum of these Late Fees and Penalty Fees not to
exceed One Thousand Dollars ($1000.00).
(See Appendix B- This section was approved under text amendment 94T-01)
Section 9.500 Effective Date
These regulations shall take effect and be in force immediately after their adoption and
legal publication.
Certified by the Planning Commission.
-113-
APPENDIX A
STATUS OF AMENDMENTS
The table below summarizes the status of some amendments to the zoning ordinance text not in effect in
parts of Bullitt County because of pending action by the appropriate legislative body. Portions of text
related to these amendments are briefly stated.
ACTION BY THE LEGISLATIVE BODY
A--approved
D--disapproved
P--pending
U--uncertain
SECTION SUBJECT DOCKET #
5.801 Slaughter in I-L Zone D A P D P U T-14-77
2.200 Beauty Shop as D A U A P U T-39-78
Home Occup.
5.701 Min lot in B-1 A A P A P P T-39-78
w/ sewers
4.402 Min lot w/ septic tank U A U U U A U
9.400 Fee Schedule A A D D U A T-1-79
Amendment
5.301-305 Administrative A A A A A A T-1-80
Correction to chart
of permitted uses
2.200 Definition of Farm A D A D D D T-1-81
2.200 Definition of Mobile D D A A D A T-2-81
Home
7.500 Penalties A D A A A A T-3-81
-114-
Commission Action
Fiscal Court
Mt. Washington
Shepherdsville
Lebanon Junction
Hillview
SECTION SUBJECT DOCKET #
2.200 Definition of A A A A A A T-4-81
Immediate Family
5.501 (b) -2 Mobile Home on Farms A A A A A A T-4-81
5.603 Side yard setbacks D A D A A D T-5-81
5.701 Single Family dwellings A A D A A D T-1-82
with commercial use
5.702 Single Family dwellings A A D A A D T-1-82
with commercial use
5.302 Chart for two Family A A D A A D T-1-82
dwellings
8.301 (c) acreage requirements A D A A A A T-2-82
for any incorporated city
5.501 (c) Changing of the word A A A D D D T-4-83
“subdivision” to
“division”
5.502 (a) Changing of the word A A A D D D T-4-83
“subdivision” to
“division”
5.603 Adding Row House A A A A A D T-5-83
Development
8.301 (c) Acreage requirements A D A D D D T-2-84
in Agricultural to R-1
2.200 Definition of Mobile A A D D D D T-2-85
Home
-115-
Commission Action
Fiscal Court
Mt. Washington
Shepherdsville
Lebanon Junction
Hillview
Appendix A (con’t.)
Section Subject
Planning Commission
Fiscal Court
Lebanon Junction
Mt. Washington
Shepherdsville
Hillview
Pioneer Village
Hunters Hollow
Hebron Estates
Fox Chase
Docket
No.
6.201 Conditional Use Procedure A A U A A A U A A U 89T-05
1.100 Name of regulations A A A A A A A A A A 91T-01
4.307 Projections into yard space A U U U U A U A U U 91T-02
7.303 Dimensional Variance A A A A A A U A U A 91T-03
9.400 Schedule of Fees, Charges
and Expenses
A A U A A A A A A A 94T-01
6.205 Conditional Use- Off
Street Parking
A A A A A A A A A A 94T-02
8.400 Planning Commission
Recommendation and
Fiscal Court Decision
A A U U A A A A A A 94T-04
2.200 Words and Terms Defined D U U A U A U U U U 95T-01
3.100 Zones D U U A U A U U U U 95T-01
4.700 Mineral Extraction and
Regrading
D U U A U A U U U U 95T-01
4.701 Procedure for Mineral
Extraction Operation
D U U A U A U U U U 95T-01
4.702 Development Standards D U U A U A U U U U 95T-01
4.703 Rehabilitation
Requirements
D U U A U A U U U U 95T-01
5.301 Natural Resources Uses D U U A U A U U U U 95T-01
5.303 Business Uses D U U A U A U U U U 95T-01
5.305 Public and Semipublic
Uses
D U U A U A U U U U 95T-01
5.800 Industrial Zones D U U A U A U U U U 95T-01
5.802 Permitted uses in IG zones D U U A U A U U U U 95T-01
9.400 Schedule of Fee, Charges
and Expenses
D U U A U A U U U U 95T-01
5.950 Earth Products Zone (new
section)
D U U A U A U U U U 95T-01
2.200 Words and Terms Defined D U U U U A U U U U 2001T-01
3.100 Zones D U U U U A U U U U 2001T-01
4.700 Mineral Extraction and
Regrading
D U U U U A U U U U 2001T-01
115A
4.701 Procedure for Mineral
Extraction Operation
D U U U U A U U U U 2001T-01
4.702 Development Standards D U U U U A U U U U 2001T-01
4.703 Rehabilitation
Requirements
D U U U U A U U U U 2001T-01
5.301 Natural Resources Uses D U U U U A U U U U 2001T-01
5.303 Business Uses D U U U U A U U U U 2001T-01
5.305 Public and Semipublic
Uses
D U U U U A U U U U 2001T-01
5.800 Industrial Zones D U U U U A U U U U 2001T-01
5.802 General Industrial, IG D U U U U A U U U U 2001T-01
5.950 Earth Products Zone D U U U U A U U U U 2001T-01
5.951 Rehabilitation
Requirements in EPA
Zone (new section)
D U U U U A U U U U 2001T-01
5.802 General Industrial, IG A U U A A A U U U U 2002T-01
5.801 Permitted uses in IL
zones
A U U A A A U U U U 2002T-01
5.801 Quantities of Flammable
Materials in Gallons
A A U U A U U U U U 2008T-01
5.801(f)(5)
5.801(f)(6)
5.802(f)(6)
5.802(f)(7)
(DELETED) Use, Storage
and Disposal of
Flammable Liquids or
Materials.
(Created new section
5.404)
A A U U U D D U D D 2009T-01
2.200 Words and Terms
Defined “Structure”
A A A A A A A A A A 2011T-02
115B
APPENDIX B
TEXT AMENDMENTS
The following amendments are in effect in certain incorporated cities in Bullitt County.
Please refer to Appendix A for status of these amendments.
Section 2.200 Definition of FARM (T-1-81)
A distinct bounded parcel of land containing ten (10) or more acres which is used for
farming operations.
In effect in: Mt. Washington
Section 2.200 Definition of MOBILE HOME (T-2-81)
A detached residential dwelling unit designed for transportation as one or more units after
fabrication, on streets or highways on its own wheels or on flatbed or other trailers, and
arriving at the site as one or more units where it is to be occupied as a dwelling complete
and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and minor assembly
operations, location on jacks or other temporary or permanent foundation, connections to
utilities, and the like. Mobile homes are built on a permanent, integral chassis and can be
used with or without a permanent foundation. Removal of the wheels and placement on a
foundation does not exempt a mobile home from all requirements applicable to mobile
homes of these regulations. Likewise, the joining of two or more units to form a single
dwelling does not exempt a mobile home from all requirements applicable to mobile
homes of these regulations. A travel trailer is not to be considered as a mobile home.
In effect in: Hillview, Mt. Washington, Shepherdsville
Section 7.500 Penalties (T-3-81)
Note: This amendment merely corrected an improper citation of the Kentucky Revised
Statutes. It is in effect throughout the county, and is included in the body of the text.
Section 5.603 (d) (2) Side Yard Setbacks (T-5-81)
Side yard – There shall be a minimum side yard on each side of any building or structure
of 10 feet measured from the side lot line to the nearest building or structure except that
garages or carports and accessory buildings and uses may extend an additional five (5)
feet into one side yard.
In effect in: Hillview, Mt. Washington -116-
Section 5.701 Single Family Dwellings with Commercial Use (T-1-82)
Note: Sections 5.701 (a) (82) and 5.701 (g) as found in the main text were not approved,
and therefore are not in effect in: Hillview, Mt. Washington.
Section 5.702 Single Family Dwellings with Commercial Use (T-1-82)
Note: Sections 5.702 (a) (9) and 5.702 (h) as found in the main text were not approved,
and therefore are not in effect in: Hillview, Mt. Washington.
Section 5.302 Chart for Two Family Dwellings (T-1-82)
Note: Section 5.302 as found in the main text permits two family dwellings in B-1 and
B-2 districts upon approved site plan review. This amendment was not approved, and
therefore is not in effect in: Hillview, Mt. Washington.
Section 8.301 Acreage Requirements for Cities (T-2-82)
Note: The last two sentences of Section 8.301 (c) were added by amendment and
approved by all the cities, although denied by Fiscal Court. Since Fiscal Court’s denial
had no effect on the enforcement of the new regulation (since it deals entirely with city
regulations), the amendment has been included in the main text.
Sections 5.501 and 5.502 Changing the word “subdivision” to “division” (T-4-83)
Note: Sections 5.501 (c) and 5.502 (a) of the main text refer to the “division of land” and
the “division of property” respectively. This amendment was not approved by all
jurisdictions. The previous phrases “subdivision of land” and “subdivision of property”
are still in effect in: Hillview, Lebanon Junction, Shepherdsville.
Section 5.603 Adding Row House Development (T-5-83)
Note: Section 5.603 (f) was added by amendment. This amendment was not approved,
and is not in effect in: Hillview.
-117-
Section 8.301 (c) Acreage Requirements in Agricultural to R-1 (T-2-84)
The zoning regulations or map shall not be amended, changed, or modified in such
manner as to create a freestanding zone of less than five (5) acres, except for B-1
Highway Commercial which may be as small as three (3) acres and except for
amendments from A Agricultural to R-1 Residential which may be as small as one (1)
acre where the Planning Commission finds that such an amendment is harmonious with
the surrounding land use and, thus in agreement with the community’s comprehensive
plan.
This acreage requirement for rezoning shall not apply within the municipal boundary of
any incorporated city within Bullitt County. The City Council of each respective City
shall have the authority to rezone property containing less than the above stated acreage
within their boundary.
In effect in: Mt. Washington.
Section 6.201 (89T-05) Conditional Use Procedure
Section 6.201 is amended to remove the requirement of the Planning Commission to
review applications for Conditional Use Permits. See Section 6.201 for complete text
amendment.
In effect in: unincorporated areas of Bullitt County as well as the cities of
Shepherdsville, Mt. Washington, Hillview, Hunters Hollow, and Hebron Estates.
-118-
Text Amendment 91T-01
Section 1.100
These regulations shall be known and referred to as the ‘Official Zoning
Regulations of Bullitt County’ and all cities within its boundaries and may be
cited as the County / City Zoning Regulations. Reference to County, or Bullitt
County, shall signify the county including all municipal corporations within its
boundaries, unless otherwise stated.
Each Section of the City / County Zoning Regulations which sets forth the
original four political divisions is amended to include all municipal corporations
************************************************************************
This text amendment was adopted by Bullitt Fiscal Court and the cities of Shepherdsville,
Hillview, Lebanon Junction, Mt. Washington, Pioneer Village, Hunters Hollow, Fox
Chase, and Hebron Estates.
-119-
Text Amendment 91T-02
Section 4.307
Steps, terraces, decks, carports, bay windows, fire escapes, balconies, open
porches, and other unenclosed architectural features, may extend into required
yard areas not more than nine (9) feet, provided that no such projection shall be
less than five (5) feet from a side lot line. Enclosing of such projections into yard
areas is prohibited, except within the City Limits of the City of Hillview, which
shall be controlled by the provisions of Section 5.602 (d).
Section 5.602
d. the following setback and yard requirements shall be observed:
2. Side Yards: there shall be a minimum side yard on each side of
any building or structure of fifteen (15) feet measured from the
side lot line to the nearest building or structure, except that garages
and accessory buildings may extend an additional ten (10) feet into
one side yard. This requirement the location of garages or carports
within the City Limits of the City of Hillview. This side yard
requirement within the City of Hillview on an addition which does
not extend into the side yard any further than the existing house
shall not require a variance; nor shall a garage or a carport which is
at least 18” from the side property line require a variance.
************************************************************************
This text amendment is in effect in the Cities of Hillview and Hunters Hollow.
-120-
Text Amendment 91T-03
Amendment to Section 7.303
Section 7.303 Dimensional Variance
The Board shall have the power to hear and decide on applications for dimensional
variances where, by reasons of the exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or unusual shape
of a site on the effective date of there zoning regulations or by reason of exceptional
topographic conditions, or some other extraordinary situation or condition of that site, the
literal enforcement of the dimensional requirements (height or width of building or size
of yards, but no populations density) of the zoning regulation would deprive the applicant
of reasonable capacity to make use of the land in a manner equivalent to the use
permitted other landowners in the same zone. The Board may impose any reasonable
conditions or restrictions on any variance it decides to grant. The following shall govern
the granting of a variance:
a. Applications for building line variances, for buildings which have been
constructed, or on which construction has been commenced before the
variance is applied for shall be accompanied by an additional minimum fee of
One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) and Ten Dollars ($10.00) per inch of any
variance requested for more than Ten (10 inches). This fee is non-refundable
unless the variance request is withdrawn. Any variance requested for an
existing building which was completed prior to the adoption of this regulation
shall be exempt from this fee requirement.
b. Before any variance is granted, the Board must find all of the following,
which shall be recorded along with any imposed conditions or restrictions in
its minutes and records and issued in written form to the applicant to
constitute proof of the dimensional variance.
1. The specific conditions in detail which are unique to the applicant’s
land and do not exist on other land in the same zone.
2. The manner in which the strict application of the provisions of the
regulation would deprive the applicant of a reasonable use of the land
in the manner equivalent to the use permitted other landowners in the
same zone.
3. That the unique conditions and circumstances are not the result of
actions of the applicant taken subsequent to the adoption of these
zoning regulations.
121
Text Amendment 91T-03 con’t.
4. Reasons that the variance will preserve, not harm the public safety and
welfare, and will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood.
c. The Board shall not possess the power to grant a variance to permit a use of
any land, building, or structure which is not permitted by the zoning
regulations in the zone in questions, or to alter density requirements in the
zone in question.
************************************************************************
This amendment is in effect in the unincorporated areas of Bullitt County and the cities of
Lebanon Junction, Fox Chase, Mt. Washington and Shepherdsville and Hillview, and
Hunters Hollow. No response from Hebron Estates, and/or Pioneer Village.
122
TEXT AMENDMENT 94T-01
SECTION 9.400 SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES & EXPENSES
LATE FEE & PENALTY FEE:
In addition to the regular building permit and or compliance fee established
herein, there shall be a LATE FEE, assessed by the Administrative Official, for obtaining
a building permit and or compliance after construction has commenced of One Hundred
Dollars ($100.00) minimum plus an additional Penalty Fee of One Hundred Dollars
($100.00) per day for each day, after the first day construction has commenced, on which
addition construction activity occurs without a building permit and or compliance being
issued with the total sum of these Late Fees and Penalty Fees not to exceed One
Thousand Dollars ($1000.00).
SECTION 2.200 WORDS AND TERMS DEFINED
The following section shall be added to this section:
Construction: The delivery, to the site, of materials which are to be incorporated
into subsequent improvements which are located on the site. This may include but is not
limited to; concrete, lumber, brick, steel, block/brick or other similar material.
************************************************************************
This text amendment was adopted by Bullitt Fiscal Court and the cities of Mt.
Washington, Shepherdsville, Hillview, Hunters Hollow, Fox Chase, Pioneer Village and
Hebron Estates.
123
TEXT AMENDMENT 94-T-02
ADDITION OF SECTION 6.205
SECTION 6.05 CONDITIONAL USE – OFF STREET PARKING
An off-street parking area may be allowed in a properly zoned area provided it
serves a demonstrable purpose benefiting the public welfare and when developed in
compliance with all the following listed requirements:
a. Walls, fences, or plantings shall be provided in a manner to provide
protection for and be in harmony with surrounding residential property.
b. The minimum front, street side, and side yards required in the zoning
district shall be maintained free of parking.
c. All driveways and the area used for the parking of vehicles shall be
surfaced with a hard and durable material and be properly drained.
d. All non-residential off-street parking facilities shall be designed with
appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in such a manner
as to minimize interference with traffic movement and shall be so
designed and located that vehicles shall not back from or into a public
street. Non-residential off-street parking facilities designed for vehicles
backing from or into an alley may be allowed at the discretion of the
Board of Adjustment.
e. The parking areas and spaces required by these regulations shall not be
used for the display, advertisement, sale, repair, dismantling or wrecking
of any vehicles, equipment or materials.
f. Building or structures shall be permitted for shelters for guards, attendants
or watchmen.
g. All off-street parking areas, except for those serving detached single
family uses and agricultural uses, shall be of a hard and durable surface
which limits or precludes particulate air pollution. Examples of such
surfaces are: Asphalt, brick or concrete paving and interlocking paver
blocks including those that retain space for vegetation (“Grasscrete” – type
products) are acceptable paving materials.
124
Text Amendment 94T-02 con’t.
h. The approval of all plans and specifications for all entrances, exits, and
lights shall be obtained from the appropriate government which is
responsible for traffic engineering prior to the public hearing on the
conditional use permit.
************************************************************************
This text amendment was adopted by Bullitt Fiscal Court and the cities of Mt.
Washington, Lebanon Junction, Shepherdsville, Hillview, Pioneer Village, Fox Chase,
Hebron Estates and Hunters Hollow.
125
TEXT AMENDMENT 2002T-01
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 5.801 AND 5.802
Section 5.801 a-40
Trailer storage, rental sales, assembly and manufacturing plant.
Section 5.802 a-9
Automotive, tractor, motorized farm implement assembly or manufacture
This amendment was approved by the cities of Shepherdsville, Mt. Washington and
Hillview.
-126-
127
Text Amendment 2008T-01
Current
5.801 (f) (6)
The storage and utilization of flammable liquids or of materials that produce flammable
or explosive vapors or gases shall be permitted on any lot in accordance with the
following table:
Total Permitted Quantities of Flammable Closed Cup Flashpoint in
Materials in Gallons in Degrees F.
Above Ground Below Ground
Class I Class I
Not Permitted 20,000 Below 100 Degrees F.
Class II Class II
1,000 40,000 Above 100 Degrees F. and
Below 140 Degrees F.
Class III Class III
5,000 80,000 Above 140 Degrees F.
Proposed
Total Permitted Quantities of Flammable Closed Cup Flashpoint
Materials in Gallons in Degrees F.
Above Ground Below Ground
Class I Class I
Not Permitted in A, B-1 20,000 Below 100 Degrees F.
B-2, IL and IG zones
subject to compliance
with the Kentucky Standards
of Safety administered by the
Kentucky Fire Marshal’s Office
Class II Class II
1,000 40,000 Above 100 Degrees F. and
Below 140 Degrees F.
Class III Class III
5,000 80,000 Above 140 Degrees F.
TEXT AMENDMENT 2009T-01
AMENDMENT TO SECTIONS:
5.801 (f) (5), 5.801 (f) (6),
5.802 (f) (6) and 5.802 (f) (7)
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE FISCAL COURT OF BULLITT
COUNTY, KENTUCKY:
SECTION ONE: Sections 5.801 (f) (5), 5.801 (f) (6), 5.802 (f) (6) and 5.802 (f) (7) shall
be deleted in their entirety.
SECTION TWO: There shall be created a new section as follows:
SECTION 5.404. USE, STORAGE AND DISPOSAL OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS OR
MATERIALS.
(a) All activities involving the use, storage and/ or disposal of flammable
liquids or materials which produce flammable or explosive vapors or gases
shall be provided with adequate safety and protective devices against
hazards of fire and explosion in accordance with the Kentucky Standards
of Safety administered by the Kentucky Fire Marshal’s Office and with
any other applicable state or local laws and regulations. In addition,
adequate fire fighting and suppression equipment and devices in
accordance with applicable standards and regulations shall be provided.
(b) All above ground storage shall be in enclosed, fireproof vaults if so
required by and in accordance with the Kentucky Standards of Safety
administered by the Kentucky Fire Marshal’s Office and with any other
applicable stated of local laws and regulations.
(c) The storage, utilization or manufacture of flammable radioactive and/or
explosive materials and products which decompose by detonation is
prohibited in all zones except General Industrial, “IG”.
(d) The storage and utilization of flammable liquids or of materials that
produce flammable or explosive vapors or gases shall be permitted on a
single lot in each zone only in quantities as set forth in the following table:
128
Total Permitted Quantites
Of Flammable Materials in Gallons
Class I Class II Class III
Zones
Above
Ground
Below
Ground
Above
Ground
Below
Ground
Above
Ground
Below
Ground
A 500 20,000 1,000 6,000 2,000 10,000
C <50 <50 1,000 1,000 1,000 2,000
SR <50 <50 1,000 1,000 1,000 2,000
R-1 <50 <50 1,000 1,000 1,000 2,000
R-2 <50 <50 1,000 1,000 1,000 2,000
R-3 <50 <50 1,000 1,000 1,000 2,000
R-4 <50 <50 1,000 1,000 1,000 2,000
B-1 1,500 20,000 1,000 40,000 3,000 40,000
B-2 1,000 20,000 1,000 40,000 3,000 40,000
IL 3,000 20,000 5,000 40,000 5,000 80,000
IG 3,000 20,000 5,000 40,000 5,000 80,000
PR <50 <50 1,000 2,000 2,000 5,000
PB <50 <50 1,000 2,000 2,000 5,000
EP 1,000 20,000 5,000 40,000 5,000 80,000
Closed Cup Flashpoint in Degrees F
Below 100 Degrees F Above 100 Degrees F
&Below 140 Degrees F
Above 140 Degrees F
All Zones Subject to Compliance With the Kentucky Standards of Safety
Administered By the Kentucky Fire Marshal’s Office.
SECTION THREE: This Ordinance shall take effect upon publication.
This text amendment was adopted by Bullitt Fiscal Court and the City of Shepherdsville.
This text amendment does not apply in any other cities in Bullitt County.
129
Text Amendment 2011T-02
The following definition of a “Structure” was added to Section 2.200 of the Official
Zoning Regulations of Bullitt County and All Cities within Its Boundaries. This
definition was taken from: KRS 100.111 (21).
“Structure” means anything constructed or made, the use of which requires a
permanent location in or on the ground or attachment to something having a
permanent location in or on the ground, including buildings and signs
Bullitt Fiscal Court Approved
City of Hillview Approved
City of Lebanon Junction Approved
City of Pioneer Village Approved
City of Shepherdsville Approved
City of Mt. Washington Approved
City of Hebron Estates Approved
City of Fox Chase Approved

SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
BULLITT COUNTY
KENTUCKY
MOUNT WASHINGTON, LEBANON JUNCTION,
SHEPHERDSVILLE AND HILLVIEW
BULLITT COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
Authority and Jurisdiction for
Subdivision Regulations---------------------------------------------- 1
ARTICLE I
TITLE, PURPOSES, INTERPRETATION,
AND SEVERABILITY
Section 100 Title ----------------------------------------------------------- 2
Section 101 Purposes ------------------------------------------------------ 2
Section 102 Interpretation ------------------------------------------------- 2
Section 103 Severability --------------------------------------------------- 2
Section 104 Subdivision Control ----------------------------------------- 3
ARTICLE II
DEFINITION OF TERMS
Section 200 General ------------------------------------------------------- 4
Section 201 Exclusions --------------------------------------------------- 4
Section 202 Subdivision -------------------------------------------------- 4
Section 203 Streets -------------------------------------------------------- 5
Section 204 Other Terms ------------------------------------------------- 5
ARTICLE III
PROCEDURE
Section 300 Introduction ------------------------------------------------- 7
Section 301 Distribution of
Proposed Final Plat ------------------------------- 7
Section 302 Approval of Final Plat ------------------------------------- 7
Section 303 Offer of Dedication May Be
Noted in Record Plan -------------------------------------- 9
ARTICLE IV
DESIGN STANDARDS
Page
Section 400 Location and Arrangement of Street -------------------- 10
Section 401 Street Intersections ---------------------------------------- 10
Section 402 Street Widths and Building Setback Lines ------------- 11,12
Section 403 Street Names ----------------------------------------------- 13
Section 404 Alleys -------------------------------------------------------- 13
Section 405 Blocks ------------------------------------------------------- 13
Section 406 Lots ---------------------------------------------------------- 13
Section 407 Storm Drainage -------------------------------------------- 14
Section 408 Land Subject to Flooding --------------------------------- 14
Section 409 Requirements for Utilities -------------------------------- 14
ARTICLE V
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Section 500 Purpose ------------------------------------------------------ 15
Section 501 Responsibility for Subdivision Plans -------------------- 15
Section 502 Monuments and Pins --------------------------------------- 15
Section 503 Street Requirements ---------------------------------------- 15
Section 504 Storm and Surface Drainage ------------------------------ 16
Section 505 Water --------------------------------------------------------- 16
Section 506 Street Signs -------------------------------------------------- 16
ARTICLE VI
PLATS AND DATA
Section 600 General Subdivision Information ------------------------ 17
Section 601 Final Plat ---------------------------------------------------- 17
Section 602 A Certificate by the Engineer ---------------------------- 19
ARTICLE VII
FEES, VARIANCES AND PENALTIES
Section 700 Hardship ----------------------------------------------------- 20
Section 701 Conditions --------------------------------------------------- 20
Section 702 Enforcement and Penalties for Violations -------------- 20
Section 703 Conflict with Other Laws --------------------------------- 21
Section 704 General Repealer ------------------------------------------- 21
Appendix A Certificate of Accuracy ------------------------------------ 22
Appendix B Final Subdivision Plat Check List ------------------------ 23
Appendix C Adoption, Amendment, and Effective Date ------------- 24
Amendments to Subdivision Regulations --------------------------------- 25
Authority and Jurisdiction For
Subdivision Regulations
These subdivision regulations were adopted under the authority granted by the
Kentucky Revised Statutes, Chapter 100, Section 100.273 through 100.307. The Bullitt
County Planning Commission which was established in accordance with the Kentucky
Revised Statutes, Chapter 100, Section 100.133 through 100.181 has fulfilled the
requirements set forth in the applicable section of the Kentucky Revised Statutes as
necessary for the adoption of such regulations.
These regulations provide a procedure and minimum standards of design
construction by which the Bullitt County Planning Commission can equitably appraise all
future proposed plats, for land subdivision plat preparation, review, and approval
requirements.
These regulations shall govern all subdivision of land within the boundaries of
Bullitt County, Kentucky, hereafter established; provided that if a developer has recorded
a subdivision plat prior to March 11, 1983, which is a part of a parcel of land owned by
that developer, he shall be permitted to develop remainder of said parcel as a subdivision
without complying with these subdivision regulations.
Any owner of land within Bullitt County who hereafter wishes to subdivide such
land or a portion there of shall submit a plat of the proposed subdivision to the Bullitt
County Planning Commission according to the requirements set forth in these
regulations.
1
ARTICLE I
TITLE, PURPOSES, INTERPRETATION, AND SEVERABILITY
Section 100 TITLE
These Regulations shall be known, cited and referred to as the Bullitt County
Subdivision Regulations.
Section 101 PURPOSES
The Regulations is enacted in order to promote the orderly development of Bullitt
County and all cities therein: to improve the present health, safety, convenience
and welfare of its citizens and to plan for the future development of the area to the
end, that highway systems be carefully planned, that new community centers
grow only with adequate highway, utility, health, educational, and recreational
facilities: that the needs of agriculture, industry and business be recognized in
future growth: that residential areas provide healthy surroundings for family life:
and that the growth of the community is commensurate with and promotive of the
efficient and economical use of public funds.
Section 102 INTERPRETATION
The provisions of these Regulations shall be held to be minimum requirements to
meet the above stated purposes. Where the provisions of these Regulations
impose greater restrictions than those of any statute, other ordinance, or
regulations, the provisions of these Regulations shall prevail. Where the
provisions of any statute, other ordinance or regulation impose greater restrictions
than those of these Regulations, the provisions of such statute, ordinance, or
regulation shall prevail.
Section 103 SEVERABILITY
The provisions of these Regulations shall be severable, and if any section, clause,
sentence, part or provision thereof shall be held to unconstitutional, illegal, or
invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision of the court shall not
affect the validity of any of the remaining sections, clauses, sentences, parts or
provisions of these Regulations.
2
Section 104 SUBDIVISION CONTROL
No subdivision of any lot, tract or parcel of land shall be effected, no street,
sanitary sewer, storm, water main, or other facilities in connection therewith shall
be laid out, constructed, opened, or dedicated for public use or travel, or for the
common use of occupants of buildings abutting thereon except in strict
accordance with the provisions of these Regulations.
3
ARTICLE II
DEFINITION OF TERMS
Section 200 GENERAL
Unless a contrary intention clearly appears, the following words and phrases shall
have for the purpose of these Regulations the meanings given in the following
clauses.
Section 201 EXCLUSIONS
1. For the purposes of these Regulations, words and terms used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
(a). Words used in the present tense include the future.
(b). The singular includes the plural.
(c). The plural includes the singular.
(d). The word “person” includes a corporation, unincorporated
association, or a partnership as well as the individual.
(e). The word “lot” includes the word “plot” or “parcel”.
(f). The term “shall” is always mandatory.
(g). The word “building” includes the word “structure,” and shall be
construed as if followed by the phrase “or part thereof.”
(h). The word “Commission” and the words “Planning Commission”
always means the Bullitt County Planning Commission.
(i). The word “street” means a public way for vehicular traffic,
whether designated as a court, boulevard, avenue, cul-de-sac,
expressway, highway, lane, and road, or however otherwise
designated.
(j). The word “city” always means any of the cities operating under the
Regulations including all the land area of Bullitt County.
(k). The word “watercourse” includes channel, creek, ditch, drain, dry
run, spring and stream.
Section 202 SUBDIVISION
“Subdivision” means the division of a parcel of land into three (3) or more lots or
parcels for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sales, lease or building
development, or if a new street is involved, any division of a parcel of land;
provided that a division of land for agricultural use and not involving a new street
shall not be deemed a subdivision.
The term includes re-subdivision and when appropriate to the context, shall relate
to the process of subdivision or to the land subdivided; any division or redivision
of land into parcels of less than one acre occurring within twelve (12) months
4
following a division of the same land shall be deemed a subdivision within the
meaning of this section.
Section 203 STREETS
1. A right of way dedicated to public use, which affords the principal means of
vehicular access to abutting property. A street may be designated as a
highway, thoroughfare, parkway, boulevard, street, road, avenue, land, drive,
place, or other appropriate name.
2. Street Types
a. Arterial- Highways that are designated or utilized primarily for high
vehicular speeds or for heavy volumes of traffic which connect two
major arteries.
b. Collector- Streets planned to facilitate the collection of traffic from
minor streets, and to provide circulation between neighborhood areas
providing convenient access to arterial highways.
c. Minor- Local streets designed primarily to provide access to abutting
properties and to carry limited volumes of traffic.
d. Marginal Access- Minor streets, parallel and adjacent to arterial
highways and serving to reduce the number of access points to the
arterial thereby increasing traffic safety.
Section 204 OTHER TERMS
1. Block: An area bounded by streets.
2. Building Setback Line: The line parallel to the street line at a distance
therefrom equal to the depth of the minimum required front yard.
3. Lot: A parcel of land fronting on a street and created by the subdivision of
an existing lot or parcel of record.
4. Plat, Final: A complete and exact subdivision plan, prepared for official
recording as required by statute, to define property rights, proposed
streets, rights-of-way, easements and physical improvements on and in the
land.
5. Right-of-Way Line: The dividing line between a street or road and a lot.
The right-of-way line is the same as the street line.
5
6. Subdivider: A person who is the owner, or authorized agent of the owner,
of land to be subdivided.
7. Yard, Front: An open space extending across the full width of the lot and
lying between the street line at the nearest point of the building.
8. Zoning Ordinance: The Ordinance adopted by the Bullitt County Planning
Commission.
6
ARTICLE III
PROCEDURE
Section 300 INTRODUCTION
The procedures hereinafter specified provide for a procedure for approval of a
final plat.
Section 301 DISTRIBUTION OF PROPOSED FINAL PLAT
The Planning Commission Administrator shall submit copies to the interested
public agencies and utility companies and invite written comments on the plan
and any specific factors regarding the plan from the agency, company, or affected
municipality.
Agencies to receive copies:
1. Gas and Electric Companies
2. Health Department
3. Kentucky Department of Transportation
4. Telephone Company
5. Water Company
6. Municipalities, if located in city limits
Section 302 APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT
A plat of a subdivision within the jurisdiction of the Planning Commission shall
not be recorded by the County Clerk unless and until it has first been approved by
the Planning Commission. The filing and recording of a plat involving the
subdivision of lands covered by these regulations shall be without legal effect
unless approved by the Commission: Provided, however, that failure to comply
with this Section shall not invalidate or affect the title to any land within the area
of such plat: And provided further, that if such plat shall bear the seal of the
Commission it shall be presumed to have been approved thereby.
A fee of $10.00 per lot with a maximum fee of $500.00 a minimum fee of $50.00
will be paid prior to the approval of the proposed final plat. The planning
Commission Administrator will review the material submitted for conformity to
these regulations and negotiations with subdivider on changes deemed advisable
and the kind and extent of improvements to be made by him. The Planning
Commission Adminstrator may approve the proposed final plat conditionally and
require amendments to the plat before granting full approval. If the subdivider
does not submit an acceptable amended plat within ninety (90) days on
submission of the original plat, the plat shall be deemed to be disapproved by the
Commission.
7
1. The action of the Commission including any conditions determined shall be
noted on two (2) copies of the proposed final plat. One (1) copy of the action,
and the plat shall be returned to the Subdivider, and the other retained by the
Planning Commission.
2. The Commission will require the proposed plans be reviewed and certified by
a registered engineer or land surveyor.
3. Improvements or Guarantee thereof. Before approving any final plat for
recording, the Planning Commission shall either require that all facilities
specified in Article IV and V hereof shall have been installed in strict
accordance with the standards and specifications of the Commission, or that
the Commission be assured by means of a proper contract and completion
guarantee, as set forth in this section, that the improvements will subsequently
be installed by the Subdivider.
4. Agreement to Complete Improvements. In all cases where the necessary
grading, paving and other street improvements required herein shall not have
been installed prior to final approval in strict accordance with the standards
and specifications of the Commission, the Applicant shall enter into a written
agreement with the Commission in the manner and form approved by the
Commission, wherein Applicant shall agree, to the extent applicable:
a. To construct, or cause to be constructed, at his own expense, all streets,
bridges, culverts, crosswalks, water systems, drainage facilities, street
signs, monuments, and other improvements shown on said subdivision
plan, all in strict accordance with standards and appropriate public
authority and within the time specified in said Agreement.
b. To make provision for qualified county official to inspect aforesaid
improvements to assure strict compliance with the City and County
standards and specifications.
c. The Subdivider shall provide a deed or subdivision covenant for the
maintenance of above mentioned improvements through a “maintenance
association” of owners in the subdivision or other guarantee until such
time as the City or County or other appropriate public authority shall
assume maintenance responsibility.
5. Conditional Approval of Final Plats. The Commission may approve a plat for
a subdivision in which the improvements and installations have not been
completed by the Applicant as required by these regulations provided that the
Subdivider enters into the Agreement described heretofore and provides a
property bond or agreement as specified in Section 302, Paragraph 4 which
shall:
8
a. Run to the city in which the subdivision is located or to the county if
located outside the corporate limits of a city.
b. Be in an amount determined by the Commission to be sufficient to
complete the improvements and installations in compliance with these
Regulations; to reimburse the city or county for reasonable legal,
engineering and inspection fees, and to obtain the easements required by
Section 405 thereof.
c. Be with surety satisfactory to the Commission.
d. Specify the time for the completion of the improvements and installations.
Any funds received from these bonds shall be used by the City or County only for
completion of the improvements and installations for which they were provided,
and without prior appropriation.
DEDICATION OF IMPROVEMENTS
Section 303 OFFER OF DEDICATION MAY BE NOTED IN RECORD
PLAN
Streets and other public improvements shown on a subdivision plan to be
recorded may be offered for dedication to the City or an appropriate governmental
agency by notation thereof of the plan, or the Subdivider may note on the plan, or
the Subdivider may note on the plan if such improvements have not been offered
for dedication to the City or an appropriate governmental agency.
9
ARTICLE IV
DESIGN STANDARDS
Section 400 LOCATION AND ARRANGEMENT OF STREETS
1. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets
shall conform to the street design standards in Section 402 as adopted or
amended, and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned
streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety and in
their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such
streets.
2. Local streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be
discouraged.
3. Dead-end streets (cul-de-sac), designed to be so permanently, shall be
provided at the closed end with a turnaround having an outside roadway
diameter of at least seventy (70) feet and a street right-of-way diameter of at
least one hundred (100) feet so the Planning Commission may approved an
alternate design such as a “T” or “Y” backround. Such streets shall be not be
longer that 1000 feet measured from its intersecting R.O.W. line to the outer
edge of the turnaround except where topographical or other conditions make
this limitation impractical. A suitable turnaround may be required by the
Planning Commission when a street is temporarily dead-ended over 150 feet
from its nearest intersection.
Section 401 STREET INTERSECTIONS
1. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred and fifty (150) feet
shall be avoided when practicable.
2. Streets shall be laid out to intersect at right angles wherever possible and in no
case shall they intersect with any other street at less than 75°.
3. Right-of-way lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a radius of
twenty-five (25) feet, or of a greater radius where the Planning Commission
may permit comparable cutoffs or chords in place of rounded corners.
4. No cross intersections of centerlines of other than minor, marginal access, or
cul-de-sac streets shall be closer than 800 feet apart, unless the Commission
deems otherwise.
5. Multiple intersections involving the junction of more than two streets shall be
avoided.
10
6. Grades at intersections shall be in conformance with Section 402, following.
7. Proper sight lines shall be maintained at all intersections of streets. Measured
from the intersecting street lines, these shall be a clear sight triangle from the
point of intersection indicted on the plan and maintained free and clear of
shrubs, structures, signs and other visual obstructions.
8. The intersection should be designed and graded to allow for proper drainage.
Section 402 STREET WIDTHS AND BUILDING SETBACK LINES
1. Half streets or one-way streets shall be prohibited, except where essential
to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the
other requirements of these Regulations. If circumstances render this
impracticable, adequate provision for the concurrent dedication of the
remaining half of the street shall be furnished by the Subdvider. Wherever
a half street is adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other half of the
street shall be platted within such tract.
2 Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing street of inadequate
right-of-way width, additional right-of-way width of the new section shall
be dedicated to conform to the standards established in Section 402.
3. Grades of streets shall conform as closely as possible to the original
topography and shall be designed to produce usable lots and reasonable
grades.
4. Grades of streets shall be arranged to obtain as many building sites as
possible at or above the grade of the street(s) abutting the building.
5. A centerline street profile of all proposed streets to include proposed
drains and complying with the design standards of Section 402 shall be
submitted to the Planning Commission Administrator.
11
Section 402 STREET DESIGN STANDARDS
Collector & Marginal
Street Classification Arterial Secondary Minor Access
Cul-de-
Sac
Minimum width of 60 feet 50 feet 50 feet 50 feet 100 feet
right-of-way:
Minimum width of 32 feet 20' width 20' width 20' width 70' width
pavement: 2' shoulder 2' shoulder 2' shoulder
2'
shoulder
Minimum radius of 400 feet 100 feet except 100 feet except
horizontal curves: for street inter- for street inter- ------- ------
section corners section corners
Minimum length of 200 feet, but 100 feet, but not 100 feet, but not 80 feet 70 feet
vertical curves as
not less
than less than 25 feet less than 25 feet
measured from center 50 feet for for crest curve for crest curve
line of right-of-way each 1% and 35 feet for and 35 feet for
algebraic sag curve for sag curve for
difference of each 1% algebraic each 1% algebraic
grade difference of difference of
grade grade
Minimum length of 300 feet 100 feet except 100 feet except 50 feet 50 feet
tangents between when excessive when excessive
reverse curves: grades may be grades may be
reduced to reason- reduced to reasonable
grades by able grades by
shortening tangent shortening tangent
Minimum allowable 5% 7% 12% * 12% * 12% *
grade:
Minimum grade 0.5% 0.5% 0.5% 0.5% 0.5%
for drainage:
Minimum site
over 300
feet 300 feet 100 feet 80 feet 80 feet
distance: as specific
case requires
*Grades greater than 12% will be permitted by the Planning Commission if recommended by Design Engineer. 12
Section 403 STREET NAMES
Subdivision streets shall be identified by proposed names. In case of proposed
streets which are clearly aligned with existing streets, these new streets shall bear
the name of the existing street. In no case shall they be duplicated.
Section 404 ALLEYS
1. Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts, except that the
Planning Commission may waive this requirement where other definite and
assured provision is made for service access, such as off-street loading,
unloading, and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed.
2. The width of any alley shall not be less than twenty (20) feet. With minimum
pavement of 18 feet.
3. Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable, shall be
provided with adequate turn-around facilities at the dead-end.
Section 405 BLOCKS
The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to:
e. Provisions of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the
type of use contemplated.
f. Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions.
g. Needs for convenient access, circulation, control, and safety of street
traffic.
h. Limitations and opportunities of topography.
Section 406 LOTS
1. Lot dimensions shall conform to the requirement of the Zoning Ordinance.
2. Every subdivided lot shall have adequate direct access to a public street.
3. Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where
essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries
or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation.
4. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines.
13
5. The size, depth, and width of parcels laid out or reserved for non-residential
use shall be in conformance with all the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.
Section 407 STORM DRAINAGE
1. Drainage facilities shall be provided:
a. To permit unimpeded flow of natural watercourses; and
b. To ensure adequate drainage of all points along the line of streets.
2. Inlets and manhole covers and frames shall conform to Kentucky Department
of Transportation standards.
3. Bridges and culverts shall have ample waterway and be designed to carry
expected flows.
Section 408 LAND SUBJECT TO FLOODING
1. Where land is located in the flood plain, such area shall be clearly marked.
2. Where a sufficient portion of a lot is above the 100 year flood plain to allow
construction of a residential structure above the 100 year flood plain, then a
structure can be built.
Section 409 REQUIREMENTS FOR UTILITIES
The subdivider is required to provide water, electric, and telephone utilities, in
and to the proposed subdivision where possible.
14
ARTICLE V
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Section 500 PURPOSE
1. The purpose of this article is:
a. to establish and define the public improvements which will be
required to be constructed by the subdivider as conditions for final
plat approval; and
b. to establish procedures for assuring compliance to these
requirements.
2. Every Subdivider shall be required to install the public and other
improvements listed in Sections 502 through 506 in accordance with the
public intent and the conditions and specifications noted.
Section 501 RESPONSIBILITY FOR SUBDIVISION PLANS
It shall be the responsibility of the Owner of every proposed subdivision, to have
prepared by a registered engineer or registered land surveyor, a set of subdivision
plans consisting of street centerline profiles and proposed drainage.
Section 502 MONUMENTS AND PINS
1. Concrete monuments at least thirty-six (36”) inches in length and four (4”)
inches in diameter or four (4”) inches square shall be set at least at the
point of beginning as shown on the plat.
2. Iron pin or iron pipe monuments not less that one-half inch in diameter
and not less that twenty-four (24”) inches in length shall be set at all lot
corners.
Section 503 STREET REQUIREMENTS
1. Grading: All streets, roads and alleys shall be graded by the
subdivider so that pavements can be constructed to the required
subdivision plans. In the case of electric transmission lines, the clearance
from the pavement to the nearest conductor shall meet the requirements of
the National Electrical Safety Code.
15
Section 503 Cont.
Preparation: Before grading is stated, the entire right-of-way area shall
be first cleared of all roots, brush, objectionable materials, all trees not
intended for preservation and stumps under paved material unless
adequate fill can be obtained. Such objectionable matter, as well as
similar matter from cuts shall be removed from the right-of-way and
disposed of in such a manner that it will not become incorporated in any
fills or be an obstacle in the way of drainage. Any fill material shall be
free from trash and unwanted foreign objects and be properly compacted.
2. The Subdivider shall provide for the complete construction of streets.
Where streets are proposed to be dedicated to the County or City, that
government is not required to accept said street until it has been inspected
by a qualified City/County Road Supervisor and approved.
3. Pavement: All streets shall have a concrete or asphalt type pavement
with no loose aggregate. Pavement width shall conform with the
dimension and data related to the street classification as described in
Section 402. The pavement specifications shall be designed to carry the
expected traffic loads and shall meet the following minimum standards—
2” compacted asphalt and 6” base of 6” concrete street. All subdivisions
with lots having less than five (5) acres must be paved with the
aforementioned asphalt or concrete standard; all other streets to have a
minimum of six (6) inch stone base.
Section 504 STORM AND SURFACE DRAINAGE
All drainage facilities shall be installed and the land graded for adequate drainage
as shown on the approved final plan, and Subdivision plan
Section 505 WATER
All water mains and lines shall conform to the appropriate utility system.
Section 506 STREET SIGNS
Street name signs shall be erected at all street intersections in all subdivisions.
16
ARTICLE VI
PLATS AND DATA
Section 600 GENERAL SUBDIVISION INFORMATION
General subdivision information shall describe or outline the existing conditions
of the site and the proposed developments as necessary to supplement the
drawings required below. This information may include data on existing
covenants, land characteristics, and available community facilities and utilities;
and information describing the subdivision proposal such as number of residential
lots, typical lot width and depth, business areas, protective covenants and
proposed utilities and street improvements.
Section 601 FINAL PLAT
1. The final plat shall be drawn in ink on tracing cloth or equally durable
material that is twenty-four by thirty-six (24x36) inches and be at a scale
of one hundred (100) feet to the inch. Where necessary, the plat may be
on several sheets accompanied by an index sheet showing the entire
subdivision. For large subdivisions, the final plat may be submitted for
approval progressively in contiguous sections. Primary control points,
approved by the engineer, or descriptions and “ties” to such control points,
to which all dimensions, angles, bearing, and similar data on the plat shall
be referred as set forth in Section 502. The final plat shall show the
following.
a. Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, easements, and
other rights-of-way and property lines of residential lots and other
sites; with dimensions in feet and hundredths of a foot, bearing of
deflection angles, and raddi, arcs, and central angles of all curves.
b. Name and right-of-way width of each street or other right-of-way.
c. Location, dimensions and purpose of any easements.
d. Number to identify each lot or site
e. Purpose for which sites, other than residential lots, are dedicated or
reserved.
f. Minimum building setback line on all lots and other sites.
17
Section 601 cont.
g. Location and description of monuments as devoted in Section 502.
h. Names of record owners of adjoining unplatted land.
i. Reference to previously recorded subdivision plats of the same
subdivision by record name, date, and number.
j. Certification by surveyor or engineer certifying to accuracy of
survey and plat.
k. Name and address of the owner; certification of title showing that
the applicant is the land owner or his authorized agent.
l. Plat by owner dedicating streets, right-of-way and any sites for
public use.
m. Notation stating title, acreage, number of lots, north point, and
date.
n. Signature blocks for:
1. Certification of engineer, Form A
2. The Planning and Zoning Administrator or Chairman of the
Planning Commission.
3. Statement of available water service.
4. Easement Acceptance, Form B.
o. Vicinity Map. A vicinity map shall be prepared at a scale of twothousand
(2,000) feet to the inch, indicating the relationship of the
proposed subdivision to existing facilities which serve it, such as
roads. Such a sketch may be shown on a U.S.G. S. map of the area
and shall be placed in the upper right hand corner.
p. Final Subdivision Plat check list to be submitted. (Form in
Appendix B)
18
Section 602 A CERTIFICATION BY THE ENGINEER
A certificate by the developers engineer certifying that a Subdivider has complied
with a, b, or c of the following:
a. All improvements have been installed in accord with the requirements of
these regulations, or
b. An Agreement as drawn by the Planning Commission Attorney has been
executed as stated in Section 302.
c. The Subdivider shall provide a deed or subdivision covenant for the
maintenance of above mentioned improvements through a “Maintenance
Association” of owners in the subdivision.
19
ARTICLE VII
VARIANCES AND PENALTIES
Section 700 HARDSHIP
If it is found by the Planning Commission that strict enforcement of these
regulations would create an undue hardship because of the extraordinary or
unique physical conditions that exist on the property to be subdivided, and which
are not found usually within the area or jurisdiction of these Subdivision
Regulations; any variance shall be to the extent necessary to provide relief for the
undue hardship. Financial disadvantage to the property owner shall not be sole
proof of hardship within the purpose of these regulations.
Section 701 CONDITIONS
In granting variances and modifications, the Planning Commission may require
such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the
standards or requirements so varied or modified.
Section 702 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS
ENFORCEMENT
1. No plat or plan of a subdivision of land located within the jurisdiction of
the Planning Commission shall be admitted to the records of county or
received or recorded by the County Clerk until said plat has received final
approval in writing on the final plat by the Planning Commission or the
Administrative Official as provided in the Kentucky Revised Statutes,
Chapter 100.277.
2. If any section, clause, paragraph, provision, or portion of these
Regulations shall be held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect any other section,
clause, paragraph, provision, or portion of these regulations.
PENALTIES
1. Any person or entity who violates any of the provisions of KRS 100.201
through 100.347 and 100.991 (2) or any of the regulations adopted
pursuant hereunder for which no other penalty is provided, shall upon
conviction be fined not less than ten (10) but no more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each conviction. Each day of violation shall
constitute a separate offence.
20
Section 703 CONFLICT WITH OTHER LAWS
Wherever the regulations made under authority of this article required higher
standards than are required in any other statute or local ordinance or regulation,
the provisions of the regulations made under authority of this article shall govern.
Whenever the provisions of nay other statute or local ordinance or regulation
impose other higher standards than are required by the regulations of this
ordinance, the provisions of such statute or local ordinance or regulation shall
govern.
Section 704 GENERAL REPEALER
All acts or parts of acts inconsistent with the provisions of this act are, to the
extent of their inconsistence, repealed.
21
APPENDIX A
A. Form “A” (on final subdivision plat)
CERTIFICATE OF ACCURACY
I hereby certify that the plan shown and described hereon is a true and correct
survey to the accuracy established by the Kentucky State Board of Registration
For Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors for subdivisions and that the
monuments have been placed as shown hereon to the specifications.
____________ (date) ________, 200___
________________________________
(signature of registered engineer or surveyor)
22
APPENDIX B
FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT CHECK LIST
(to be filed with the Planning Commission Minutes)
Name of Subdivision ______________________________________________________
Name of Major Subdivision, Date of Approval of Final –Plan
_______________________________________________________________________
Name of Minor Subdivision, ___________________________________Fee__________
Location ________________________________________________________________
Owner(s)________________________________________________________________
Address ___________________________________________________Tel.__________
Engineer or Surveyor ______________________________________________________
Address ___________________________________________________Tel.__________
Date Submitted ___________________________________________________________
Meeting Date ____________________________________________________________
INFORMATION & DOCUMENTATION CHECK LIST
______ Construction of Improvements Completed or Security Posted
______ Fee Paid
______ Certificate of Ownership and Dedication
______ Certificate of Accuracy
______ Statement of Available Water Services
______ Original Plat and Six Copies Submitted
______ Approved Drawing Size of 24”x36”
______ Maps at Scale of 1” = 100’ or Larger
______ Name of Subdivision on Plat
______ Name and Address of Owner(s) on Plat
______ Name and Seal of Engineer or Surveyor on Plat
______ Acreage of Tract for Subdivision
______ Date
______ Graphic Scale
______ North Point
______ Boundary Lines and Dimensions
______ Lot Lines and Dimensions
______ Setback Lines
______ Bearing and Radii of Curves
______ Name of Streets
______ Lot Numbers and House Numbers if Available
______ Names of Adjoining Property Owner (s)
______ Protective Covenants
______ Identification of Monuments
______ Street Right-of-Ways and Dimensions
Approval Given_________________________________________________________________
Refused, and Grounds for Refusal___________________________________________________
Any Requested Variances Granted Subject to Approval by Zoning Board of Adjustments_______
Zoning Board of Adjustments Approval Received ______________________________________
Date of Action of Planning Commission______________________________________________
Planning Commission Administrator or Chairman of Planning Commission__________________
23
APPENDIX C
ADOPTION, AMENDMENT, AND EFFECTIVE DATE
1. Before adoption of these Subdivision Regulations or any amendments thereto, a
public hearing shall be held by the Planning Commission. A public notice of the
time and place of the public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city and county in accordance with the Kentucky Revised
Statutes.
2. The Commission shall transmit its recommendation to the legislative bodies of
Bullitt County and of the cities of Lebanon Junction, Mount Washington,
Shepherdsville and Hillview.
3. These Subdivision Regulations shall take effect and be in force immediately upon
their adoption by the legislative bodies and publication of a notice of such
adoption.
4. Approved copies of these regulations will be available for a fee of $15.00.
ADOPTED BY:
Bullitt County Mount Washington_____________
Mayor
________________, 200___ ________________, 200_________
_______________________ _____________________________
County Judge Attest: City Clerk
_______________________ Shepherdsville _________________
Attest: County Clerk Mayor
Lebanon Junction _________________, 200_________
_______________, 200____ ______________________________
Attest: City Clerk
_______________________ Hillview ______________________
Mayor Mayor
__________________, 200________
_______________________ ______________________________
Attest: City Clerk Attest: City Clerk
24
AMENDMENTS TO SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
OF BULLITT COUNTY, KENTUCKY
Authority and Jurisdiction for Subdivision Regulations (Page 1)
These regulations shall govern all subdivision of land within the boundaries of Bullitt
County, Kentucky, hereafter established; provided that the developer has recorded a
subdivision plat of lots in the Bullitt County Clerk’s Office prior to March 11, 1983, he,
his assigns and successors, shall be permitted to develop the remainder of said parcel as
subdivision regulations. The recording of a subdivision plat of lots, on or before March
11, 1983, for one or more sections of a development purchased prior to March 11, 1983,
will remove any remaining unrecorded section(s) of that development from under the
purview of these regulations.
Section 302
3. Improvements or Guarantee Thereof. Before approving any final plat for
recording, the Planning Commission shall either require that all facilities
specified in Article IV and V hereof shall have been installed in strict
accordance with the standards and specifications of the Commission, or that
the Commission be assured by means of a proper contract and completion
guarantee, as set forth in the section, that the improvements will be installed
by the Subdivider no later than three (3) years after approval of the final plat.
25

 
 
 
 




 


