CODE OF ORDINANCES OF BASTROP, LOUISIANA 
____________ 
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY 
____________ 
Adopted, February 9, 1989 
____________ 
Published in 1989 by Order of the Mayor and Board of Aldermen 
____________ 
 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF BASTROP 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
John S. Bond 
Mayor 
____________ 
Mrs. Jerry Jordan 
Zane Tubbs 
Louis T. Beckworth 
Mrs. Julia S. Smith 
Arthur H. Hamlin 
Board of Aldermen 
____________ 
Charles G. Gladney 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Tina Babb 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the ordinances of the City of Bastrop of a general and permanent nature. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1966 Code, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the governing body. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this volume, the reader can locate any section of the Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state laws have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this volume. 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 5 is numbered 5-1 and the tenth section of Chapter 7 is 7-10. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between sections 8-3 and 8-4 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 8-3.1, 8-3.2 and 8-3.3 respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 9 and 10, it will be designated as Chapter 9.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Indices 
The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by municipal officers and employees. There are numerous cross references within each index which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this Code to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the Code. With this system, the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Successfully keeping this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
The publication of this Code was under the direct supervision of B. Meade White, Supervising Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Charles G. Gladney, City Attorney, and Ms. Tina Babb, City Clerk, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this Code. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
ORDINANCE NO. 89-3429 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF BASTROP, LOUISIANA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND BOARD OF ALDERMEN OF THE CITY OF BASTROP: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Bastrop," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 20, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before October 26, 1988, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six (6) months or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the municipal court. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the governing body to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after October 26, 1988, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective after publication according to law. 
Passed and adopted by the mayor and board of aldermen this 9 day of February, 89. 
/s/John S. Bond 
Mayor 
/s/Tina Babb 
Clerk  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
ACT NO. 253 
House Bill No. 577       By Mr. Carter 
AN ACT 
To amend, revise, renew, and re-enact the special legislature charter of the City of Bastrop, Louisiana, in the Parish of Morehouse; to classify Bastrop, Louisiana, as a city, to define the boundaries of the City of Bastrop, Louisiana, to provide for the administration of its affairs, to define its powers and those of its officers, to change the name of the Municipal Court of the Town of Bastrop, and to repeal Act No. 219 of 1924, Act No. 96 of 1932, and Act No. 19 of 1940, and all acts and portions of acts inconsistent or in conflict herewith. 
Whereas, Due notice of the intention to introduce this Act has been published in accordance with Section 6 of Article IV of the Constitution of the State of Louisiana and satisfactory proof of said publication exhibited to the Legislature; 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The charter of the city is set out as enacted and as amended, except that explanatory matter has been inserted in brackets where deemed necessary and obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. Capitalization and style have been made uniform. 
The table in Wests' Louisiana Statutes Annotated indicates that the original charter was enacted in the 1st session of 1875 as Act No. 38; it was amended in 1878 by Act No. 63, in 1924 by Act No. 219, in 1932 by Act No. 96, and in 1940 by Act No. 19. Other special Acts specifically affecting the city are No. 511, 1950, General Hospital, lease; No. 577, 1960, municipal planning; and Nos. 23, 624 and 4, of 1972, 1979, and 1981 extra session, respectively, pertaining to the Firemen's Pension and Relief Fund. 
 
Section 1. - Incorporation and boundaries. 
Be it enacted by the Legislature of Louisiana, that all inhabitants within the corporate limits of the present "Town of Bastrop" in the Parish of Morehouse, State of Louisiana, embraced within the following limits, to wit: 
From the south one-quarter (¼) corner of Section 31, Township 21 North, Range 6 East, Morehouse Parish, Louisiana, and the point of beginning, run west with the south line of said Section 31, and the south line of Section[s] 36 and 35, Township 21 North, Range 5 East, to the south one-quarter (¼) corner of said Section 35, thence north with center line of said Section 35, one-half (½) mile to the center of said Section 35, thence west one-half (½) mile to the west line of said Section 35, thence north with west line of said Section 35, approximately one-half (½) mile to the south line of Section 42, Township 21 North, Range 5 East, thence west with the line between Sections 34 and 42, Township 21 North, Range 5 East, to the southwest corner of said Section 42, thence north with the line between Sections 42 and 34 to the north line of Section 34, thence west with the line between Sections 34 and 27, Township 21 North, Range 5 East, to the east line of Section 41, Township 21 North[,] Range 5 East, thence south with the east line of Section 41, to the southeast corner of same, thence west with the line between Sections 41 and 34, to a point where the north and south center line of Section 34 intersects the south line of Section 41, thence north with projection and continuation of center line of Section 34, into Section 41, to a point where same intersects the center line of Wilson Street, thence northeast with the center line of Wilson Street to the east line of said Section 41, thence north with the east line of Section 41, to a point where same intersects the center line of Horse Bayou, thence northeasterly with the center line of Horse Bayou to a point where same intersects the north line of the southwest quarter of northwest quarter (SW ¼ of NW ¼) of Section 23, Township 21 North, Range 5 East, thence east with the north line of the southwest quarter of northwest quarter (SW ¼ of NW ¼) and the southeast quarter of northwest quarter (SE ¼ of NW ¼) of Section 23, and the north line of the south half of the northeast quarter (S 1/2 of NE ¼) of said Section 23 and continuing east on the north line of the south half of the north half (S 1/2 of N 1/2) of Section 24, Township 21 North, Range 5 East and continuing east into Township 21 North, Range 6 East, on the north line of the south half of the northwest quarter (S 1/2 of NW ¼) Section 19, Township 21 North, Range 6 East, to the northeast corner of same, which point is on the north and south center line of said Section 19, thence south with the center line of Sections 19 and 30, Township 21 North, Range 6 East, to the southeast corner of the northeast quarter of the northwest quarter (NE ¼ of NW ¼) of said Section 30, thence east with the north line of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of said Section 30 to the northeast quarter of said Section 30 to the northeast corner of same, thence south corner of the north half (N 1/2) thereof, thence east with the north line of the south half of the southeast quarter of the northeast quarter (S 1/2 of SE ¼ of NE ¼) of said Section 30 to the east line of said Section 30, thence south with the east line of said quarter section to the northwest corner of northwest quarter of southwest quarter (NW ¼ of SW ¼) of Section 29, Township 21 North, Range 6 East, thence east with the north line of said northwest quarter of southwest quarter (NW ¼ of SW ¼) of Section 29 to the northeast corner of same, thence south with the east line of the west half of the southwest quarter (W 1/2 of SW ¼) of said Section 29 to the south line of said Section 29, thence west with the south line of Sections 29 and 30 to the south quarter corner of Section 30, thence south with the north and south center line of Section 31, Township 21 North, Range 6 East, to the point of beginning, shall continue to be a municipal corporation and body corporate and shall be classed as a city and known by the name and style of "City of Bastrop."  
Section 2. - Extension and contraction of boundaries. 
The boundaries of the City of Bastrop may be extended and contracted from time to time as provided by the general laws of the state.  
Section 3. - Capacities. 
The City of Bastrop shall have the capacity and power: 
(1)  To sue and be sued, defend and be defended, implead and be impleaded in all courts and places whatsoever. 
(2)  To purchase, accept, receive by donation or otherwise, and sell or otherwise dispose of immovable and movable property within or without the corporate limits for parks, cemeteries, hospitals, school houses, houses of correction, utilities, sewers, and all other municipal purposes. 
(3)  To make all contracts and to do all other acts in relation to the property and concerns of the municipality necessary to the exercise of its corporate or administrative powers. 
(4)  To exercise such other and further powers as are herein conferred and recognized.  
Section 4. - General powers. 
The City of Bastrop shall have and may exercise all the powers, rights, privileges, and immunities which are now or may hereafter be or could be conferred upon cities of its population class by the Constitution and general laws of the state; all powers, rights, privileges and immunities heretofore conferred on said city by any special act and not inconsistent with this Act; and all other powers pertinent to the government of a city the exercise of which, in the opinion of the mayor and board of aldermen, are necessary or desirable to promote the general welfare of the city and the safety, health, peace, good order, comfort, convenience and morals of its inhabitants, as fully and completely as though such powers were specifically enumerated in this Act, and no enumeration of particular powers in this Act shall be taken to be exclusive, but shall be held to be in addition to this general grant of power.  
Section 5. - Enumerated powers. 
In addition to the powers and capacities granted by other sections of this Act, the City of Bastrop shall have power: 
FINANCIAL POWERS 
(1)  Taxation. To assess, levy and collect taxes, license taxes and fees of such nature and amount and in such manner as is now and may hereafter be authorized and provided by the Constitution and general laws of the state, and to expend the same in the manner and subject to the limitations, provided by law for any municipal purpose except as the proceeds of such taxes, license taxes or fees are allocated by law to some specific purpose. 
(2)  Borrowing. To borrow money for the purpose of carrying out any of the powers and duties of the city within the limits and in the manner provided by the Constitution and general laws of the state. The mayor and board of aldermen may borrow money to meet current expenses, but in so doing, the debt so incurred, added to the current debt of the year, shall not exceed the sum which the levy of the taxes for the year may raise. 
(3)  Acceptance of gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests or grants from any source for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the city or the welfare of the inhabitants thereof, and provide for the care and investment of trust funds. 
(4)  Grants to the United States government. To advance money duly appropriated for the purpose to the United States of America or any department or agency thereof in accordance with federal statutes [statutes] and regulations when necessary to secure federal cooperation in projects beneficial to the city or its inhabitants. 
(5)  Special assessments. To assess the whole or part of the cost of opening, improving, grading, constructing, reconstructing, paving, and repaving of streets, alleys, or other public ways, and of the construction and reconstruction of curbs, gutters, sidewalks, sewers and drains, upon the owners of properties abutting on such improvements. The cost of such improvements may be defrayed by levying and collecting local or special assessments on real property in the manner provided by the general laws of the state. 
POWERS RELATING TO PUBLIC WORKS, 
UTILITIES AND PROPERTIES 
(6)  Acquisition and alienation of property. To acquire for any municipal purpose ownership of or a lesser interest in or to property within and without its boundaries by purchase, gift, devise, lease or expropriation and to hold, manage, control, and sell or lease such property as its interest may appear; provided that no real estate shall be sold by the city except at public sale. The procedure for expropriation shall be [as] provided by law. 
(7)  Establishment and maintenance of streets, etc. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, close, vacate, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, plants and shrubs, and otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, water and light streets, highways, boulevards, alleys, public squares, bridges, viaducts, and underpasses, and construct and improve sidewalks within the city. 
(8)  Obstruction of and encroachments over, under, or in streets, sidewalks, etc. To permit encroachment over, under or in any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place, where such encroachment does not adversely affect the public interest, upon such conditions, including regulation of the construction, suspension, and, if necessary, the removal of awnings, signs, lights, marquees, balconies or other structures projecting from buildings, as may be established by ordinance, and to provide for charges to be paid for such privilege. 
(9)  Cutting of streets, sidewalks, curbs, etc. To establish the purpose for which and conditions under which any person, firm, corporation, or department or agency of the city will be permitted to cut the surface of any street, alley, sidewalk, gutter, curb, or other public place. 
(10)  Franchise for use of streets, etc. To grant franchises for the use of the streets, alleys, sidewalks, or other public places of the city by any public utility for its pipes, conduits, rails, poles, wires, cars, busses and other facilities on such conditions and for such term, conformable to the Constitution and law of the state, as mayor and board of aldermen may determine. 
(11)  Regulation of location of pipes and wire-carrying poles. To regulate the location of pipes and wire-carrying poles in the streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public places of the city; to regulate the stringing of wires on such poles; and to compel the removal of such poles and the placing of such wires beneath the ground wherever in the opinion of the mayor and board of aldermen the public interest shall so require. 
(12)  Regulation of public passenger carriers. To regulate the type, size, weight, arrangement, construction and operation of busses, and other vehicles carrying passengers for hire, to insure safety in the streets and the comfort and safety of passengers. 
(13)  Regulation of electric and gas power. To fix the quality as to heating and lighting power and pressure of gas to be sold within the city; to regulate as far as may be necessary in the public interest the delivery of such gas to the consumers thereof; and to inspect all gas meters. 
(14)  Sewerage disposal and drainage facilities. To construct, maintain and operate within and without the city, sewers, drains, ditches, canals, and sewerage disposal works, and to make charges for the privilege of connecting with and using the sewer system of the city. 
(15)  Waterworks, electric plants, and gas plants. To erect, purchase, expropriate, maintain, and operate waterworks, electric plants, and gas plants within or without its corporate limits, with the pipe and transmission lines incident thereto, for the purpose of supplying water, gas, and electricity within and without the city, to charge and collect compensation therefor, and to provide penalties for unauthorized use thereof; or to contract with any person for the erection and/or maintenance and operation of waterworks, electric plants, or gas plants for terms not exceeding twenty-five (25) years and subject to regulation and fixing of rates by the city or the public service commission as provided by law. No contract for the erection, purchase, or maintenance and operation of waterworks, electric plants or gas plans shall be entered into until submitted to a vote of the qualified electors and approved by a majority of those voting. 
(16)  Regulation of railroads. To determine and designate the route and grade of any railroad to be laid in the city; to regulate the use of locomotives and cars upon railroads; to prohibit railroad cars and locomotives from standing across rail crossings; to compel any railroad to station flagmen and to maintain lights, safety devices and/or let-down fences, and warnings at street crossings; to compel railroads to erect and maintain bridges and viaducts over or underpasses beneath their tracks at street crossings, wherever the same are necessary, in accordance with the general laws of the state; and to make such other rules and regulations concerning such railroads as may be necessary for the safety of citizens of the city. 
(17)  Collection of disposal of garbage. To collect and dispose of garbage and refuse; to acquire, maintain, own and operate facilities for the disposal of the same within and without the city; and regulate the business of scavengers. 
(18)  Hospitals and library. To acquire, construct, own, lease, maintain and/or operate within or without the city a hospital or hospitals and a public library and all appurtenances appropriate thereto and provide for its or their management and control by delegation of authority to a board or boards of citizens or otherwise. 
(19)  Airports. To acquire, construct, own, maintain and/or operate within and without the city, airports and all appurtenances and concessions appropriate thereto; provide for their management and control either by the board of aldermen or by officers of the city or by a special board or commission of citizens appointed by the mayor and board of aldermen; make charges for the use thereof or any of the appurtenances thereof, operate concessions thereat; or lease any such airport or any of its appurtenances or concessions on such terms as the mayor and board of aldermen may determine. 
(20)  Recreation facilities. To acquire, construct, own, maintain, and/or operate, within and without the city parks, playfields, athletic fields, swimming pools, and other facilities for sport and recreation; make reasonable charges for admission to or use of such sport facilities; and operate/or lease concessions in such facilities. 
POWERS RELATING TO THE PRESERVATION OF THE PUBLIC 
PEACE, GOOD ORDER, SAFETY, HEALTH AND MORALS 
(21)  In general. To make all needful police regulations necessary for the preservation of the public peace, good order, safety, health and morals of the municipality and to prevent injury to, destruction of, or interference with public or private property. 
(22)  Prevention of disturbances. To make all necessary regulations to prevent routs, riots, mobs, other disturbances and disorderly conduct in the streets and elsewhere in the city. 
(23)  Prevention of vice. To make all necessary regulations, not in conflict with the laws of the state, for the prevention of vice, immorality, prostitution, and the sale and use of narcotic drugs, including the prohibition of the use of any building or premises for any of the above purposes, and the regulations and control of taverns, bars, and other places where intoxicating liquors are sold. 
(24)  Suppression of drunkenness and vagrancy. To make all necessary regulations for the suppression of drunkenness and vagrancy. 
(25)  Prevention and prohibition of gambling. To make all necessary regulations for the prevention and prohibition of gaming for money or property, by any method or device, including lotteries or raffles for the drawing or disposing of money or property of any kind; provide for the confiscation and destruction of all mechanical devices or other movable property used in connection with gaming for money or property; and to prohibit the use of any building or premises for any of the above purposes. 
(26)  Regulation of entertainment businesses. To regulate all commercial theaters, motion picture houses, shows, exhibitions, amusements, games and entertainments, and the buildings or premises in which they are offered. 
(27)  Regulation of places of public assembly. To make all necessary regulations for the protection of public safety and order in all places of public assembly. 
(28)  Regulation of peddlers, etc. To regulate all peddlers and itinerant vendors, all public auctions, pawnshops, loan offices, secondhand dealers and junk shops. 
(29)  Prevention of desecration of Sabbath. To make all necessary regulations to prevent desecration of the Sabbath Day. 
(30)  Prohibition of exhibition or sale of indecent or obscene material and shows. To prohibit the sale or exhibition of indecent or obscene pictures, posters, drawings, engravings, paintings, and books, and all indecent or obscene exhibitions or shows of any kind, the fighting of gamecocks, and disturbing noises in the streets. 
(31)  Regulation of sound trucks and billboards. To regulate the use of sound trucks, the crying of goods in the streets and the exhibition of signs in or upon any vehicle standing or moving therein, and the location, size and construction of billboards. 
(32)  Fire prevention regulations. To regulate the construction, maintenance and repair of buildings and other structures, including fences and partition or parapet walls, and the plumbing, electrical, heating, elevator, escalator, boiler, unfired pressure vessel, and air conditioning installations in any buildings, building, or premises, for the prevention of fire and other dangers to life and health. The standards of construction adopted under this subsection may be classified in accordance with the uses of buildings and their location in the city, provided that no buildings shall be occupied for a use requiring a better type of construction than the use for which the building was constructed until such building has been altered to conform to such higher standard. 
(33)  Building permits. To require that plans and specifications of any buildings or of any addition or alteration thereto, including plans for electrical, plumbing and other installations for which regulations have been adopted in accordance with subsection 32 above, be submitted to the proper city official and a building permit secured before the construction, addition or alteration is begun; to require the payment of a reasonable fee for such permit before the issuance of the same; to require permits for electrical, plumbing and other installations for which regulations have been adopted in accordance with subsection 32 above; and to require the inspection of such building addition, alteration or installation therein, to secure the enforcement of the regulations above provided. 
(34)  Regulation of other fire hazards. To make all necessary regulations concerning the construction, setup and operation of furnaces and stoves, all practices on the part of owners or occupants of buildings and premises likely to increase the danger of fire or the damage to persons and property arising therefrom, and the operation of stationary engines and boilers. 
(35)  Regulation of handling of explosive and inflammable substances. To regulate and, if necessary, prohibit the manufacture, transportation, storage and sale of gunpowder, fireworks, gasoline, liquefied petroleum gases and other explosive, inflammable or otherwise dangerous substances, and the exercise of any dangerous, offensive or unhealthful business, trade or establishment. 
(36)  Zoning regulations. To regulate and restrict the height, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures; the size of lots and the percentage of a lot that may be occupied; the depth of front and rear yards and width of side yards; the location and use of buildings, structures and land for trade, industry, residence or other purposes; to divide the city into districts of such number, shape and area as may be best suited to carry out the purposes of such regulations, and be within such districts to regulate and restrict the erection, construction, alteration or use of buildings, structures, or land provided that all such regulations shall be uniform for each class or kind of buildings within each district, but the regulations of one (1) district may differ from those in other districts; and for the execution of these powers to make use of the procedure established by general law. 
(37)  Approval of tract subdivisions. To provide that any person desiring to subdivide a tract of land within the corporate limits, or to be included therein, shall submit a plan and map of such subdivision to the mayor and board of aldermen to be approved by them before the same shall be filed for record in the official records of the parish. 
(38)  Regulation of callings, trades, professions and occupations. To regulate all callings, trades, professions, and occupations conducted, pursued, carried on or operated within the limits of the city in accordance with the general law of the state. 
(39)  Regulation of taxicabs. To grant permits for the use of the streets by taxicabs and other vehicles carrying passengers or goods for hire; to limit the number of such vehicles; and prescribe the conditions on which such permits shall be granted, the qualifications of drivers, and the rates to be charged by taxicabs and other vehicles for hire. 
(40)  Regulation of traffic. To regulate the speed of automobiles and other vehicles, including busses, trolley busses and railway locomotives and cars, on or across the streets of the city; to make all necessary regulations for the control of traffic, including the designation of one-way streets, the limitation or prohibition of parking, and the installation, maintenance and operation of parking meters; and to make all other regulations of the use of the streets necessary to insure the free movement of traffic therein. 
(41)  Health regulations. To make regulations, not in conflict with the laws of the state, for the maintenance of cleanliness and sanitary conditions within the city, and to prevent the introduction and spread of contagious diseases; regulate the construction, installation, maintenance and condition of all water and sewer pipes, connections, toilets, water closets and plumbing fixtures of all kinds; regulate the construction and use of septic tanks and dry closets where sewers are not available; compel the use of sewers; the connection of premises therewith where a sewer is available in an adjacent street or alley, and the installation in such premises of suitable sanitary facilities; regulate or prohibit connections to and use of sewers; and to act in conjunction with the police jury and health officers of the parish in executing such regulations. 
(42)  Regulation of animals. To prevent the running at large of dogs, other animals, and poultry; regulate or prohibit the keeping of other animals and poultry within the limits of the city; to require the licensing of dogs; and to provide for the impounding or destruction of stray, dangerous or vicious dogs or other animals. 
(43)  Removing of weeds, etc., from sidewalks and other places. To require the cutting, destruction and removal of noxious weeds, grass or deleterious, unhealthy or noxious growths on any lot or place or sidewalk within the city, and upon the failure of the owner of such lot or place or of the property abutting on such sidewalk to cut or remove such weeds, grass or growth, the city may cut and remove the same and charge and collect from such owner the cost thereof as provided by law.  
Section 6. - Enforcement provisions. 
The City of Bastrop may provide suitable penalties, not exceeding a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or both, for any one (1) offense, for the violation of any of the regulatory ordinances which it is authorized to enact under this Act; however, in the cases of operating a vehicle while intoxicated, reckless operation of a vehicle, and hit and run driving, the penalties may exceed such limits but shall not exceed the penalties authorized for violation of such state crimes. Such offenses shall be cognizable by the City Court of Bastrop or any other court of competent jurisdiction. The city may also require licenses or permits whenever such requirement will facilitate the enforcement of any regulatory ordinance enacted under the provisions of this Act or any law. The city may contract with the police jury of Morehouse Parish, which is empowered in the premises, for the use of the parish jail by the municipality. 
(Act No. 127(H.B. No. 1178), 1987 Reg. Sess., § 1)  
Section 7. - Abatement of nuisances. 
The City of Bastrop shall have the power to abate and remove nuisances, including power to condemn and cause to be demolished any building or structure in a dangerous or dilapidated condition.  
Section 8. - Officers of the city. 
The officers of the City of Bastrop shall be a mayor, five (5) aldermen, a clerk, a tax collector, a treasurer, a street commissioner, and such other municipal officers as may be provided for by the mayor and board of aldermen, including a superintendent of parks and cemeteries, a chief of police, a chief of the fire department, a city engineer, and a health officer. The mayor and aldermen shall be elected by the people; all other officers shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the board of aldermen, subject to the general laws of the state relating to civil service. The street commissioner and clerk may be one (1) alderman, the mayor may be street commissioner, and the clerk may be tax collector if the board of aldermen so provide. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 33:381.  
Section 9. - Municipal elections, terms of office, and vacancies. 
Municipal elections shall be held under the provisions of this Act on the Tuesday next following the second Monday of June, the first election hereunder to be held in the year 1953 and every four (4) years thereafter. The officers elected shall qualify and enter the discharge of their duties on the first day of July after their election and shall hold office for four (4) years and until their successors are elected and qualified; provided, if no election be held or if a vacancy occurs at any time in the office of alderman, or should any one (1) of the aldermen fail to qualify, the vacancy in such office shall be filled by election by the remaining aldermen at any regular or special meeting of the mayor and board of aldermen. Should a vacancy occur at any time in the office of mayor such vacancy should be filled by election of a suitable person by the board of aldermen at a regular or special meeting if the unexpired portion of the term is less than one (1) year. If the unexpired portion of the term is one (1) year, or more, at the time the vacancy occurs, such vacancy shall be filled by a special election held for that purpose, which election shall be called by the board of aldermen and held within ninety (90) days from the date after the occurrence of the vacancy. The person elected as may or at such special election shall qualify and enter the discharge of his duties immediately upon receiving his commission, and he shall hold office until the next general municipal election as herein provided and until the qualification of his successor thereafter. Pending the election of a mayor either by the board of aldermen or by a special election as herein provided for, the mayor pro tempore shall act as mayor and shall discharge all of the duties of that office. 
In case of any vacancy in any municipal office to which the officer is appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the board of aldermen at any time, the same may be filled for the term by the mayor with the advice and consent of the board of aldermen at any regular or special meeting. 
Editor's note— The primary election is held on the first Saturday in April; the general election is held on the last Saturday in April.  
Section 10. - Conduct of municipal elections. 
The provisions of law on the subject of state and parish elections, so far as applicable, shall govern municipal elections in the City of Bastrop. The mayor and board of aldermen shall appoint the commissioners of election for municipal elections in years when there is no general state election, and in such years returns of the election shall be made to the mayor and board of aldermen, who shall make such proclamation and do all other things in regard thereto as is required of returning officers for the parish. 
State Law reference— Election of aldermen in Lawrason Act cities, R.S. 33:382; municipal election dates for Lawrason Act cities, R.S. 18:402(C).  
Section 11. - Qualifications of mayor and aldermen. 
The mayor and each alderman shall be a qualified elector of the City of Bastrop and a resident of Morehouse Parish for two (2) years. No member of the board of aldermen shall hold any other office or employment under the city government while he is a member of said board, except as is provided for above and below. No member of the board of aldermen or any other officer of the corporation shall be directly or indirectly interested in any work, business or contract, the expense or price or consideration of which is to be paid from the treasury of the municipality, nor be surety for any person having a contract, work or business with the city, for the performance of which security may be required, nor be surety for any officer or employee. 
State Law reference— Qualifications in Lawrason Act cities, R.S. 33:384, 33:385.  
Section 12. - Powers and duties of mayor and board of aldermen in general. 
The mayor and board of aldermen shall have the care, management, and control of the city, its property, and its finances, and shall have the power to interpret, alter, modify, amend, and repeal ordinances in the exercise of the powers granted by this Act, particularly sections 4 through 7. 
State Law reference— Exercise of legislative powers of Lawrason Act cities, R.S. 33:362.  
Section 13. - Powers and duties of mayor. 
The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the board of aldermen and the mayor shall give the deciding vote in case of a tie. He shall have the superintending control of all officers and affairs of the municipality; shall actively and vigilantly see that all the laws and ordinances are properly executed and enforced. He shall have the power to veto any law, bylaw, ordinance adopted by the board and may, in the case of budget and appropriation ordinances, veto or reduce any item or items thereof; notwithstanding the exercise of the veto power, any law or ordinance or item or items of any ordinance may be adopted, if two-thirds of the aldermen vote thereafter in favor of its adoption. He shall sign commissions and appointments of all of the officers appointed by him with the advice and consent of the board of aldermen. He shall sign warrants drawn on the treasury for money, and require the clerk to attest the same, to affix thereto the seal of the municipality and to keep an accurate record thereof in a well-bound book to be kept for that purpose. He shall from time to time communicate, in writing, to the board of aldermen information and recommend measures which may tend to the improvement of the finances, the police, health, security, ornament, comfort, and general prosperity of the municipality. He may require any officer of the municipality to exhibit his accounts or other papers, and to make a report to the board of aldermen in writing, on any matter pertaining to his office. He shall have the power to remove for neglect or violation of duty any officer appointed by him with the advice and consent of the board of aldermen. He shall have jurisdiction vested in him by ordinance over all places within five (5) miles of the corporate limits for the enforcement of any cemetery or waterworks or health or quarantine ordinance and regulation thereof. He is authorized to call on every male inhabitant of the municipality over eighteen (18) years of age and under fifty-five (55) to aid in enforcing the laws. He shall have the power to remit fines and forfeitures and to vacate and annul penalties of all kinds for offenses against the ordinances of the municipality, by and with the consent of the board of aldermen, but a fine or penalty shall not be remitted or annulled unless the reason therefor be entered on the minutes by the clerk, together with and as part of the order so doing.  
Section 14. - Meetings of the mayor and board of aldermen. 
The mayor and board of aldermen shall hold not less than one (1) regular meeting each month on a date, and at a place and hour, to be fixed by ordinance. The first meeting after this Act becomes operative may be held and called at such time and place and in such manner as authorized by law heretofore in force. The mayor or any other aldermen, may, by written notice, call a special meeting of the mayor and board of aldermen for the transaction of important business. The notice must state the time of the meeting and distinctively specify the subject matter of business to be acted upon; it must be signed by the officer or officers calling the meeting, and must be served by a policeman on the mayor and all members of the board who have not signed it and who can be found personally, at least eight (8) hours before the time fixed for the meeting. The notice with endorsement of its services shall be entered on the minutes of the special meeting. The mayor and any or all of the members of the board of aldermen may waive notice of the meeting in writing. No business except that specified in the call shall be transacted at the meeting except by unanimous consent of the mayor and board of aldermen. A member of the board of aldermen shall not receive pay for attending a special meeting. In all cases a majority of the aldermen elected shall be required to transact business. 
The mayor and board of aldermen may elect one (1) of the aldermen to be mayor pro tempore who shall preside at all meetings and perform all duties of the mayor in the absence or disability of the mayor; and in the absence of both the mayor and the mayor pro tempore, the board may elect another alderman to preside temporarily and perform such duties. The mayor pro tempore, when occupying the place of the mayor, shall have the same power and perform the same duties as the mayor.  
Section 15. - Appointment of other officers. 
At the first regular meeting of the newly elected board of aldermen succeeding each regular municipal election, a clerk, a tax collector, a treasurer, and all other officers as may be necessary shall be appointed as provided above. The clerk and tax collector shall execute a bond to the municipality, in such penalty, with such sureties and conditions as may be prescribed by ordinance and shall hold their offices for two (2) years or until their successors shall be appointed and qualified. The mayor with the advice and consent of the board of aldermen may annually appoint an attorney at law or attorneys at law for the municipality, prescribe his or their duties and fix the form and extent of his or their compensation.  
Section 16. - Duties of clerk. 
It shall be the duty of the clerk to keep a well-bound book to be labeled "Municipal Minutes, City of Bastrop" in which he shall record the proceedings and all orders, ordinances, and judgments of the mayor and board of aldermen. He shall keep the same fully indexed alphabetically so that all entries on said minutes can be easily found; such minutes and bills allowed he shall publish once in the official journal. The clerk shall be the custodian of the municipal seal. He shall keep a well-bound book, to the styled "Municipal Docket, City of Bastrop," upon which he shall enter each claim against the municipality, and each subject matter to be acted upon by the mayor and board of aldermen. After each meeting he shall make such docket for the next regular meeting. He shall examine the statutes of the state and the ordinances of the municipality to ascertain subject matter required, or proper, to be acted upon at the following meeting, and shall docket all such matters. He shall keep all such other books and records as may be provided for by ordinance, and shall file in his office and preserve all records and papers appertaining to the business of the municipality. He shall keep a well-bound book to be styled "Tax Record, City of Bastrop," in which he shall enter all deeds to individuals, and the lists of land sold to the municipality by the tax collector, showing (a) the description of the land, (b) as whose property sold, (c) date of sale, (d) amount of taxes, costs and damages due and to whom the costs are owing, (e) when redeemed, (f) by whom redeemed, (g) date of redemption, and (h) amount paid therefor. 
The clerk shall be the auditor of the municipality. He shall keep a well-bound book, in which he shall enter and preserve accounts of each particular fund, and the account of each municipal officer. The treasurer shall not receive money from any source until the same has been reported to the clerk and audited and a receipt warrant issued therefor. All fines and forfeitures shall be reported by the officer collected the same, immediately after such collection, and be paid into the treasury. The books of the auditor shall be subject to inspection by the taxpayers of the municipality at any time during business hours.  
Section 17. - Duties of tax collector. 
The tax collector shall collect, account for and pay over all taxes levied by the municipality, and perform all other duties required of him by ordinance, under the same penalties prescribed by law for the collection of state and parish taxes.  
Section 18. - Duties of treasurer. 
The treasurer shall receive and safely keep, and pay out according to law all moneys belonging to the municipality. He shall keep correct and accurate accounts of all receipts and disbursements and shall make a report in writing to the mayor and board of aldermen at each regular meeting of the finances of the municipality and shall perform all other duties that may be prescribed by ordinance; and shall pay out money only on the warrant issued by the order of the mayor and board of aldermen.  
Section 19. - Duties, compensation, selection, and discharge of officers and employees. 
The mayor and board of aldermen shall, subject to the applicable general laws of the state, prescribe the duties and fix the compensation of officers, provide for the duties, compensation, selection, and discharge of employees, and require bonds with sureties for the performance of duties from all officers and employees.  
Section 20. - Municipal court. 
The municipal court of the Town of Bastrop shall henceforth be styled the "City Court of Bastrop." The City Court of Bastrop shall have jurisdiction over all violations of ordinances of the City of Bastrop. 
State Law reference— Continuation of mayor's court, Const. 1974, Art. V, § 20; disposition of fines, forfeitures and penalties of City Court of Bastrop, R.S. 13:2001; costs, R.S. 13:1899.  
Section 21. - Ordinances. 
The style of all ordinances shall be: "Be it ordained by the mayor and board of aldermen of the City of Bastrop," and all ordinances shall, as soon as practicable after they are passed, be published three (3) weeks in the official journal of the municipality. Ordinances shall not be enforced, unless for cause the contrary be ordered, until ten (10) days after their final publication. All ordinances shall be read and considered by sections at a public meeting of the mayor and board of aldermen, and the vote on their final passage shall be taken by "yeas" and "nays," which shall be entered on the minutes by the clerk. A vote shall never be taken on an ordinance not previously reduced to writing. An ordinance shall not contain more than one (1) subject, which shall be clearly expressed in its title; and an ordinance shall not be amended or revised unless the new ordinance contains the entire ordinance revised, or the section or sections as amended, and the original shall thereby be repealed. The clerk shall keep a well-bound book to be styled "Ordinances, City of Bastrop" in which he shall enter at length every ordinance immediately after its passage; and he shall append to each a note stating the date of its passage and cite therein the book and page of the minutes containing the record of its passage. The ordinances to be so recorded are those which are in their nature laws of the municipality and not mere orders or decrees temporary in their nature. The clerk shall keep said book accurately indexed alphabetically.  
Section 22. - Assessment and collection of taxes. 
The municipal assessment of property for taxation shall be made by the clerk or tax collector by copying from the assessment rolls that portion thereof which embraces property or persons within the corporate limits; the copy may be made at any time after the assessment rolls are approved and all changes in the parish assessment thereafter made shall likewise be made in the copy; and the said copy shall be placed in the hands of the municipal tax collector and be his warrant for the collection of municipal taxes. In all cases where persons or property have escaped taxation for a previous year, the clerk shall assess the same for taxation, and his assessment, when approved by the mayor and board of aldermen, on notice to the person assessed, shall be binding and conclusive, unless appealed within five (5) days after approval and notice. The mayor and board of aldermen shall levy the municipal taxes at the regular meeting in September of each year, or, in case of failure to do so, at any regular meeting thereafter. The tax collector shall collect municipal taxes during the time and in the same manner and under the same penalties as the state and parish taxes are collected. 
He shall, where not otherwise provided, in all particulars, be governed by the general revenue laws of the state so far as applicable, in making collections; but shall make the reports thereby required to the mayor and board of aldermen, and shall pay over the money collected to the city treasurer; and shall receive only such commissions or compensation as may be allowed by ordinance. Sales for nonpayment of municipal taxes shall be made by the tax collector at such place, within the corporate limits as the mayor and board of aldermen may direct. The sale of real estate and the distrait and sale of personal property, shall be made upon the same notice, at the same time and in the same manner as provided by law for the sale of like property for unpaid state and parish taxes. The deed to the purchasers for land as sold shall be filed with the municipal clerk, and there remain subject to redemption for the same length of time, and in the same manner [as] prescribed for the redemption of lands sold for state and parish taxes. Where lands are offered for sale for unpaid municipal taxes, and a person will not bid therefor, the amount of taxes, damages, and costs due the same shall be struck off to the municipality, and otherwise dealt with as lands which are sold to the state for delinquent state and parish taxes. The board shall be authorized to pay the state and parish taxes on lands thus acquired by it, and to collect the money thus paid, with the damages and interest allowed individuals in similar cases under the general revenue laws of the state thereof, from the date of such payment, upon the redemption of the lands from the municipal sale. The deed of the tax collector for individuals and a list of lands sold to the municipality, which shall be made as required to be made by the state and parish collector, shall be filed within ten (10) days after the tax sale, with the municipal clerk; and each shall have the same force and effect, and confer the same right, and entitle to the same remedies, as deeds and lists made for delinquent taxes by the state and parish tax collector. But such title shall be subject to a title acquired under a sale for state and parish taxes. 
After time for redemption has expired, the mayor and board of aldermen may take possession of and lease or sell any lands which it has acquired at tax sale to any person, in any manner that may be prescribed by ordinance.  
Section 23. - Expenditures. 
All expenditures of money for any purpose whatever shall be in pursuance of a specific appropriation made by order and in no other manner. Every warrant drawn on the treasury shall express on its face to whom issued and for what purpose allowed; and the ordinance authorizing its issue shall be cited by minute book and page in and upon it.  
Section 24. - Annual financial statement. 
The mayor and board of aldermen shall publish in the official journal before December thirty-first of each year, a statement showing the amount of taxes and other moneys collected during preceding calendar or fiscal year, giving each source of income and the amount of expenditures in detail, stating for what purpose made. The statement shall show the resources and indebtedness of the municipality at the beginning of the fiscal year at its close, and it must be spread on the minutes of the board.  
Section 25. - Acts repealed. 
All acts or portions of acts inconsistent with and in conflict with this Act, particularly Act No. 219 of 1924, Act No. 96 of 1932, and Act 19 of 1940, are hereby repealed. 
State Law reference— Amending the Charter, R.S. 33:1181.  
Section 26. - Savings provisions. 
That all ordinances of the City of Bastrop in force at the time of the adoption of this Act and not inconsistent herewith, shall remain in full force and effect until altered or repealed by the board of aldermen or until they expire by their own limitation; all obligations and all other instruments entered into or executed before the adoption of this Act, shall continue and remain unaffected by the adoption of this Act; the bonded indebtedness and all assets and liabilities are continued in full force and effect; and all officers who may be in office at the adoption of this Act, or who may be elected or appointed before the election or appointment of their successors as herein provided shall hold their respective offices until their terms shall have expired and until their successors are duly qualified as provided by this Act, unless sooner removed as may be provided by law; that matters begun and not completed at the time of the adoption of this Act shall not [2] be continued and completed as though this Act had not been adopted. 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— The "not" obviously should be deleted. 
 
Section 27. - Separability. 
If any provision of this Act is for any reason declared unconstitutional or invalid the other separable provisions hereof shall not be affected thereby.  
Section 28. - Section headings. 
Headings to sections are included in this Act for the purpose of convenient reference and do not constitute part of the law. 
Approved by the Governor: July 3, 1952. 
A true copy: 
WADE O. MARTIN, JR., 
SECRETARY OF STATE  
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Year 	 Act 
Number 	Section 	Disposition 
			
1952 	253 	1—28 	1—28 
  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters shall constitute and be designated and may be cited as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Bastrop, Louisiana." It may also be cited as the "Bastrop Code." 
State Law reference— Ordinance codification, Const. 1974, Art. VI, § 10; R.S. 33:1361 et seq.  
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances amending the same, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the governing body: 
Board of aldermen, mayor and board of aldermen, city council, governing body. The terms "board of aldermen," "mayor and board of aldermen," "city council" and "governing body" shall mean the mayor and board of aldermen or other duly constituted governing body of the municipality. 
City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall be construed as if the words "of Bastrop" followed them. 
Computation of time. In computing a period of time allowed or prescribed by law or ordinance, the date of the act, event or default after which the period begins to run is not to be included. The last day of the period is to be included unless it is a legal holiday, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day which is not a legal holiday. 
A half-holiday is considered as a legal holiday. A legal holiday is to be included in the computation of a period of time allowed or prescribed, except when: 
(1)  It is expressly excluded; 
(2)  It would otherwise be the last day of the period; or 
(3)  The period is less than seven (7) days. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Civ. Proc. Art. 5059. 
Gender. A word importing one (1) gender shall extend and be applied to the other genders. 
Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
Keeper and proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Municipality. The word "municipality" shall mean the municipal corporation of Bastrop, Louisiana. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one (1) person and thing. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Officers, boards, etc. Whenever reference is made to any officer, board, commission or department of this municipality by title only, e.g., "clerk," "mayor," "chief of police," etc., such reference shall be read as though followed by the words, "of Bastrop, Louisiana"; and shall include subordinate officers and employees, and agents, when duly authorized to act in the particular instance. 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner" applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Parish. The words "parish" or "this parish" shall mean Morehouse Parish, Louisiana. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to a number of persons and to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate, as well as individuals. 
Personal property. The words "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as herein defined. 
Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any street, park, cemetery, school yard or open space adjacent thereto, all beaches, canals or other waterways. 
Real property. The words "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The term "residence" shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as such person's place of habitation, and to which, whenever such person is absent, such person has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one (1) place and sleeps at another the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed such person's residence. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature or subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Louisiana. 
Street. The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts, and all other public highways in the city. 
Tenant, occupant. The word "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies, the whole or a part of such buildings or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The word "week" shall be construed to mean seven (7) days. 
Written or in writing. The words "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1966, § 1-02) 
Cross reference— General definitions in the criminal code, § 8-1. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions for statutory interpretation, R.S. 1:3 et seq.  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code, printed in boldface type, are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, or as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.  
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinances repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1966, § 1-04)  
Sec. 1-5. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the governing body that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1966, § 1-05)  
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by municipal personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the governing body. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the governing body or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
State Law reference— General ordinances become Code amendments, Const. 1974, Art. VI, § 10; R.S. 33:1363.  
Sec. 1-7. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the municipality to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the municipality to be misrepresented thereby.  
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance, except as otherwise limited, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six (6) months or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the municipal court. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any ordinance shall be deemed a violation of law, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Code 1966, §§ 1-05, 1-06; Ord. No. 2875, § 1, 11-8-77; Ord. No. 88-3388, § 1, 3-8-88) 
Charter reference— Authority, § 6; jurisdiction of city court, § 20. 
State Law reference— Authority to punish by fine up to $500.00 and imprisonment up to 60 days, R.S. 33:362(A)(2)(b); punishment for driving while intoxicated, R.S. 14:98.  
Sec. 1-9. - Responsibility of officers of corporation violating this Code. 
For the purpose of enforcing this Code, a corporation shall be deemed to be represented by its president; or in the president's absence, the vice president, or in the absence of both, by the officer or individual in charge of the affairs of the corporation.  
Sec. 1-10. - Conflicts. 
If there is a conflict between any provision of this Code and any code adopted by reference herein, the more restrictive provision shall apply.  
Sec. 1-11. - Continuation of included ordinances. 
This Code shall be construed as continuations of and as substitutes for the ordinances or parts of ordinances which are revised and consolidated herein.  
Sec. 1-12. - Applications for permits generally—Deposit of cost of notice. 
Whenever any application is made to the city for the granting of a permit of any kind, whereby it is necessary to publish newspaper notice or to notify property owners or others by mail, the person making application shall deposit with the city the estimated cost and expense of giving such notice and the amount so estimated shall be deposited in the city treasury. 
(Code 1966, § 1-07)  
Sec. 1-13. - Same—Collection of expenses. 
The officers or employees of the city with whom such application as provided in section 1-12 may be filed shall be charged with the duties of collecting such expenses and costs. 
(Code 1966, § 1-08)  
Sec. 1-14. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or any ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following matters when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the municipality, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the municipality or any evidence of the municipality's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the municipality; 
(2)  Any administrative ordinance or resolution; 
(3)  Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance or resolution to any person; 
(4)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street, alley or other public way; 
(5)  The annual appropriation ordinance; 
(6)  Any ordinance prescribing zoning regulations or effecting a zoning map amendment; 
(7)  Any ordinance prescribing the street grades of any street in the municipality; 
(8)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(9)  Any ordinance prescribing traffic regulations for specific streets or locations; 
(10)  Any ordinance creating a special district; 
(11)  Any ordinance prescribing subdivision or platting regulations or dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the municipality; 
(12)  Any ordinance extending or contracting the boundaries of the municipality; 
(13)  Any ordinance providing for the acquisition of lands for use as public parks or other purposes; 
(14)  Any ordinance providing for compensation to officers or employees of the municipality; 
(15)  Any ordinance or resolution fixing utility rates and charges; 
(16)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes; 
(17)  Any ordinance enacted after October 26, 1988; 
and all such provisions shall continue in full force and effect as if fully set forth herein.  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Officers of city, §§ 8, 15. 
Cross reference— Personnel, Ch. 15. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 2-1—2-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MEETINGS OF GOVERNING BODY 
 
Sec. 2-20. - Place, time and day of regular meetings. 
The regular monthly meeting of the governing body shall be held in the council chamber in the city hall, at the hour of 6:00 p.m. on the second Thursday of each month. 
(Code 1966, § 2-18; Ord. No. 3130, § 1, 12-13-82; Ord. No. 88-3422, § 1, 10-26-88)  
Sec. 2-21. - Order of business at regular meetings; agenda. 
(a)  Unless this section of these rules of procedure is suspended at any regular meeting by the unanimous vote of all members present, the following shall be the order of business at all regular meetings of the governing body; provided that the mayor will call and the governing body will consider items on the agenda in the order upon which persons who may be present in the council room are interested, prior to calling those items upon which no person interested is present: 
(1)  Call to order. 
(2)  Prayer. 
(3)  Reading of minutes of the preceding regular meeting and of special meetings held since the preceding regular meeting. 
(4)  Public hearings of citizens and of citizens' committees. 
(5)  Consideration of and action on reports of committees appointed of the governing body. 
(6)  Reports of city officials or employees required by law or by action of the governing body. 
(7)  Action on ordinances and resolutions introduced at previous meetings. 
(8)  Other unfinished business. 
(9)  Introduction of, and permitted action on proposed ordinances and resolutions. 
(10)  Other new business. 
(11)  Communications. 
(12)  Adjournment. 
(b)  Prior to each regular meeting, the city clerk shall prepare an agenda of all matters which such clerk knows may be considered at the meeting, arranged in the order set forth above in sufficient detail to explain the nature of the item. 
(Code 1966, § 2-19)  
Sec. 2-22. - Special meetings—Calling; notices; actions. 
(a)  The mayor or any member of the governing body may call a special meeting of the governing body to be held at the place and at the time set forth in the notice of the special meeting. All notices of the special meeting shall be issued by the city clerk and shall contain a statement of the specific items of business to be transacted, and shall be served by a police officer on the mayor and all members of the governing body who have not signed it and who can be found personally, at least eight (8) hours before the time fixed for the meeting. 
(b)  The notice with endorsement of its services shall be entered on the minutes of the special meeting. The mayor and any or all the members of the governing body may waive notice of the meeting in writing. 
(c)  No business except that specified in the call shall be transacted at the meeting except by unanimous consent of the governing body. In all cases a majority of the members elected shall be required to transact business. 
(Code 1966, §§ 2-07, 2-20)  
Sec. 2-23. - Same—Order of business. 
The following shall be the order of business at all special meetings of the governing body: 
(1)  Call to order. 
(2)  Roll call. 
(3)  Proof of notice of the meeting or waiver thereof by members not proven to have been notified properly. 
(4)  Consideration of the specific items of business stated in the call for such special meeting. 
(Code 1966, § 2-21)  
Sec. 2-24. - Quorum. 
Three (3) or more members of the governing body present at any regular or special meeting of the governing body shall constitute a quorum. 
(Code 1966, §§ 2-07, 2-22)  
Sec. 2-25. - Journal of proceedings. 
The city clerk shall keep a journal of the proceedings of the governing body at all regular and special meetings to be labelled "Municipal Minutes, City of Bastrop." 
(Code 1966, § 2-23)  
Sec. 2-26. - Conducting of meetings; public hearings. 
The mayor, or in the mayor's absence the mayor pro tempore, shall at all times have full charge and responsibility for the conduct of all meetings of the governing body. Any party desiring to be heard by the governing body shall be given time at any regular meeting to present such party's plea. By a majority vote of the governing body, time to any one (1) individual or any one (1) group of individuals may be limited to fifteen (15) minutes. 
(Code 1966, § 2-24)  
Sec. 2-27. - Procedural matters not covered. 
Any point or matter of procedure shall be determined according to the rules set forth in Robert's Rules of Order, Revised. 
(Code 1966, § 2-25)  
Secs. 2-28—2-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, COMMITTEES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-41—2-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - EMPLOYEE HEALTH BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section 6 of Ord. No. 89-3444 repealed Ord. No. 88-3395, adopted June 14, 1988, from which form §§ 2-51—2-54 were derived. The editor has included §§ 1—3 of Ord. No. 89-3444 as a new Div. 2, §§ 2-51—2-54. 
Cross reference— Personnel, Ch. 15. 
 
Sec. 2-51. - Established; membership. 
There is hereby established an employee health board, an administrative board of the city. This employee health board shall consist of twelve (12) members with one (1) member from each of the following identified departments, three (3) elected representatives from the retired employees of the city and the mayor of the city. 
(1)  Executive and administrative departments. 
(2)  City court. 
(3)  Police department. 
(4)  Fire department. 
(5)  Street and cemetery departments. 
(6)  Sewer department and city garage. 
(7)  Recreation and purchasing. 
(8)  Board of aldermen of the city. 
(Ord. No. 89-3444, § 1, 8-8-89)  
Sec. 2-52. - Authority and powers. 
This board shall have the full authority and power to amend health insurance policies covering active and retired employees of the city and/or to change insurance companies, if desired, by the board, it being provided, however, that the amount of contributions by the city as an employer shall be in the sole discretion of the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 89-3444, § 1, 8-8-89)  
Sec. 2-53. - Election of members; vacancies; chairperson. 
Members of the employee health board shall be elected every four (4) years, such election to be immediately after the installation of the mayor and board of aldermen of the city. Any vacancy on the board shall be filled by special election by members of the representative group where such vacancy exists. The duly elected mayor of the city shall be the chairperson of such board. 
(Ord. No. 89-3444, § 2, 8-8-89)  
Sec. 2-54. - Compensation; meetings; recordkeeping. 
Members of the employee health board shall serve without pay, and shall hold such meetings as shall be necessary to properly attend to the duties of the board. The board shall be called into meeting at the written request of the elected mayor of the city or upon the written request of at least three (3) members of the board. The employee health board shall keep such records as are necessary to the conduct of its business, shall keep minutes of all its meetings and shall keep a record of each decision made by such board. The duly elected mayor shall furnish office help to the employee health board to assist with recordkeeping. 
(Ord. No. 89-3444, § 3, 8-8-89)  
Secs. 2-55—2-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - TECHNOLOGY AND COMMUNICATION POLICY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 08-4160, adopted April 10, 2008, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, such ordinance has been added as § 2-71. 
 
Sec. 2-71. - Requirements and guidelines. 
The City of Bastrop Technology and Communication Policy provides you with requirements and guidance regarding using city e-mail, telephone, voicemail, fax, the internet and other city technology systems. 
The City of Bastrop e-mail, telephone, voicemail, fax, Internet and technology systems belong to the city, and the city reserves the right to monitor and examine all communications over these systems at its discretion. Accordingly, no employee should have any expectation of privacy as to his or her Internet or technology systems usage and should not use these systems for information they wish to keep private. These systems should be used primarily for city-related business. Personal use of e-mail, voicemail, fax and the Internet is acceptable, but should be done using good judgment and with the recognition that these systems are provided in order to conduct business. Federal and state law and city policies regarding misuse of city property, discrimination, harassment, sexual harassment, and confidential information apply to the use of all city technology systems. 
The city reserves the right to inspect any and all files stored in all areas of the City of Bastrop network, including those assigned to individual employees, and those stored on any city computer, in order to assure compliance with this and other city policies. 
Employees are not allowed to: 
a.  Violate copyright law by downloading, duplicating, installing or using unlicensed software or by transmitting copyrighted materials belonging to entities other than the city. Failure to observe copyright or license agreements may result in disciplinary action from the city or legal action by a copyright owner; 
b.  Hack or attempt to hack into other networks including: attempting to gain access to restricted resources inside or outside the City of Bastrop network; 
c.  Use the Internet in such a way that it disrupts the operation of the city network or the networks of other users; 
d.  Share personal files to the Internet; and 
e.  Use the Internet or technology systems to send messages with derogatory or inflammatory remarks about an individual or group's age, disability, gender, race, religion, national origin, physical attributes, sexual preference, political beliefs or any other classification protected by federal, state or local law. 
f.  Use of any proxy service or software that disguises or masks user identity or location. 
(Ord. No. 08-4160, 4-10-08) 
Prohibited uses of city owned digital equipment 
City equipment may not be used for any of the following purposes as defined by city policy, ethics rules and city and state laws (this is not necessarily an all inclusive list - others may apply and the user is charged with using discretion): 
Conducting private business, political campaigning, announcing union membership meetings or conducting other exclusively union business, making unauthorized general message distributions to all users ("everyone"), sharing or storing unlicensed software or audio/video files, distribution of any video or still images without prior city approval, or any other illegal usage. 
Waiver of privacy rights 
Employee expressly waives any right of privacy in anything they create, store, send, or receive using the city's computer equipment or Internet access. User consents to allow city IT personnel access to and review of all materials created, stored, sent, or received by employee through any city network or Internet connection. 
Software 
All software installed on computers provided by the city will be legally obtained and licensed. All software may only be installed by the IT department. Personal software installed on city computers is prohibited. Employees are prohibited from installing software on city computers in violation of license agreements. Doing so makes the city liable for damages relating to claims of copyright infringement and software piracy. Any employee found to be in violation of this policy will be subject to immediate termination. Software requests must be made to your supervisor if you have a work-related need for commercial software and can only be installed by the IT department. 
Copyrighted Material 
The city is committed to respecting intellectual property rights and does not condone or support its employees' use of certain web sites that could be considered a violation of copyright law. While the city will only restrict access to a service to control bandwidth utilization, we urge you to use your best judgment when using the city network to avoid copyright infringement and to respect the intellectual property rights of others. 
Email 
Email is provided as an essential tool in communicating both inside and outside the city for business-related purposes. The city reserves the right to periodically monitor email. Therefore, employees should not consider their conversations over city-provided email to be private. 
Instant Messenger 
If instant messenger accounts and or software are needed they will be provided by the city. Employees are not to install or use instant messengers unless approved by the city. The city reserves the right to periodically review instant mail chat logs. Therefore, employees should not consider their conversations over instant messenger sessions to be private. 
Passwords 
Employees are prohibited from giving out personal passwords to anyone internal or external of the city. Employee passwords will be provided by the Human Resources Department. 
Email and instant messenger etiquette 
Employees are expected to treat all employees and non-employees with the same courtesy and respect via email and instant messenger (IM) communications as they would in face-to-face discourse. 
Computer Usage 
Employees must take measures to protect sensitive customer and city information stored on their computers. 
Hardware 
Purchase and installation of new or upgraded equipment, including computer systems, cabling, keyboards, mice, printers, modems, plotters, monitors, software, memory, hard drives, etc., must be accomplished by way of the IT Department. Employees may not install ANY personal equipment or software. 
Internet Usage 
We realize that every employee at the city may have a legitimate need for full, unfiltered Internet access. Unfiltered Internet access is provided for the purposes of performing day-to-day business tasks. Employees must realize that they share an Internet connection and the transfer capacity of that connection is not infinite. If the City of Bastrop Internet connection becomes unusually slow, the city reserves the right to monitor Internet traffic to determine the cause of the problem and to identify troublesome users or applications. Excessive use of the Internet for activities not directly related to workplace tasks may result in disciplinary action, up to and including termination of employment. 
Blocking sites with inappropriate content 
The city has the right to utilize software that makes it possible to identify and block access to Internet sites containing sexually explicit or other material deemed inappropriate in the workplace. 
Telephone Usage 
The telephone system (including voicemail) at the city is the property of the city and is provided for business purposes. The city may periodically monitor the usage of the telephone systems to ensure compliance with this policy. Therefore, employees should not consider their conversations or recorded voicemail on the City of Bastrop telephone system to be private. 
Monitoring and Tracking 
The city may monitor or track employee with video, GPS, RFID or any tracking/monitoring system. Any negative information gathered by these devices or software may be used for disciplinary action or termination. 
Public Records and Records Retention 
In accordance with the Louisiana Public Records Law and the Federal Freedom of Information Act, all records, which includes all writings, recordings, electronic data and electronic transmissions, including e-mail, are public records, unless they are specifically otherwise defined or exempted by law. Public records shall be preserve and no employee is permitted to purposely destroy or dispose of any public records in violation of the law, subpoena, court order or other legal authority. The city shall develop and implement procedures for the permanent retention and storage of public records. Those procedures may include the permanent archival or retention of public records in an alternate form, such as the scanning or printing of paper copies of e-mail. In addition, the city shall develop procedures that will (1) permit public access to public records that only exist in an electronic or nontangible form and (2) provide for the reproduction of public records that only exist in an electronic or nontangible in response to a subpoena or court order. 
Acknowledgement of Understanding 
I have read and agree to comply with the terms of this policy governing the use of the City of Bastrop computer network and technology. I understand that violation of this policy may result in disciplinary action, including possible termination and civil and criminal penalties. 
_____
Signature 	_____
Date 
_____
Print name 	_____
Employee ID 
 
(Ord. No. 08-4160, 4-10-08)  
Chapter 3 - AIRPORT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority, § 5(19). 
Cross reference— Littering from aircraft, § 10-26. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 3-1. - Operations manual. 
The Morehouse Memorial Airport Operations Manual, adopted in August of 1979, is hereby incorporated in and made a part of this Code by reference, as fully as if set out at length herein. One (1) or more copies thereof is on file in the office of the city clerk.  
Secs. 3-2—3-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MOREHOUSE MEMORIAL AIRPORT ZONING 
 
Sec. 3-20. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Airport: The Morehouse Memorial Airport. 
Airport elevation: The highest point of an airport's usable landing area measured in feet from mean sea level. For Morehouse Memorial Airport the established airport elevation is 167.0 feet (mean sea level). 
Airport hazard: Any structure or tree or use of land which obstructs the airspace required for, or is otherwise hazardous to, the flight of aircraft in landing or taking off at the airport; and any use of land which is hazardous to persons or property because of its proximity to the airport. 
Approach surface: A surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline, extending outward and upward from each end of the primary surface and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope set forth in sections 3-23 and 3-24. In plan the perimeter of the approach surface coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone. 
Approach, transitional, horizontal, and conical zones: These zones are set forth in sections 3-21 and 3-22. 
Board of appeal: A board consisting of five (5) members appointed by the governing body, as provided for in R.S. 2:386. 
Conical surface: A surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of twenty (20) to one (1) for a horizontal distance of four thousand (4,000) feet. 
Dwelling: Any building or portion thereof designed or used as a residence or sleeping place of one (1) or more persons. 
Hazard to air navigation: An obstruction determined to have a substantial adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace. 
Height: For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this article and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified. 
Horizontal surface: A horizontal plane one hundred fifty (150) feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan coincides with the perimeter of the horizontal zone. 
Larger than utility runway: A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller-driven aircraft of greater than twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) pounds maximum gross weight and jet-powered aircraft. 
Nonconforming use: Any pre-existing structure, object of natural growth, or use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this article or an amendment hereto. 
Nonprecision instrument runway: A runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance, or area-type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved, or planned, and for which no precision approach facilities are planned. 
Obstruction: Any structure, growth, or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in sections 3-23 and 3-24. 
Primary surface: A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends two hundred (200) feet beyond each end of that runway; when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface, or planned hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of the primary surface is set forth in sections 3-21 and 3-22. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. 
Runway: A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length. The runway includes any proposed new runway or runway extension shown on an airport layout plan or other planning document. 
Structure: An object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by man, including, but without limitation, buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formations, and overhead transmission lines. 
Transitional surfaces: These surfaces extend outward and upward at ninety-degree angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven (7) feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces. 
Tree: Any object of natural growth. 
Utility runway: A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by aircraft of twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) pounds maximum gross weight or less. 
Water surfaces: For the purpose of this article, the term shall have the same meaning as land for the establishment of protected zones. 
(Code 1966, § 25-12; Ord. No. 3234, § 2, 8-21-84)  
Sec. 3-21. - Airspace obstruction zones—Airspace zones. 
In order to carry out the provisions of this article, there are hereby created and established certain zones which include all of the land lying beneath the approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces, and conical surfaces as they apply to the airport. An area located in more than one (1) of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows: 
(1)  Larger than utility runway visibility greater than three-fourths mile nonprecision instrument approach zone: The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is five hundred (500) feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of three thousand five hundred (3,500) feet at a horizontal distance of ten thousand (10,000) feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(2)  Transitional zones: The transitional zones are the areas beneath the transitional surfaces. 
(3)  Horizontal zone: The horizontal zone is established by swinging arcs of ten thousand (10,000) feet radii from the center of each end of the primary surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal zone does not include the approach and transitional zones. 
(4)  Conical zone: The conical zone is established as the area that commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward therefrom a horizontal distance of four thousand (4,000) feet. 
(Code 1966, § 25-13; Ord. No. 3234, § 3(A), 8-21-84)  
Sec. 3-22. - Same—Airspace zone height limitations. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, no structure shall be erected, altered, or maintained, and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any zone created by this article to a height in excess of the applicable height limit herein established for such zone. Such applicable height limitations are hereby established for each of the zones in question as follows: 
(1)  Larger than utility runway visibility greater than three-fourths mile approach zone: (Runway 16-34) Slopes thirty-four (34) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of ten thousand (10,000) feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(2)  Transitional zones: Slopes seven (7) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the approach surface, and extending to a height of one hundred fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation. In addition to the foregoing, there are established height limits sloping seven (7) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending to where they intersect the conical surface. 
(3)  Horizontal zone: Established at one hundred fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation. 
(4)  Conical zone: Slopes twenty (20) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at one hundred fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation and extending horizontally four thousand (4,000) feet to a height of three hundred fifty (350) feet above the airport elevation. 
(5)  Excepted height limitations: Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting the construction or maintenance of any structure, or growth of any tree to a height up to fifty (50) feet above the surface of the land. 
(Code 1966, § 25-13; Ord. No. 3234, § 3(B), 8-21-84)  
Sec. 3-23. - Land use safety zones—Created. 
In order to carry out the purpose of this article, as set forth above and also, in order to restrict those uses which may be hazardous to the operational safety of aircraft operating to and from the airport, and furthermore to limit population and building density in the runway approach areas, thereby creating sufficient open space so as to protect life and property in case of an accident, there are hereby created and established the following land use safety zones: 
(1)  Safety zone A: All land in that portion of the approach zones of a runway, as defined in section 3-21, which extends outward from the end of primary surface a distance equal to two-thirds of the planned length of the runway, which distance shall be: three thousand eight hundred (3,800) feet for runway 16-34. 
(2)  Safety zone B: All land in that portion of the approach zones of a runway, as defined in section 3-21, which extends outward from safety zone A a distance equal to one-third of the planned length of the runway, which distance shall be: one thousand nine hundred (1,900) feet for runway 16-34. 
(3)  Safety zone C: All that land which is enclosed within the perimeter of the horizontal zone, as defined in section 3-21, and which is not included in zone A or zone B. 
(Code 1966, § 25-13; Ord. No. 3234, § 4(A), 8-21-84)  
Sec. 3-24. - Same—Use restrictions. 
(a)  Zone A: Subject at all times to the height restrictions set forth in section 3-22 and to the general restrictions contained in section 3-26, areas designated as zone A shall contain no buildings, temporary structures, aerial transmission lines, or other similar aboveground land use structural hazards, and shall be restricted to those uses which will not create, attract, or bring together an assembly of persons thereon. Permitted uses may include, but are not limited to, such uses as agriculture (seasonal crops), horticulture, animal husbandry, raising of livestock, wildlife habitat, light outdoor recreation (nonspectator), cemeteries, and auto parking. 
(b)  Zone B: Subject at all times to the height restrictions set forth in section 3-22 and to the general restrictions contained in section 3-26, areas designated as zone B shall be restricted in use as follows: 
(1)  Each use shall be on a site whose area shall not be less than three (3) acres. 
(2)  Each use shall not create, attract, or bring together a site population that would exceed fifteen (15) times that of the site acreage. 
(3)  Each site shall have not more than one (1) building plot upon which any number of structures may be erected. 
(4)  A building plot shall be a single, uniform and noncontrived area, the shape of which is uncomplicated and the area of which shall not exceed the following minimum ratios with respect to the total site area: 
Site Area 
at least(Acres) 	But Less 
than 
(Acres) 	Ratio of Site 
Area to Bldg. 
Plot Area 	Building 
Plat Area 
(sq. ft.) 	Max. Site 
Population 
(15 persons/A) 
				
 3 	 4 	12:1 	 10,900 	 45 
 4 	 6 	10:1 	 17,400 	 60 
 6 	10 	 8:1 	 32,700 	 90 
10 	20 	 6:1 	 72,600 	150 
20 	and up 	 4:1 	218,000 	300 
 
(5)  The following uses are specifically prohibited in zone B: Churches, hospitals, schools, theaters, stadiums, hotels and motels, trailer courts, campgrounds, and other places of frequent public or semipublic assembly. 
(c)  Zone C: Zone C is subject only to height restrictions set forth in section 3-22, and to the general restrictions contained in section 3-26. 
(Code 1966, § 25-15; Ord. No. 3234, § 4(B), 8-21-84)  
Sec. 3-25. - Airport zoning map. 
The several zones herein established are shown on the Morehouse Memorial Airport Zoning Map consisting of one (1) sheet, prepared by Aillet, Fenner, Jolly & McClelland and dated January 1984, attached to the ordinance from which this article is derived and made a part hereof, which map, together with such amendments thereto as may from time to time be made, and all notations, references, elevations, data, zone boundaries, and other information thereon, shall be and the same is hereby adopted a part of this article. 
(Code 1966, § 25-13; Ord. No. 3234, § 5, 8-21-84)  
Sec. 3-26. - Use restrictions. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, no use may be made of land or water within any zone established by this article in such a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards, or otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport. 
(Code 1966, § 25-15; Ord. No. 3234, § 6, 8-21-84)  
Sec. 3-27. - Nonconforming uses—Regulations not retroactive. 
The regulations prescribed by this article shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering or other change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of a nonconforming use. Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of such ordinance, and was diligently prosecuted. 
(Code 1966, § 25-16; Ord. No. 3234, § 7(A), 8-21-84)  
Sec. 3-28. - Same—Marking and lighting. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 3-27, the owner of any existing nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation, and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the airport owner, to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of such airport obstruction. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the airport owner. The airport owner shall also have the right to install at its cost such markers and lights, as shall be deemed necessary by the airport owner, on structures or trees which may not penetrate the horizontal or conical surfaces, but which are considered by the airport owner to be potential hazards to air navigation. 
(Code 1966, § 25-16; Ord. No. 3234, § 7(B), 8-21-84)  
Sec. 3-29. - Permits—Future uses. 
Except as specifically provided in subsections (1) and (2) hereunder, no material change shall be made in the use of land and no structure shall be erected, altered, or otherwise established in any zone hereby created unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and granted by the city as hereinafter provided for. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted. A copy of each permit application when filed shall also be sent by the applicant by certified mail to the assistant secretary, office of aviation and public transportation, state department of transportation and development. 
(1)  However, a permit for a tree or structure of less than seventy-five (75) feet of vertical height above the ground shall not be required in the horizontal and conical zones or in any approach and transitional zones beyond a horizontal distance of four thousand two hundred (4,200) feet from each end of the runway except when such tree or structure, because of terrain, land contour, or topographic features, would extend above the height limit or not be of a land use prescribed for the respective zone. 
(2)  Nothing contained in this foregoing exception in subsection (1) shall be construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction, alteration, or growth of any structure or tree in excess of any of the height limitations established by this article as set forth in sections 3-23 and 3-24 or violate any land use limitation set forth in section 3-25. 
(Code 1966, § 25-17; Ord. No. 3234, § 8(A), 8-21-84)  
Sec. 3-30. - Same—Existing uses. 
No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an obstruction or permit a nonconforming use, structure, or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived or any amendments thereto or than it is when the application for a permit is made. Except as indicated, all applications for such a permit shall be granted. 
(Code 1966, § 25-17; Ord. No. 3234, § 8(B), 8-21-84)  
Sec. 3-31. - Same—Nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed. 
When the city determines that a nonconforming tree or structure has been abandoned or more than eighty (80) percent torn down, physically deteriorated, or decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations. 
(Code 1966, § 25-17; Ord. No. 3234, § 8(C), 8-21-84)  
Sec. 3-32. - Same—Variances. 
Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use property, not in accordance with the regulations prescribed in this article, may apply to the board of appeal for a variance from such regulations. The application for variance shall be accompanied by a determination from the federal aviation administration as to the effect of the proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace. Such variances shall be allowed where it is duly found that a literal application or enforcement of the regulations will result in unnecessary hardship and relief granted, will not be contrary to the public interest, will not create a hazard to air navigation, will do substantial justice, and will be in accordance with the spirit of this article. Additionally, no application for variance to the requirements of this article may be considered by the board of appeal unless a copy of the application has been furnished to the assistant secretary office of aviation and public transportation, state department of transportation and development and to the city for advice as to the aeronautical effects of the variance. If the city does not respond to the application within fifteen (15) days after receipt, the board of appeal may act on its own to grant or deny such application. 
(Code 1966, § 25-17; Ord. No. 3234, § 8(D), 8-21-84)  
Sec. 3-33. - Same—Obstruction marking and lighting. 
Any permit or variance granted may, if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this article and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to install, operate, and maintain, at the owner's expense, such markings and lights as may be necessary. If deemed property by the board of appeal, this condition may be modified to require the owner to permit the city, at its own expense, to install, operate, and maintain the necessary markings and lights. 
(Code 1966, § 25-17; Ord. No. 3234, § 8(E), 8-21-84)  
Sec. 3-34. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the city to appoint an administrative agency to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed herein. Applications for permits and variances shall be made to the administrative agency upon the form provided in Appendix A to this article for that purpose. Applications required by this article to be submitted to the administrative agency shall be promptly considered and granted or denied. Application for action by the board of appeal shall be forthwith transmitted by the administrative agency. 
(Code 1966, § 25-18; Ord. No. 3234, § 9, 8-21-84)  
Sec. 3-35. - Board of appeal—Created; powers; members; organization; meetings. 
(a)  There is hereby created a board of appeal, to have and exercise the following powers: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the administrative agency in the enforcement of this article or any ordinance adopted pursuant hereto; 
(2)  To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this article upon which such board may be required to pass under this article or ordinance; 
(3)  To hear and decide specific variances under R.S. 2:385(B), where a zoning board of appeals or adjustment already exists, it may be appointed as the board of appeal. Otherwise, the board of appeal shall consist of five (5) members, each to be appointed for a term of three (3) years and to be removable for cause by the appointing authority upon written charges and after public hearing. 
(b)  The board shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of this article or any ordinance adopted hereunder. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may determine. The chairman, or in the chairman's absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the board shall be public. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall immediately be filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. 
(Code 1966, § 25-19; Ord. No. 3234, § 10(A), (B), 8-21-84)  
Sec. 3-36. - Same—Appeal procedure; effect; hearing. 
(a)  Appeals to the board of appeal may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the political subdivision affected, by any decision of the administrative agency. An appeal must be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the board, by filing with the agency from which the appeal is taken and with the board, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The agency from which the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(b)  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the agency from which the appeal is taken certifies to the board, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in its opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board or by a court of record on application on notice to the agency from which the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
(c)  The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice and due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(Code 1966, § 25-18; Ord. No. 3234, § 10(C)—(E), 8-21-84)  
Sec. 3-37. - Same—Action. 
(a)  The board of appeal may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify, the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the administrative agency from which the appeal is taken. 
(b)  The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the board shall be sufficient to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the administrative agency, or to decide the favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under any such ordinance, or to effect any variation in this article or such ordinance. 
(Code 1966, § 25-19; Ord. No. 3234, § 10(F), (G), 8-21-84)  
Sec. 3-38. - Judicial review. 
Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the board of appeal, may appeal to the district court as provided in R.S. 2:387. 
(Code 1966, § 25-20; Ord. No. 3234, § 11, 8-21-84)  
Sec. 3-39. - Conflicting regulations. 
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this article and any other regulations applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be with respect to the height of structures or trees, or the use of the land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail. 
(Ord. No. 3234, § 13, 8-21-84)  
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Entering establishment with firearm, § 8-154. 
 
Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverages: Any fluid, or any solid capable of being converted into fluid, suitable for human consumption, and containing more than one-half (½) of one (1) percent of alcohol by volume, including malt, vinous, spirituous, alcoholic or intoxicating liquors, beers, porter, ale, stout, fruit juices, cider, and wine. 
(1)  Beverages of low alcoholic content: Alcoholic beverages containing not more than six (6) percent of alcohol by volume. 
(2)  Beverages of high alcoholic content: Alcoholic beverages containing more than six (6) percent of alcohol by volume. 
Beer outlet: A place where any person draws or removes any malt beverages from containers for consumption on or off the premises. 
Bottle club: Any establishment whereby the owner, or any employee of the owner, does not sell, serve, handle, dispense or store alcoholic beverages, but in which patrons are allowed to consume alcoholic beverages on the premises from the patron's own store, stock, or supplies of alcoholic beverages. 
Class A beer retail dealer: Any person who sells alcoholic beverages of low alcoholic content at retail for consumption on or off the premises. 
Class B beer dealer: Any person who sells alcoholic beverages of low alcoholic content at retail in bottles, cans or other sealed containers only and only for consumption off the licensed premises. 
Class A liquor retail dealer: Any person who sells alcoholic beverages of high or low alcoholic content at retail in bottles, cans or other sealed containers and only for consumption off the licensed premises. 
Class A (retail dealer, off premises only): Any person who sells beverages of high or low alcoholic content at retail in sealed containers for consumption off the licensed premises. 
Class B (retail dealer, on premises): Any person who sells beverages of high or low alcoholic content at retail for consumption on the premises, or in sealed containers (eg., bottles and cans) for consumption off the promises. 
Class D liquor retail dealer: Any person who sells alcoholic beverages of high or low alcoholic content, including frozen drinks, at retail in sealed containers with a closed top or cap, even though temporary in nature, and only for consumption off the licensed premises. 
Class R restaurant establishment: Any restaurant establishment that sells alcohol of high and low alcohol content at retail for consumption on the premises. 
Consumption off the licensed premises : In a closed container, prepared for transportation and actual consumption of the beverage other than on the licensed premises. A beverage covered or sealed with a closed top or cap, even though temporary in nature, shall be considered as a closed container. 
Dealer: Any person who, as a business, manufactures, blends, rectifies, distills, processes, imports, stores, uses, handles, holds, sells, offers for sale, solicits orders for the sale of, distributes, delivers, serves, or transports any alcoholic beverage in the city or engages herein in any business transaction relating to any such beverage. 
Handle: To sell, use, distribute, store, consume, or otherwise handle. 
Hotel-motel hospitality room: Any room in a bona fide hotel or motel which is used for the purpose of the hospitable consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
License or permit: Used interchangeably. 
Manufacturer: Any person who directly or indirectly, personally or through any agency, engages in the making, blending, rectifying, or other processing of alcoholic beverages in the city. 
Package house: A place where a person sells alcoholic beverages in closed containers, prepared for transportation and consumption off the premises. 
Premises: A licensed establishment where alcoholic beverages are kept, sold, stored, or consumed. 
Private club: An organization with limited and restricted membership which is nonprofit in nature and classified as tax exempt by all state and federal taxing authorities. 
Restaurant establishment: An entity which operates a place of business whose purpose and primary function is to take orders for, prepare and serve food and food items on the premises, which serves alcoholic beverages in conjunction with meals, which serves food on all days of operation, which grosses sixty (60) percent of its average monthly revenue from the sale of food and food items, which maintains separate sales figures for alcoholic beverages, and which operates a fully equipped kitchen used for the preparation of uncooked foods for service and consumption of such food on the premises. 
Retail dealer: Any person who offers for sale, exposes for sale, has in such person's possession for sale or distribution, or sells, alcoholic beverages in any quantity to persons other than licensed wholesale or retail dealers. 
Wholesale dealer: Any person who sells alcoholic beverages to licensed wholesale dealers or licensed retail dealers within the city, or to any person for delivery beyond the borders of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 4-1; Ord. No. 3134, § 1, 12-14-82; Ord. No. 01-3937, § 1, 5-10-01; Ord. No. 05-4053, 4-14-05; Ord. No. 05-4076, 11-10-05) 
State Law reference— For definitions under the state beverage laws, see R.S. 26:2, 26:241, 26:581, 26:641, 26:711.  
Sec. 4-2. - License required, exception; prior payment of fee before issuance; high content license includes low content license. 
(a)  Every retail dealer and every wholesale dealer in alcoholic beverages of low alcoholic content or alcoholic beverages of high alcoholic content and any private club or bottle club is hereby required to obtain from the city for each year, an appropriate license to conduct such business during each year in which such business is to be conducted, the issuance of which shall be conditioned upon the prior payment of the license fees levied in section 4-13. A license to sell alcoholic beverages of high alcoholic content shall include, and obviate the necessity of, a license to sell alcoholic beverages of low alcoholic content. 
(b)  Any hotel/motel hospitality room shall be exempt from the licensing requirements set forth above. 
(c)  In addition to the other requirements set forth in subsection (a), an applicant for a restaurant establishment class R license shall attach to its application: 
(1)  Proof of issuance of a retail dealer's license for on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages (of high or low content) from the city (or contemporaneous application for such license); and 
(2)  An affidavit establishing that the applicant is a restaurant establishment and the establishment grosses sixty (60) percent of its average monthly revenue from the sale of food and food items, which affidavit is supported by copies of actual business records, including sales records, sales tax receipts, receipts for purchases of food, food items and alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  For new restaurant establishments without prior business experience on which to determine the gross revenue from the sale of the items as set forth in subsection (c)(2) above, the affidavit provided in subsection (c)(2) shall provide that based upon the reasonable expectation of applicant, the establishment will meet the requirement, and the restaurant establishment class R license granted shall be considered as temporary and shall be subject to the express condition that the necessary documentation as set forth in subsection (c)(2) above shall be submitted prior to the expiration of a sixty-day period from the grant of the license, or the license shall automatically expire. 
(e)  Failure of an establishment to continue to meet the requirements of a "restaurant establishment" shall be sufficient grounds for immediate suspension of the restaurant establishment class R license. 
(f)  If an applicant for a restaurant establishment class R license is the holder of a retail dealer's license for on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages from the city, the city may issue the restaurant establishment class R license upon compliance with this section, and without additional approval of the city council. 
(Code 1966, §§ 4-2, 4-2.1; Ord. No. 3134, § 1, 12-14-82; Ord. No. 01-3937, § 2, 5-10-01)  
Sec. 4-3. - License prerequisite to engaging in business; posting. 
(a)  No person shall engage in either of the businesses of selling, offering for sale, possessing for sale, or allowing the consumption of or distribution of alcoholic beverages of low alcoholic content or alcoholic beverages of high alcoholic content without first obtaining the necessary license required hereunder. 
(b)  All licenses issued hereunder must be posted in a conspicuous place in the licensed premises. 
(Code 1966, § 4-3; Ord. No. 3134, § 1, 12-14-82)  
Sec. 4-4. - Governing body to determine issuance; certificate of approval. 
The right to determine which persons shall or shall not be issued licenses hereunder shall be vested in the governing body. No license hereunder, whether new or renewal, shall be issued by the city tax collector unless such collector has received a certificate evidencing the approval of the application for a license by the governing body. 
(Code 1966, § 4-4; Ord. No. 3134, § 1, 12-14-82)  
Sec. 4-5. - Sale by wholesaler only when retailer's license displayed; exceptions. 
No wholesale dealer shall sell to any retail dealer any alcoholic beverage unless the retail dealer has posted in a conspicuous place in such retail dealer's establishment the license required hereunder; provided, a wholesale dealer may sell such beverages to a retail dealer commencing a new business, or buying or taking over an established business for which a license has been issued, if such retail dealer produces a certificate from the tax collector of the city dated not more than thirty-five (35) days prior to the sale of alcoholic beverages, evidencing the application for a license or permit hereunder. 
(Code 1966, § 4-5; Ord. No. 3134, § 1, 12-14-82)  
Sec. 4-6. - Separate license required; transferability; changing locations. 
(a)  Separate licenses shall be required for each place of business operated by a retail dealer, wholesale dealer, bottle club, or private club. All licenses issued hereunder shall be personal and nontransferable, and shall become void upon the death of the licensee. If the business changes hands during the period for which the license was issued, a new license shall be applied for and paid to the tax collector within fifteen (15) calendar days of the date of change. Upon the failure of the original licensee to notify the tax collector for any such change in the license within the fifteen-calendar-day period, the original licensee shall be assessed ten dollars ($10.00) per day for each day of noncompliance. 
(b)  A retail dealer or wholesale dealer shall conduct such business only in the licensed premises, which premises shall include the lot of the licensee, but shall exclude the sidewalk, street curb, and street adjacent thereto, and no license issued hereunder shall authorize the conducting of business in any changed location except upon application therefor submitted to the governing body, which may grant or deny it as it deems advisable. Should the location of the place of business be changed or should there be any other change in the requirements of the original license during the period the license runs, such license shall be sent to the tax collector within fifteen (15) calendar days of the date of change so that the proper changes may be noted thereon. The tax collector shall collect from the licensee requesting the change, an administrative fee of ten (10) percent of the license fee or a minimum of twenty dollars ($20.00), whichever is greater, for any such license change. Upon the failure of the licensee requesting the change to notify the tax collector of any such change within the fifteen-calendar-day period, the licensee shall be assessed an additional ten dollars ($10.00) per day for each day of noncompliance. 
(c)  The license shall at all times be prominently displayed by the dealer in such dealer's place of business so as to be seen and easily read by the public. 
(d)  The premises for which licenses shall be issued within the meaning of this chapter are as defined in section 4-1, but the premises shall not include the sidewalk, street curb, or street adjacent thereto. 
(Code 1966, § 4-6; Ord. No. 3134, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— As to personal nature of permit, see R.S. 26:76, 26:276.  
Sec. 4-7. - Refusal to issue license; revocation. 
In the exercise of its police power, whenever deemed advisable and for the general welfare, under this chapter or any applicable law of the state of Louisiana, the governing body may for good cause, revoke any permit previously issued. If any retail dealer has conducted, operated, or permitted, such dealer's place of business so as to become a dive, disorderly place, or nuisance, any application for the renewal of the license or permit hereunder may be refused. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7; Ord. No. 3134, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Suspension or revocation of permits by municipality, R.S. 33:4785 et seq.  
Sec. 4-8. - Ineligibility of spouse to obtain license. 
No license shall be issued to any applicant who is the spouse of a person who personally is ineligible for a permit, unless such applicant is legally separated from such spouse. In the event the spouse and such person resume living together as spouses of each other, the licensee must return the license issued to such licensee to the tax collector within fifteen (15) days after resumption of living with the spouse. Upon the failure of such licensee to comply with this section, the licensee shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7.1; Ord. No. 3134, § 1, 12-14-82)  
Sec. 4-9. - License application—Filing; delinquency penalty. 
(a)  All applications for licenses for a new business shall be filed with the tax collector. 
(b)  Applications for renewals for a license shall be filed with the tax collector on or before the thirty-first day of October for the ensuing year. 
(c)  Should any retail dealer, wholesale dealer, bottle club, restaurant or private club fail to file an application for the renewal of a license for the ensuing year on or before the thirty-first day of October, a delinquency penalty shall be imposed of five (5) percent of the amount due for the license applied for if the failure is for not more than thirty (30) days, with an additional five (5) percent for each additional thirty (30) days or fraction thereof during which the failure continues. If the application for the renewal of a license is not filed until on or after January first of the year for which the license is required, the application may be denied. 
(d)  Renewal licenses may be withheld or denied on the same grounds and in the same manner as an original license. 
(Code 1966, § 4-8; Ord. No. 3134, § 1, 12-14-82; Ord. No. 01-3937, § 3, 5-10-01) 
State Law reference— Similar provision as to penalty, R.S. 26:88, 26:285.  
Sec. 4-10. - Same—Requirements; stamping; submitting to officers for investigation; submitting to governing body. 
(a)  All applications for new or renewal licenses shall be in writing, shall be sworn to before an officer authorized to administer oaths, and shall contain the information and shall be accompanied by the documents set forth and detailed in section 4-12. 
(b)  The tax collector shall immediately stamp upon each application the year, month and day on which it was received, and shall deliver the application to the chief of police, who shall immediately make an investigation of the applicant and of the applicant's character and reputation, and if the applicant is a partnership, an investigation as to the character and reputation of each member thereof, and if the applicant is a corporation, the same investigation of each officer and manager of such corporation. When the investigation is completed, a written statement of the results thereof shall be made and filed with the tax collector, who in turn shall submit it to the mayor and to the governing body. 
(Code 1966, § 4-9; Ord. No. 3134, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— For similar provisions as to state permit, see R.S. 26:78, 26:278.  
Sec. 4-11. - Same—Qualifications of applicant. 
(a)  Every applicant for an alcoholic beverage license shall meet the following qualifications and conditions: 
(1)  Is a person of good character and reputation and over twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(2)  Is a citizen of the United States and of the state and a resident of the state continuously for a period of not less than two (2) years next preceding the date of filing the application. 
(3)  Is the owner of the premises or has a bona fide written lease therefor. In cases where the applicant holds a bona fide written lease, the name and current address of the lessor shall be shown on the application form filed with the tax collector. 
(4)  Has not been convicted of a felony under the laws of the United States, this state, or any other state or country. 
(5)  Has not been convicted in this or in any other state or by the United States or any other country of soliciting for prostitution, pandering, letting premises for prostitution, contributing to the delinquency of juveniles, keeping a disorderly place, letting a disorderly place, or illegally dealing in narcotics. 
(6)  Has not had a license or permit to sell or deal in alcoholic beverages, issued by the United States, by any state, or by any municipality or other political subdivision of any state authorized to issue permits or licenses with respect to alcoholic beverages, revoked within two (2) years prior to the application, or been convicted or had a judgment of court rendered against such person in a case involving alcoholic beverages by the courts of the city or any other political subdivision, or the state or any other state or the United States for two (2) years prior to the application. 
(7)  Has not been adjudged by any alcoholic beverage control board of this state to have violated, or been convicted by any court of violating, any of the provisions of this chapter or of the alcoholic beverage control laws or ordinances of any other state or political subdivision. 
(b)  If the applicant is a partnership, or anyone in partnership with or financed by another, all members of the partnership or all the persons in any way financially interested in the business shall also possess the qualifications required of an applicant. The application shall state the full names and proper residence addresses of all partners and persons financially interested, and each shall furnish such person's affidavit showing such person's qualifications, as required of an applicant. 
(c)  If the applicant is a corporation, it shall be either organized under the laws of this state or qualified to do business within this state, and, all officers and directors and all stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five (5) percent of the stock and the persons who shall conduct or manage the business shall possess the qualifications required of an applicant, to be shown by the affidavit of each accompanying the application. 
(d)  If the applicant's business is to be conducted wholly or partly by one (1) or more managers, agents, servants, employees or other representatives, those persons shall also possess the qualifications required of the applicant, to be shown by the affidavit of each accompanying the application. 
(e)  If the applicant, or any person required to have the same qualifications, does not possess the required qualifications, the license may be denied. 
(Code 1966, § 4-10; Ord. No. 3134, § 1, 12-14-82; Ord. No. 93-3648, § 1, 1-11-93; Ord. No. 99-3863, 1-14-99) 
State Law reference— For similar provisions, see R.S. 26:80, 26:280.  
Sec. 4-12. - Same—Contents; fingerprinting of applicant; advertisement of new application. 
(a)  Every application for a license to engage in the sale at retail or wholesale of alcoholic beverages shall set forth and contain the following: 
(1)  The full name of the applicant, correct home address of applicant and an accurate description and the correct address of the premises wherein the business is to be conducted, which latter address shall be considered the proper address for all notices to the applicant required by this chapter or by the state law. 
(2)  The year, month, day and place of applicant's birth. If the birth of the applicant occurred outside the United States, the applicant shall declare, if true, that applicant is a naturalized citizen of the United States and shall attach to the application a certificate of the clerk of court wherein the naturalization occurred, showing the applicant was naturalized, and give the date of the order or judgment granting such naturalization. If such information cannot be set forth in any printed form which may be furnished, then it shall be set forth in a sworn statement which the applicant shall attach to the application. 
(3)  A statement, if true, that the applicant has continuously resided in this state for two (2) years prior to the filing of the application. 
(4)  A statement that the applicant is the owner of the premises to be licensed or has a bona fide written lease therefor, in which latter event the name of the lessor shall be shown in the application and a duplicate original or certified copy of such lease shall be filed by the applicant with the application. 
(5)  A statement that the applicant has not been charged with or convicted of a felony or misdemeanor under the laws of the United States, this state or any other state of the country, or under the ordinances of this city or any other municipality or political subdivision; or, if such convictions or charges have occurred, a complete list thereof, including the name of the court, the state and city or parish or county where each charge was made, the nature of each charge and the disposition thereof (i.e., conviction and sentence received, dismissal without trial, acquittal or pending). 
(6)  A statement that no alcoholic beverage license or permit issued to the applicant or a partnership in which applicant was a partner or a corporation in which applicant was an officer, director or stockholder owning more than five (5) percent of the stock has been revoked within five (5) years prior to the filing of the application, and that no conviction by any court or adverse judgment against applicant, or a partnership or corporation in which applicant was interested as aforesaid, with respect to alcoholic beverages has ever occurred; or if any such revocation or conviction has occurred, a full and complete disclosure regarding the same shall be made a part of the application and sworn to by the applicant. 
(7)  If the application is for a new business and is not for the renewal of a license which has theretofore been issued to applicant and which has not been revoked, then the applicant for such new license shall attach to the application a separate document (if no space is provided therefor in the application form), which shall be sworn to before an officer authorized to administer oaths, showing the following: 
a.  The cities, towns and places in the United States where applicant has lived. Applicant shall give, if possible, the names of the streets and the numbers thereof of each place where applicant has resided. 
b.  The work in which applicant has been engaged for the ten (10) years preceding the date of applicant's application, with full details and particulars. 
c.  Whether applicant has ever been known by any name other than the name given in the application. If so, applicant shall give the names under which applicant has been known or the name which applicant has assumed and the places where such name has been used. 
d.  Whether applicant has ever conducted a house of prostitution or been interested in any way or manner in the operation of such place, and whether applicant has been convicted of violating the "white slave law." 
e.  Whether applicant has sold or possessed for sale narcotics of any kind, or whether applicant is an alcoholic or a user of dope or narcotics. 
f.  The places where applicant has operated saloons or cocktail lounges or other places where alcoholic beverages were sold; the places where applicant has worked in bars or lounges, either as a bartender or in any other capacity. 
(b)  In order to carry out its duty to properly investigate all applicants for alcoholic beverage licenses, the police department may require any applicant to submit to a fingerprinting test in order that applicant's background may be checked. Failure to submit to such a test on request of the police department shall be grounds for the denial, suspension or revocation of any alcoholic beverage license. 
(c)  Each applicant for a license to conduct a new business shall give notice in the official journal of the city that applicant is applying in the city for a license to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages in the city, and shall attach to such application a certificate by the publisher of the official journal that such notice has been published for the period required by law. 
(d)  Any misstatement, concealment or suppression of fact in any application or accompanying affidavit or document shall be sufficient ground for the denial, suspension or revocation of a permit. 
(Code 1966, § 4-10.1; Ord. No. 3134, § 1, 12-14-82)  
Sec. 4-13 - License fees—Schedule. 
There is hereby levied an annual license fee against all who may engage in the business of selling, either retail or wholesale, offering for sale, serving or consuming alcoholic beverages in the city. The fees are assessed as follows: 
(1)  Class A (retail dealer, off premises only) ..... $ 400.00 
(2)  Class A—Beer only (retail dealer, off premises only) ..... 60.00 
(3)  Class B (retail dealer, on premises) ..... 500.00 
(4)  Class B—Beer only (retail dealer, on premises) ..... 75.00 
(5)  Class B (private club, on premises only) ..... 500.00 
(6)  Class R (restaurant) ..... 500.00 
(7)  Wholesale liquor dealer ..... 500.00 
(Code 1966, § 4-11; Ord. No. 3134, § 1, 12-14-82; Ord. No. 89-3961, § 1, 10-12-89; Ord. No. 92-3591, § 1, 8-18-92; Ord. No. 01-3937, § 4, 5-10-01; Ord. No 05-4053, 4-14-05; Ord. No. 05-4076, 11-10-05) 
State Law reference— Authority to collect, R.S. 26:74, 26:274.  
Sec. 4-14. - Same—Full fee regardless of date of commencing business. 
In the event a business shall commence subsequent to the first day of January of any year a full year's license fee shall be collected regardless of time of commencement. 
(Code 1966, § 4-12; Ord. No. 3134, § 1, 12-14-82)  
Sec. 4-14.1. - Same—Exemptions for hotel/motel hospitality rooms, restaurants. 
The closing hours as set forth in section 4-14 shall not apply to hotel/motel hospitality rooms or restaurants that hold a Class R restaurant alcohol license. Restaurants that have a Class R restaurant alcohol license may not sell alcoholic beverages or permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on their premises from 12:00 midnight on Saturday until 10:00 a.m. on Sunday, and from 10:00 p.m. on Sunday until 6:00 a.m. on the following Monday morning, and are permitted to sell beer, wine and like beverages containing not more than six (6) percent of alcohol by volume in conjunction with meals prepared and served on the premises on Sundays between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 06-4081, 2-9-06)  
Sec. 4-15. - Federal and state licenses and permits required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, keep, or offer for sale, any alcoholic beverage defined in this chapter without first obtaining from the United States and the state every license and permit, if any, authorizing such person to engage as dealer in intoxicating liquors defined by the United States and the state. 
(Code 1966, § 4-13; Ord. No. 3134, § 1, 12-14-82)  
Sec. 4-15.1. - Requirement to display sign; fetal alcohol syndrome. 
(a)  Each person holding a license under the provisions of this chapter shall post and display in a conspicuous place on each licensed premises a sign which shall clearly read as follows: 
"WARNING: 
DRINKING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES DURING PREGNANCY CAN CAUSE SEVERE PHYSICAL OR MENTAL BIRTH DEFECTS." 
(b)  Signs required to be posted or displayed herein shall not be less than eight (8) inches by ten (10) inches with letters not less than three-eighths ( 3/8 ) of an inch in height. Said signs must be substantially similar in design and color as the sample attached to this section, by reference, and available for inspection at the office of the city clerk of the City of Bastrop. 
(c)  The city may make such warning signs available to licensees under this chapter. 
(d)  Any licensee or permittee who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), or in default thereof, twenty (20) days in jail, or both, upon the first conviction and not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or forty (40) days in jail or both upon the second or subsequent convictions. In the case of a corporation, the officer or agent in and upon conviction may be punished as provided above. 
(Ord. No. 94-3662, § 1, 5-27-94) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 94-3662, adopted May 27, 1994, provided for the addition of a new § 4-15. Inasmuch as provisions designated as such already existed in this Code, said new section has been added herein as § 4-15.1 at the editor's discretion.  
Sec. 4-16. - Closing hours—Specified. 
All places of business where alcoholic beverages are kept, sold, stored for sale at retail, or served shall make no sale of, serve or dispense any alcoholic beverage between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday, and between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 12:00 noon on Sunday. During the hours when the sale of alcohol is prohibited, all activity at any business where alcohol is sold for consumption on the premises shall cease. All places of business where alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the premises, or where consumption on the premises without sale is permitted, may remain open solely to permit consumption on the premises, but shall not sell, serve or dispense alcohol, between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 2:00 a.m. on Saturday, Sunday and on the following holidays: New Year's Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day. 
(Code 1966, § 4-14; Ord. No. 3134, § 1, 12-14-82; Ord. No. 89-3435, § 1, 5-11-89; Ord. No. 95-3733, § 1, 11-21-95; Ord. No. 12-4208, 6-14-12; Ord. No. 13-4221, 12-12-13 ; Ord. No. 16-4240 , 5-12-16)  
Sec. 4-16.1. - Establishments holding R permits exempt. 
The provisions contained in section 4-16 shall not apply to any restaurant that holds a Class R restaurant alcohol license as defined in section 4-13. 
(Ord. No. 06-4081, 2-9-06)  
Sec. 4-17. - Same—Exemptions of hotel-motel hospitality rooms and bottle clubs. 
In addition, the closing hour set forth in section 4-16 shall not apply to restaurant establishments; however, restaurant establishments may not sell or serve alcoholic beverages between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Monday through Friday, and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. 
(Code 1966, § 4-14.1; Ord. No. 3134, § 1, 12-14-82; Ord. No. 3825, 3-12-98; Ord. No. 01-3937, § 5, 5-10-01; Ord. No. 13-4221, 12-12-13 )  
Sec. 4-18. - Same—Exemption of private clubs. 
A bona fide private club, a bottle club, or the premises of a commercial establishment wherein alcoholic beverages are dispensed or consumed at a privately controlled function shall not dispense or permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on Monday through Friday, and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday, but shall otherwise be exempt from the closing hour set forth in section 4-16. Notwithstanding any declaration made herein that is to the contrary, a bona fide bottle club may remain open and permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 2:00 a.m. on the following holidays: New Year's Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. 
(Code 1966, § 4-14.2; Ord. No. 3134, § 1, 12-14-82; Ord. No. 3825, 3-12-98; Ord. No. 3830, 5-14-98; Ord. No. 99-3899, 12-9-99; Ord. No. 02-3987, § 1, 11-14-02; Ord. No. 03-4002, §§ 1, 2, 6-12-03; Ord. No. 13-4221, 12-12-13 )  
Sec. 4-19. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-4208, adopted June 14, 2012, repealed § 4-19, which pertained to establishments holding R permits exempt—exceptions, merchandise to be concealed during such hours and derived from § 4-15 of the 1966 Code; Ord. No. 3134, § 1, 12-14-82.  
Sec. 4-20. - Same—Frequenting places during such times. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the proprietor or the proprietor's employee, to stay or be found in any place where alcoholic beverages are kept and sold between the hours such places are required to be closed. 
(Code 1966, § 4-16; Ord. No. 3134, § 1, 12-14-82)  
Sec. 4-21. - Sale in dwellings. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, or keep for sale, any alcoholic beverage controlled by this chapter in any place or premises used as a dwelling house, a boardinghouse, a lodginghouse, or a rooming house; provided, nothing in this section shall apply to duly licensed hotels. 
(Code 1966, § 4-17; Ord. No. 3134, § 1, 12-14-82)  
Sec. 4-22. - Sleeping in premises. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to lie or sleep on the counter, tables, chairs or floor or other place in any place wherein alcoholic beverages are kept and sold. 
(Code 1966, § 4-18; Ord. No. 3134, § 1, 12-14-82)  
Sec. 4-23. - Proximity to schools, churches, etc. 
(a)  No license as defined in section 4-2 shall be granted for any premises situated within three hundred (300) feet or less, as fixed by the ordinance, of a public playground or of a building used exclusively as a church or synagogue, public library, school, or full-time day care center as defined in R.S. 17:405(A)(4). 
(b)  In respect to beverages of high alcoholic content and low alcoholic content, the measurement of this distance shall be measured as a person walks using the sidewalk from the nearest point of the property line of the church, synagogue, public library, public playground, or school to the nearest point of the public premises to be licensed, or by such method as may hereafter be prescribed by the laws of the state. 
(c)  The restrictions contained in this section do not apply to premises which are maintained as bona fide hotel, motel, railway car, or fraternal organization, nor to any premises licensed to deal in alcoholic beverages for one (1) year prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(d)  That in the event a retail or wholesale business has an interruption of the continuity of business for a period in excess of six (6) months, in order to reopen for business, the requirements set forth above in subsection (a) of this section must be complied with. 
(e)  Any manufacturing, wholesale or retail business exempted from the coverage of subsection (a) of this section by the applicability of subsection (c) of this section, or any city, state or federal statutory or constitutional provision shall be so exempted or protected only to the extent of the class of license issued legally permitted to be on the premises as of the date that the public playground or building used exclusively as a church or synagogue, public library, or school began operation. 
(Code 1966, § 4-19; Ord. No. 3134, § 1, 12-14-82; Ord. No. 93-3645, § 1, 10-14-93; Ord. No. 05-4049, 2-10-05) 
State Law reference— Authority, R.S. 26:81, 26:281.  
Sec. 4-23.1. - Security at establishments where alcohol is dispensed or consumed. 
Every establishment licensed by the city to dispense alcohol, or to permit the consumption of alcohol upon its premises, shall employ security personnel and only such persons certified by the Council on Peace Officer Standards and Training ("P.O.S.T. Certification") to carry firearms and who are commissioned as law enforcement officers to arrest individuals within the corporate limits of the city who are suspected of violating crimes enumerated in the city's Code of Ordinances or in the Louisiana Criminal Code, when such establishment is open and permits the sale, dispensing or consumption of alcohol on its premises after 12:00 midnight. Not less than two (2) P.O.S.T. certified security personnel commissioned to make arrests in the city shall be posted on such premises during the period from 12:00 midnight until the premises are closed. 
(Ord. No. 99-3899, 12-9-99; Ord. No. 13-4221, 12-12-13 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 99-3899, adopted Dec. 9, 1999, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as § 4-24. Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated, the provisions have been redesignated as § 4-23.1, at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 4-24. - Reservation of rights to governing body. 
The city reserves all rights that it might have under existing state laws relative to the issuance and revocation of permits. 
(Code 1966, § 4-20; Ord. No. 3134, § 1, 12-14-82)  
Sec. 4-25. - Unlawful acts on licensed premises. 
The following acts are hereby prohibited and no person holding a license as retail dealer, and no agent, associate, employee or representative or servant of any such person, shall do, or permit to be done any of such acts, on or about the licensed premises: 
(1)  Sell or serve alcoholic beverages to any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years. 
Cross reference— Sale, etc., to or by minors generally, § 4-26 et seq. 
(2)  Sell or serve alcoholic beverages to any intoxicated person. 
(3)  Intentionally entice, aid, or permit any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to visit or loiter in or about any place where alcoholic beverages or beer are the principal commodities sold, handled or given away. 
(4)  Permit any prostitute to frequent the licensed premises, or to solicit patrons for prostitution on the licensed premises. 
(5)  Permit any disturbance of the peace or obscenity, or any lewd, immoral, or improper entertainment, conduct or practices on the licensed premises. 
(6)  Sell, offer for sale, possess, or permit the consumption on or about the licensed premises of any kind or type of alcoholic beverage, the sale or possession of which is not authorized under the license. 
(7)  Intentionally conduct illegal gambling, as defined by law, on the premises described in the application for the license. 
(8)  Employ or permit persons, commonly known as B drinkers, to solicit patrons for drinks and to accept drinks from patrons and receive therefor any commission or remuneration in any other way. 
(9)  Employ anyone under twenty-one (21) years of age when the sale or handling of alcoholic beverages constitutes the main business. If the sale or handling of alcoholic beverages does not constitute the main business, an employee under the age of twenty-one (21) years shall not be permitted to handle, serve, or work with alcoholic beverages. 
(10)  Fail to keep the premises clean and sanitary. 
(11)  Permit the playing of pool or billiards by any person under eighteen (18) years of age, or permit such a person to visit or frequent the licensed premises operating a pool or billiard hall. 
(12)  Illegally sell, offer for sale, possess, or permit the consumption on or about the licensed premises of any kind or type of narcotics or habit-forming drugs. 
(13)  Accept food stamp coupons as payment for alcoholic beverages in violation of the provisions of Public Law 88-525 and regulation 1600.2(i) issued pursuant to that section of the federal statute by the United States secretary of agriculture. 
(14)  Fail to keep the licensed premises well-lighted and all outside windows and doors open to the view of the sidewalk or outside. 
(15)  Sell beverages of low or high alcoholic content between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on any day, and it shall be unlawful to sell such beverages between the hours of 12:00 midnight Saturday and 6:00 a.m. Monday, subject to the exceptions contained in R.S. 51:191, 51:192. 
(16)  To consume alcoholic, vinous and malt liquors in or on any premises that is operated under the retail permit or wholesale permit, or the permitting thereof. 
(17)  Sell or permit the sale of any of the alcoholic beverages described in section 4-1 hereof, on the sidewalk, street curb or street adjacent to the premises for which the permit or license is issued. 
(18)  Operate a wholesale or retail business, as defined in section 4-1, without first applying for and obtaining a permit therefor. 
(Code 1966, § 4-21; Ord. No. 3134, § 1, 12-14-82; Ord. No. 87-3351, § 1, 5-12-87; Ord. No. 91-3562, § 1, 12-14-91; Ord. No. 99-3863, 1-14-99) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 26:90, 26:91, 26:286, 26:287.  
Sec. 4-26. - Unlawful purchase or possession of alcoholic beverages by persons twenty-one years of age. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person under twenty-one (21) years of age to purchase any alcoholic beverage either of high or low alcoholic content. Whoever is found guilty of violating the provisions of this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or be imprisoned for not more than ten (10) days. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person under twenty-one (21) years of age to have public possession of any alcoholic beverage either of high or low alcoholic content. Whoever is found guilty of violating the provisions of this subsection shall be fined not more than fifty dollars ($50.00). Any person apprehended while violating the provisions of this subsection shall be issued a citation by the apprehending law enforcement officer which shall be paid in the same manner as provided for the offenders of local traffic violations. 
(c)  "Possess" as used herein shall not include accepting delivery of alcohol pursuant to ownership or lawful employment by a duly licensed manufacturer, wholesaler, or retailer of beverage alcohol. 
(Code 1966, § 10-133; Ord. No. 87-3352, § 1, 5-12-87; Ord. No. 99-3863, 1-14-99) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:91.1.  
Sec. 4-27. - Unlawful purchase or possession of alcoholic beverages by persons under age twenty-one. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person, other than a parent, spouse or legal guardian over the age of twenty-one (21), to purchase alcohol for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) or possess any alcoholic beverage either of high or low alcoholic content. 
(b)  Whoever is charged with the violation of this section shall be remanded to the juvenile court for hearing and disposition of the case. 
(Code 1966, § 10-134; Ord. No. 87-3352, § 1, 5-12-87; Ord. No. 99-3863, 1-14-99) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:91.2.  
Sec. 4-28. - Unlawful purchase of alcoholic beverages by adults on behalf of minors. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any adult to purchase on behalf of a person under the age of eighteen (18) years any alcoholic beverage of high or low alcoholic content. 
(b)  Whoever is found guilty of violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or be imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days. 
(Code 1966, § 10-135; Ord. No. 87-3352, § 1, 5-12-87; Ord. No. 91-3562, § 2, 12-14-91)  
Sec. 4-29. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 99-3863, adopted Jan. 14, 1999, repealed § 4-29 in its entirety. Formerly, § 4-29 pertained to the purchase, consumption and public possession of alcoholic beverages by persons eighteen to twenty-one years of age and derived from § 10-136 of the 1966 Code and § 1 of Ord. No. 87-3352, adopted May 12, 1987.  
Sec. 4-30. - Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages on public property owned or operated by the city. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or consume alcoholic beverages of either high or low content on the premises of any park, playground, recreation facility of public building owned or operated by the city; except for the authorized functions at the Municipal Center and Technology and Conference Center. 
(Code 1966, § 10-226; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82; Ord. No. 18-4249 , 5-10-18)  
Sec. 4-31. - Sale at service stations. 
It shall be unlawful to sell alcoholic beverages at any establishment where gasoline or other motor fuel is sold except for sales of alcoholic beverages packaged in bottles, cans or other sealed containers for consumption off the licensed premises, and provided that such sales shall not constitute the principal business activity of the licensed retail dealer. 
(Code 1966, § 4-24; Ord. No. 3134, § 1, 12-14-82)  
Sec. 4-32. - Seizure and sale of beverages. 
Any alcoholic beverage seized as a result of the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be ordered confiscated and sold by the city and the proceeds from such sale shall be placed in the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 4-23; Ord. No. 3134, § 1, 12-14-82)  
Sec. 4-33. - Suspension or revocation of license—Procedure. 
Before any license is suspended or revoked the holder thereof shall be entitled to a hearing as hereinafter provided, and no license shall be revoked unless such a hearing has been held, and the governing body thereafter votes for such suspension or revocation. 
(Code 1966, § 4-25; Ord. No. 3134, § 1, 12-14-82)  
Sec. 4-34. - Same—Hearing required; requirement of majority vote for suspension or revocation. 
Before any license is suspended or revoked, the holder thereof shall be entitled to a hearing as hereinafter provided, and no license shall be revoked unless such a hearing has been held and a majority of the members of the governing body thereafter votes for such suspension or revocation. 
(Code 1966, § 4-26; Ord. No. 3134, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 33:4786.  
Sec. 4-35. - Same—Notice of hearing; petition for suspension or revocation. 
A notice shall be served upon the holder of the license stating the time and place of the hearing to be held by the governing body which shall be not less than ten (10) calendar days from the date such notice is given. The notice shall enumerate the cause or causes for suspending or revoking the license, and shall be sent by registered or certified mail to the holder of the license at the address of the holder's place of business as given in the application for the license, or may be served on the holder in person by an officer or employee of the municipality. Any trade organization consisting of brewers and distributors of beverages of low alcoholic content, through its authorized representative, may file with the governing body a sworn petition requesting that a license be suspended or revoked, and the procedure in such cases shall be the same as herein set out. 
(Code 1966, § 4-27; Ord. No. 3134, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 33:4787.  
Sec. 4-36. - Same—Dual revocation. 
Low alcoholic license automatically applies against high alcoholic licenses. Revocation or suspension of any license for the beverages of low alcoholic content automatically suspends or revokes, as the case may be, any license held by the same person for beverages of high alcoholic content. 
(Code 1966, § 4-28; Ord. No. 3134, § 1, 12-14-82)  
Sec. 4-37. - Same—Notice of decision. 
Notice of decision to suspend or revoke the license shall be sent immediately to the collector of revenue and the state board of tax appeals by registered or certified mail, with the request that the state permit be revoked according to law. 
(Code 1966, § 4-29; Ord. No. 3134, § 1, 12-14-82)  
Sec. 4-38. - Same—Appeal. 
The holder of the license who is aggrieved by a decision of the governing body to suspend or revoke such person's license may, within ten (10) days of the notification of the decision, take a devolutive appeal to the district court having jurisdiction of the place of business and on such appeal the trial shall be de novo. Within ten (10) calendar days from the signing of the judgment by the district court the municipality or the holder of the license, as the case may be, may devolutively appeal from the judgment of the district court to the court of appeals as in ordinary civil cases. 
(Code 1966, § 4-30; Ord. No. 3134, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— See R.S. 33:4788.  
Sec. 4-39. - Violations; penalties—General; persons responsible; revocation, suspension of license. 
(a)  Any permittee or licensee or any agent or employee of such permittee or licensee convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-8, unless otherwise provided herein. The officer or agent in charge of any corporation for which a license and permit as "retail dealer" may have been issued hereunder shall be subject to prosecution for any violation by such corporation, and upon conviction may be punished as provided above. 
(b)  Any conviction under the provisions of this chapter shall be grounds for revocation or suspension of the violator's license. A conviction under this chapter of a retail dealer's agent, associate, employee, representative or servant shall be considered the retail dealer's conviction for purposes of suspension or revocation of the license. 
(Code 1966, § 4-21.1; Ord. No. 3134, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Suspension or revocation of permits by municipality, R.S. 33:4785, 33:4788.  
Sec. 4-40. - Same—Untruthful statements. 
Any person making any untruthful statements in the application for a permit or in any of the documents to be attached to the application, as herein provided, and violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-8. Any false statement made in connection with any application shall also be sufficient cause for refusing to issue a license under the provisions hereof. 
(Code 1966, § 4-22; Ord. No. 3134, § 1, 12-14-82) 
Cross reference— Definition of "cannabis" and of "marijuana," § 8-1.  
Chapter 5 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to regulate, § 5(42). 
Cross reference— Dogs in cemetery, § 7-10(d); noise from animals, § 11-4(b)(4); theft of dogs, § 8-91. 
 
Sec. 5-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Animal: Any mammal, domestic or wild, other than humans which may be infected with rabies. 
Animal control officer: A duly commissioned and sworn health officer, police officer or a duly commissioned and sworn representative of the same. 
Animal nuisance: Created when an animal: (1) runs out of control as defined herein; (2) barks, howls, cries or makes other noises which are deemed to be excessive, continuous or untimely to the point where the peace of the neighboring property owners is disturbed; (3) molests or disturbs persons or vehicles by chasing, barking or biting; (4) attacks other domestic animals; (5) trespasses upon school grounds; (6) defecates upon any public place or upon premises not owned or controlled by the owner or harborer unless promptly removed by the animal owner or harborer; (7) creates an insect breeding and/or attraction site due to an accumulation of excreta; or (8) damages or destroys the property of a person other than the owner or harborer. 
Animal shelter: A public facility used to confine and house animals seized, lost, abandoned or given over by the owners or harborers. 
Bite: To be seized with the teeth or jaws so that a person or animal has been nipped, gripped, wounded or pierced and saliva of the biting animal has contacted the resulting break or abrasion of the skin. "Face bite" is a bite anywhere above the shoulders of a human. 
Boarding kennel: A licensed facility other than an animal hospital, or the animal shelter, where animals, normally dogs and cats, not owned by the proprietor, are temporarily sheltered, fed, watered and exercised in return for a fee. 
Breeder (professional): Any person who breeds animals for profit and who produces more than two (2) litters of animals, normally dogs or cats, in any one (1) calendar year. "Breeder" (hobbyist) is any person who harbors four (4) or more animals, normally dogs or cats, or who breeds animals as a hobby, producing not more than two (2) litters in any one (1) calendar year. 
Cat: Any member of the animal species felis catus six (6) months or more in age. 
Control of an animal: That the same is on a leash not more than eight (8) feet in length; is under the voice control in the presence of a competent person on that person's property; is on or within a vehicle being driven or parked; or is within the property limits of its owner or harborer or upon the premises of another person with the consent of that person. 
Dog: Any member of the animal species canis familiaris six (6) months or more in age. 
Domestic animal: Includes dogs, cats, domesticated sheep, horses, cattle, goats, swine, fowl, ducks, geese, turkeys, confined domestic hares and rabbits, pheasants and other birds and animals raised and/or maintained in confinement. 
Euthanasia: A death brought about by any method which produces rapid loss of consciousness to a painless death. 
Exhibitor: A person who exhibits animals, normally dogs or cats, for compensation or improvement of the breed. 
Groomer: A person who performs the service of trimming, bathing or pedicure of animals, normally dogs or cats, for a fee. 
Harborer: Any person who provides food and shelter for any domesticated animal on other than a periodic or temporary basis, but has no right of property in any such animal. 
Owner: Any person having right of property in any animal; who keeps an animal; who has an animal in such person's care or custody; or who knowingly permits an animal to remain on or about any premises occupied by such person. 
Pet shop: An establishment operated by a person which acquires animals, birds, reptiles and fish bred by others, whether an owner, agent or on consignment, and sells, offers to sell, exchanges or offers for adoption with charge such animals, birds, reptiles and fish as domestic pets to the general public at wholesale or retail. 
Trainer: A person qualified by training and experience in various facets of animal life, normally dogs or cats. 
Vaccination certificate: A serially numbered certificate, or a form approved by the animal control officer, countersigned by the veterinarian or other qualified person, administering the vaccine, giving the name of the owner of the animal to whom issued, the description of the animal, indicating the year for which issued, and certifying that the animal was inoculated or vaccinated against rabies and giving the date thereof. 
Vaccination for rabies: An inoculation by a veterinarian or other qualified person of an animal with antirabies vaccine. 
Vaccination license tag: A suitable tag approved by the animal control officer, bearing the same numerical number as the vaccination certificate and indicating the year for which issued. 
Veterinarian: Any person licensed by the state board of veterinary medicine examiners to practice veterinary medicine in the state. 
Vicious (dangerous) animal: Any animal, domestic or wild, known to attack a person where such person may lawfully be at any time, without provocation, or any animal that bites or otherwise injures a human. 
Voice control: That an animal: (1) is physically capable of hearing normal commands; (2) is, at the time under consideration, within reasonable proximity to controller so that shouting or excessively loud commands are not necessary; (3) has been adequately trained in obedience so as to be capable of understanding control commands; and (4) either continually demonstrates, or is able to demonstrate on demand, response to a command that will cause the animal to immediately come into close proximity to the controller and cease any kind of aggressive behavior or action that would be offensive to other persons or animals. 
Work dog: Any member of the animal species canis familiaris trained for and actively engaged in rescue, law enforcement, or as a guide for the blind or deaf. 
(Code 1966, § 6-02; Ord. No. 3340, § 1, 12-9-86)  
Sec. 5-2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to promote harmonious relationships in the interaction between humans and animals by: 
(1)  Protecting animals from improper use, abuse, neglect, exploitation, inhumane treatment and health hazards; 
(2)  Delineating the animal owner's or harborer's responsibility for the acts and behavior of such person's animals at all times; 
(3)  Providing security to residents from annoyance, damage or destruction to property, intimidation, injury and health hazards by animals; 
(4)  Encouraging responsible pet ownership; and 
(5)  Providing standards for all persons and agencies, public or private, engaged in confinement, buying, selling, harboring or dealing in animals in any manner whatsoever. 
(Code 1966, § 6-01; Ord. No. 3340, § 1, 12-9-86)  
Sec. 5-3. - Powers and duties of animal control officer. 
The animal control officer or the agent of the animal control officer: 
(1)  May enter upon private premises to apprehend a stray animal, a vicious animal, a wild creature or an animal suspected of being infected with rabies; 
(2)  May enter upon private premises to investigate complaints of irresponsibility or inhumane animal care and seize animals which have been obviously neglected; 
(3)  May seize, impound or dispose of any vicious animal at any time necessary for the protection of any person or animal; 
(4)  Shall maintain a registry of all animals served by the animal shelter, including dates of receipt and discharge, reason for use, description of the animal, itemization of the impoundment expenses incurred; collect all fees and charges for seizure and impoundment; and supervise the disposition of all impounded animals; and 
(5)  Shall cooperate and work with the Morehouse Humane Society. 
(Code 1966, § 6-03; Ord. No. 3340, § 1, 12-9-86)  
Sec. 5-4. - Responsible animal care—General. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or harborer of a domestic animal not to provide for such person's animal: 
(1)  Sufficient quantity of good and wholesome food and water; 
(2)  Proper protection and care from the weather; 
(3)  Veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering; 
(4)  Humane treatment; and 
(5)  Prompt removal and sanitary disposal of all excreta deposited by such person's animal anywhere in the city. 
(b)  All pens, fences, yards or runs where any animal is kept shall be securely constructed and shall be of such construction as to be easily cleaned and kept in good repair and adequate for the purpose intended and shall not be allowed to become unsightly or smell offensively. 
(Code 1966, § 6-04, 10-131; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82; Ord. No. 3340, § 1, 12-9-86)  
Sec. 5-5. - Same—Running out of control; creating nuisance. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or harborer of any domestic animal to cause or allow the same to run out of control or create an animal nuisance as defined in section 5-1. 
(Code 1966, § 6-17; Ord. No. 3340, § 1, 12-9-86)  
Sec. 5-6. - Cruelty to animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Beat, underfeed, overload, overwork, torment, abandon or otherwise inhumanely treat any domestic animal anywhere in the city; 
(2)  Sell, offer for sale, barter or give away as a pet or novelty any rabbit, hare, baby chick, duckling or other fowl, which has been dyed, colored or otherwise treated to impart an artificial color thereto; 
(3)  Sell, offer for sale, barter or give away as a pet or novelty any baby chick or duckling; 
(4)  Kill or wound or attempt to kill or wound, or take the eggs or young of any game or song birds; 
(5)  Knowingly poison or cause to be poisoned any domestic animal, except that common rat poison mixed only with vegetable or grain substances may be exposed for the protection of property; or 
(6)  Give away any domestic animal as a prize or as an inducement to enter into any contract, game or other competition, or as an inducement to enter a place of amusement; or offer such animal as an incentive to enter into a business agreement when the offer was for the purpose of attracting trade. 
(Code 1966, §§ 6-05, 10-131; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82; Ord. No. 3340, § 1, 12-9-86) 
State Law reference— Cruelty, R.S. 14:102 et seq.; dyed chicks, etc., R.S. 3:2363.  
Sec. 5-7. - Vaccination for rabies—Required. 
Prior to March first of each year every owner of a dog six (6) months of age or over shall have such dog vaccinated against rabies. The owner of a dog that is less than six (6) months of age on March first of any year shall have such dog vaccinated against rabies when it reaches six (6) months of age, and such dog shall be vaccinated against rabies thereafter the same as any other dog. 
(Code 1966, § 6-06; Ord. No. 3340, § 1, 12-9-86) 
State Law reference— As to rabies inoculation, see the Sanitary Code, referred to in R.S. 40:4.  
Sec. 5-8. - Same—Certificate and tag. 
(a)  At the time of the vaccination, the owner of the dog shall be issued a vaccination certificate and a vaccination tag. It shall be a violation of this chapter for the owner of the dog to fail to keep such tag securely fastened to the collar or harness of the dog at all times, or to fail to keep the collar or harness on the dog at all times. 
(b)  Any owner or harborer who presents in writing to the animal control officer information that a tag has been lost and who produces the original vaccination certificate may be issued a duplicate vaccination tag. 
(Code 1966, § 6-07; Ord. No. 3340, § 1, 12-9-86)  
Sec. 5-9. - Same—Incorrect tag. 
It shall be a violation of this chapter for the owner of any dog to permit the dog to wear any vaccination tag not issued to that particular dog. 
(Code 1966, § 6-08; Ord. No. 3340, § 1, 12-9-86)  
Sec. 5-10. - Animal bites; observation. 
(a)  Any person having knowledge or reason to believe that any animal in the city has bitten a person shall report within twenty-four (24) hours, so far as is known, the name and address of the owner or harborer and the circumstances of the animal. Such reports concerning bites shall be made to the police department. 
(b)  Whenever any animal has rabies, or is suspected of having rabies, or when any animal which has attacked or bitten a person, such animal shall be seized by the animal control officer and impounded with a licensed veterinarian for observation, examination and testing. Such animal shall be kept under observation for a period of ten (10) days, unless such animal is too vicious and dangerous to be impounded safely, in which case it may be killed and its head shipped to a health department laboratory for an examination for rabies. Any animal which is kept under observation for a period of ten (10) days and does not become ill or die, may be released from such observation with owner paying veterinarian charges, and any applicable fees required by this chapter. If the animal becomes ill or dies from any cause within the observation period, it shall be the health officer's duty to have the animal's head submitted to a health department laboratory for examination for rabies. Any individual causing, aiding or abetting, the hiding of an animal which has attacked or bitten anyone shall be subject to penalties as hereinafter provided. 
(Code 1966, § 6-09; Ord. No. 3340, § 1, 12-9-86)  
Sec. 5-11. - Diseased animals. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or harborer of any domestic animal to knowingly cause or allow the same to be exposed in any public place anywhere in the city, or to ship or remove such animal from the owner's premises, when the same is afflicted with a contagious infectious disease, except under the supervision of the animal control officer. It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to order the disposition of such diseased animals and treatment of the affected premises to prevent the communication and spread of contagion and infection, except in cases where a licensed veterinarian is empowered to act and does act. 
(Code 1966, § 6-10; Ord. No. 3340, § 1, 12-9-86)  
Sec. 5-12. - Swine, horses and mules in public rights-of-way prohibited; penned animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, ride or possess swine, horses, mules or any animal of the horse and mule kind within the public rights-of-way in the City of Bastrop or upon the private property or premises owned by another, leased or legally occupied by others. The keeping, riding and possession of such animals in the pubic rights-of-way is permitted when (a) animals are being transported on trailers, trains and other forms of commercial carriage that are designed for the transportation of livestock and (b) animals are kept, ridden or possessed as a part of a permitted parade or permitted fair, circus or like form of amusement. Such activities conducted upon the grounds at the Morehouse Activity Center that are a part of the official activities or events occurring at the Morehouse Activity Center are exempt from the prohibitions of this section. 
(b)  The following animals may be kept provided they are penned by a fence adequate to contain the penned animals at all times: 
(1)  Cows and animals of the cow kind; 
(2)  Sheep, goats, chickens or geese; and 
(3)  Horses, mules or any animal of the horse and mule kind. 
(Ord. No. 11-4199, 7-14-11)  
Sec. 5-13. - Keeping of wild or vicious animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or have in such person's possession or under such person's control within the city any poisonous reptile, or any other dangerous or carnivorous wild animal or reptile, any vicious or dangerous domesticated animal, or any other animal or reptile of wild, vicious or dangerous propensity, including but not being limited to the following: 
(1)  All poisonous animals including rear-fang snakes; 
(2)  Apes; chimpanzees (Pan); gibbons (Hylobates); gorillas (Gorilla); orangutans (Pongo); and siamangs (Symphalangus); 
(3)  Baboons (Papoi, Mandrillus); 
(4)  Bears (Ursidae); 
(5)  Bison (Bison); 
(6)  Cheetahs (Acinonyx jubatus); 
(7)  Crocodilians (Crocodilia), thirty (30) inches in length or more; 
(8)  Constrictor snakes, six (6) feet in length or more; 
(9)  Coyotes (Canis latrans); 
(10)  Deer (Cervidae); includes all members of the deer family, for example, white-tailed deer, elk, antelope and moose; 
(11)  Elephants (Elephas and Loxodonta); 
(12)  Gamecocks and other fighting birds; 
(13)  Hippopotami (Hippopotamidae); 
(14)  Hyenas (Hyaenidae); 
(15)  Jaguars (Panthera onca); 
(16)  Leopards (Panthera pardus); 
(17)  Lions (Panthera leo); 
(18)  Lynxes (Lynx); 
(19)  Monkeys, old world (Cercopithecidae); 
(20)  Ostriches (Struthio); 
(21)  Piranha fish (Characidae); 
(22)  Pumas (Felis concolor), also known as cougars, mountain lions and panthers; 
(23)  Rhinoceroses (Rhinocero tidae); 
(24)  Sharks (class Chondrichthyes); 
(25)  Snow leopards (Panthera uncia); 
(26)  Tigers (Panthera tigris); and 
(27)  Wolves (Canis lupus). 
(b)  The following types of domesticated animals may be kept provided that they are caged at all times: 
(1)  Skunks; 
(2)  Raccoons; and 
(3)  Squirrels. 
(c)  The above provisions shall not apply to licensed pet shops, menageries, zoological gardens and circuses, if: 
(1)  Their location conforms to the provisions of the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(2)  All animals and animal quarters are kept in a clean and sanitary condition and so maintained as to eliminate objectionable odors. 
(3)  Animals are maintained in quarters so constructed as to prevent their escape. 
(4)  No person lives or resides within one hundred (100) feet of the quarters in which the animals are kept. 
(Code 1966, § 6-12; Ord. No. 3340, § 1, 12-9-86)  
Sec. 5-14. - Effective yarding and control of vicious animals. 
(a)  Any animal that has bitten or attacked a person or other animal is hereby deemed and declared to be a vicious animal and shall be kept effectively yarded and controlled at all times by the owner or harborer or other person having custody thereof. The owner of any vicious animal found running at large in violation of this section shall be provided with a notice reading substantially as follows: 
"TO:   (Owner)   
FROM:  Animal Control Officer 
City of Bastrop 
Animal Control Shelter 
Bastrop, Louisiana 
RE:   (Describe Animal)   
You are hereby notified that the animal described above is and has been declared to be a vicious animal because it attacked or bit a person under the following circumstances: _____
_____
_____ 
You are further notified that in the event this animal is again found running at large in violation of section 5-14 of the Bastrop Code of Ordinances, such animal shall constitute a public nuisance and it shall promptly be impounded and destroyed in a humane manner, and without further notice to you (who will be deemed to have abandoned the same); or, in the alternative, it may be released to a responsible person conditioned upon satisfactory proof that such person will protect the public from such animal. 
This notice given this _____ day of ____________________, 19_____, in compliance with section 5-14 of the Bastrop Code of Ordinances. 
This Notice Received: 
_____
Owner 
_____
Date Received 
City of Bastrop 
Animal Control Shelter 
By:  _____
Animal Control Officer" 
(b)  In the event the vicious animal is again found running at large in violation of this section after its owner has received the notice described above, such animal shall constitute a public nuisance and shall promptly be destroyed in a humane manner and without further notice to its owner, who will be deemed to have abandoned the animal, or, in the alternative, it may be released to a responsible person conditioned upon satisfactory proof that such person will protect the public from such animal. 
(Code 1966, § 6-13; Ord. No. 3340, § 1, 12-9-86)  
Sec. 5-15. - Animal exhibitions. 
Exhibitions or parades involving ferae natural or domestic animals or both may be conducted only upon the issuance of a permit therefor by the chief of police. Performing exhibits, circuses and parades must be investigated in advance as to purpose, intent, animal procedures and assurances for human health and safety. 
(Code 1966, § 6-14; Ord. No. 3340, § 1, 12-9-86)  
Sec. 5-16. - Female animals in heat. 
All female animals in heat shall be confined in a building or secure enclosure or upon leash in such a manner as the animal cannot come in contact with a male animal except for planned breeding. Should such animal running at large in heat be properly tagged or identified, the animal control officer shall pick up and place the animal with a veterinarian, and the owner or harborer may reclaim the same by paying the owner reclaiming fee as provided in section 5-22 and the veterinarian's board bill. 
(Code 1966, § 6-15; Ord. No. 3340, § 1, 12-9-86)  
Sec. 5-17. - Professional breeder permit. 
(a)  Any person desiring to obtain a professional breeder permit shall make application on forms provided by the city. No breeder permit shall be issued to any multiple-family residential premises and only one (1) permit shall be issued to any one (1) household. Upon verification of the information provided, receipt of the required certification, satisfactory inspection of related premises and facilities by the city health officer or animal control officer, and payment of the fee involved, a breeder permit shall be issued. 
(b)  A breeder permit shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per calendar year, twenty-five dollars ($25.00) minimum per animal, plus two dollars ($2.00) per animal or two dollars ($2.00) per sexually altered animal, in excess of six (6). 
(Code 1966, § 6-16; Ord. No. 3340, § 1, 12-9-86)  
Sec. 5-18. - Boarding kennels and pet shops. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate a boarding kennel or pet shop without having first obtained an occupational license and a permit therefor. 
(b)  No person operating a boarding kennel or pet shop shall allow any kennels or pens to be located less than ten (10) feet from the nearest public place or lot line bounding the premises. 
(c)  Any pet shop as defined herein shall comply with all of the requirements set forth below: 
(1)  Application for permit: Application forms may be obtained from the animal control shelter or may be requested by telephone or in writing. After the application form has been completed, it shall be mailed or delivered to the animal control shelter. If an applicant certifies that all the requirements of these rules and regulations have been met in such person's establishment, the supervisor of the animal control shelter shall issue a temporary permit until such time as the supervisor has made a physical inspection of the establishment, which inspection shall be made within ninety (90) days of such issuance. Such temporary permit shall not be valid for more than ninety (90) days from the date of its issuance and shall be revoked at the time of inspection if all permit requirements are not met. Upon certification by the supervisor of the animal control shelter that all permit requirements have been met, the supervisor shall forthwith issue a regular permit which shall be valid until December thirty-first of the year of issuance. 
(2)  Renewal of permits: Prior to December thirty-first of each year, every holder of a pet shop permit shall renew same by applying to the animal control shelter for the appropriate form, completing same and returning it to the animal control shelter as hereinabove set forth. 
(3)  Inspection: Every pet shop shall be subject to reasonable inspections during its regular business hours by the supervisor of the animal control shelter; provided, however, that such inspections do not interfere with the orderly conduct of business of the pet shop. 
(4)  Prohibition: No pet shop shall breed, hold, buy, sell, or offer to sell, whether as owner, agent, or on consignment, any wild animal which is hereby defined as those animals wild by nature, which, because of habit, mode of life or natural instinct are incapable of being completely domesticated and require the exercise of art, force or skill to keep them in subjection. 
(5)  Minimum standards of care of animals: 
a.  Each animal shall receive its minimum daily food requirements and shall be given fresh water to drink at least once every morning and once every afternoon. 
b.  Containers (cages) which house an animal shall be cleaned every day. 
c.  Every bird shall have sufficient room in its container (cage) to sit on a perch. Large birds shall not be kept in the same container (cage) with small birds. 
d.  No animal shall be kept in darkness during daylight hours, unless it is more natural for the animal. 
e.  Every feline six (6) months or over and every canine twelve (12) months or over, shall be kept in a separate container (cage). 
f.  Animals of the opposite sex shall be kept in separate containers (cages). 
g.  No animal shall be sold to the public until it has a certificate from a veterinarian practicing in the parish showing proof of the necessary shots and immunization. 
(Code 1966, § 6-19; Ord. No. 3340, § 1, 12-9-86)  
Sec. 5-19. - Impounding—Required; holding period. 
It shall be the duty of the animal control officer and/or appointed representative to seize and impound any dog not vaccinated and not tagged with the current official tag, and any dog so seized and impounded shall be held for a period of at least five (5) days during which time the owner or harborer may claim such dog by paying the fees prescribed in section 5-22. 
(Code 1966, § 6-17; Ord. No. 3340, § 1, 12-9-86)  
Sec. 5-20. - Same—Notice to owner; conditions of release. 
When the owner or harborer of a stray animal is known through licensing, collar identification or other immediate means, the animal control officer shall notify such person of the impounding in the most expeditious manner available. The release of an impounded animal shall not be made by the animal control officer until all expenses of apprehension, notification and impounding have been paid by the owner or harborer. 
(Code 1966, § 6-17; Ord. No. 3340, § 1, 12-9-86)  
Sec. 5-21. - Same—Reclamation. 
The owner or harborer of the stray animal or unvaccinated animal shall have five (5) days from the time of impoundment in which to claim the animal. Failure by the owner or harborer to obtain release of the impounded animal within this time period shall be deemed an act of disclaimer and the animal control officer shall be authorized to allow the adoption by any person desiring same who is willing to pay the necessary fees therefor, or deliver the animal to the Morehouse Humane Society for its foster home and extended adoption program. 
(Code 1966, § 6-17; Ord. No. 3340, § 1, 12-9-86)  
Sec. 5-22. - Same—Fees. 
The owner reclaiming fee shall be a minimum of ten dollars ($10.00) for the first impoundment of the animal, fifteen dollars ($15.00) for the second impoundment; twenty dollars ($20.00) for the third impoundment; and thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for the fourth and other subsequent impoundments, if any. In addition thereto a boarding fee of three dollars ($3.00) minimum shall be charged for each day the animal has been impounded. 
(Code 1966, § 6-17; Ord. No. 3340, § 1, 12-9-86)  
Sec. 5-23. - Dangerous dogs. 
The purposes of this section are to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Bastrop, Louisiana. It is intended to be applicable to "dangerous" dogs, as defined herein, and to regulate dogs that are commonly referred to as "pit bulls," as defined herein, by ensuring responsible handling by their owners through registration, confinement, and liability insurance. 
(Ord. No. 09-4189, 4-9-09) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-4189, adopted April 9, 2009, amended § 5-23 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 5-23, pertained to violations, and derived from §§ 16-18, 16-20 of the 1966 Code; Ord. No. 3340, § 1, 12-9-86.  
Sec. 5-24. - Definitions. 
When used in this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases, and their derivations shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the content clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal control officer means any person employed or appointed by the city that is authorized to investigate and enforce violations relating to animal control or cruelty under the provisions of this section. 
At large means that a dog is not under the direct control of the owner. 
Dangerous dog means any dog that, because of its aggressive nature, training or characteristic behavior, presents a risk of serious physical harm or death to human beings, or would constitute a danger to human life, physical well being, or property if not kept under the direct control of the owner. This definition shall not apply to dogs utilized by law enforcement officers in the performance of their duties. The term "dangerous dog" includes any dog that according to the records of either the city animal shelter, the city department of animal control, or any law enforcement agency: 
(1)  Has aggressively bitten, attacked, endangered, or inflicted severe injury on a human being on public or private property, or when unprovoked, has chased or approached a person upon the street, sidewalks, or any public grounds in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, provided that such actions are attested to in a sworn statement by one (1) or more persons and dutifully investigated by any of the above-referenced authorities; 
(2)  Has more than once severely injured or killed a domestic animal while off the owner's property; or 
(3)  Has been used primarily or in part for the purpose of dog fighting, or is a dog trained for dog fighting. 
Direct control means immediate, continuous physical control of a dog such as by means of a leash, cord, secure fence, or chain of such strength to restrain the dog and controlled by a person capable of restraining the dog, or safe and secure restraint within a vehicle. If the controlling person is at all times fully and clearly within unobstructed sight and bearing of the dog, voice control shall be considered direct control when the dog is actually participating in training or in an official showing, obedience, or field event. Direct control shall not be required of dogs actually participating in a legal sport in an authorized area or to government police dogs. 
Director means the director of the department of animal control. 
Impoundment means the taking or picking up and confining of an animal by any police officer, animal control officer or any other public officer under the provisions of this section. 
Muzzle means a device constructed of strong, soft material or of metal, designed to fasten over the mouth of an animal to prevent the animal from biting any person or other animal. 
Pit bull dog means and includes any of the following dogs: 
(1)  The Staffordshire Bull Terrier breed of dogs. 
(2)  The American Staffordshire Terrier breed of dogs. 
(3)  The American Pit Bull Terrier breed of dogs. 
(4)  Dogs that have the appearance and characteristics of being predominately of the breeds of dogs known as Staffordshire Bull Terrier, American Pit Bull Terrier, or American Staffordshire Terrier. 
Owner means any person, partnership, corporation or other legal entity owning, harboring or keeping any animal, or in the case of a person under the age of 18, that person's parent or legal guardian. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed or, sheltered for three (3) or more consecutive days. This definition shall not apply to any veterinary clinic or boarding kennel. 
Sanitary condition means a condition of good order and cleanliness to minimize the possibility of disease transmission. 
Under restraint means that an animal is secured by a leash, led under the control of a person physically capable of restraining the animal and obedient to that person's commands, or securely enclosed within the real property limits of the owner's premises. 
(Ord. No. 09-4189, 4-9-09)  
Sec. 5-25. - Procedure for declaring a dog dangerous. 
(a)  An animal control officer or any adult person may request under oath that a dog be classified as dangerous as defined in section 5-24 by submitting a sworn written complaint on a form approved by the director to the department of animal control. Upon receipt of such complaint, the director shall notify the owner of the dog that a complaint has been filed and that an investigation into the allegations as set forth in the complaint will be conducted. 
(b)  At the conclusion of an investigation, the director may: 
(1)  Determine that the dog is not dangerous and, if the dog is impounded, waive any impoundment fees incurred and release the dog to its owner; or 
(2)  Determine that the dog is dangerous and order the owner to comply with the requirements for keeping dangerous dogs set forth in section 5-29, and if the dog is impounded, release the dog to its owner after the owner has paid all fees incurred for the impoundment. If all impoundment fees have not been paid within ten (10) business days after a final determination that a dog is dangerous, the director may cause the dog to be humanely destroyed. 
(c)  The provisions of sections 5-24 through 40 are intended to supplement, and not supplant, the provisions regarding wild and vicious animals covered by the chapter, and the policies and procedures set forth in section 5-14. 
(Ord. No. 09-4189, 4-9-09)  
Sec. 5-26. - Notification of dangerous dog declaration. 
(a)  Within five (5) business days after declaring a dog dangerous, the director shall notify the owner by certified mail of the dog's designation as a dangerous dog and any specific restrictions and conditions for keeping the dog, as set forth in section 5-29 of this chapter. The director also shall notify the chief executive and the police department of the designation of any dog as a dangerous dog. Such notification shall describe the dog and specify any particular requirements or conditions placed upon the dog owner. 
(b)  The notice shall inform the dog owner that he may request, in writing, a hearing to contest the director's finding and designation within five (5) business days after delivery of the dangerous dog declaration notice. 
(c)  If the director cannot with due diligence locate the owner of a dog that has been seized pursuant to this chapter, the director shall cause the dog to be impounded for not less than five (5) business days. If after five (5) days, the owner fails to claim the dog, the director may cause the dog to be humanely destroyed. 
(Ord. No. 09-4189, 4-9-09)  
Sec. 5-27. - Hearing on dangerous dog declaration. 
(a)  The department of animal control shall hold a hearing within fifteen (15) business days after receiving the dog owner's written request for such a hearing. The department shall provide notice of the date, time and location of the hearing to the dog owner by certified mail and to the complainant by regular mail. 
(b)  At a hearing, all interested persons shall be given the opportunity to present evidence on the issue of the dog's dangerousness. Criteria to be considered in a hearing required by this section shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Provocation; 
(2)  Severity of attack or injury to a person or domestic animal; 
(3)  Previous aggressive history of the dog; 
(4)  Observable behavior of the dog; 
(5)  Site and circumstances of the incident; and 
(6)  Statements from interested parties. 
(c)  A determination at a hearing that the dog is in fact a dangerous dog as defined in section 5-24 shall subject the dog and its owner to the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Failure of the dog owner to request a hearing shall result in the dog being finally declared a dangerous dog and shall subject the dog and its owner to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 09-4189, 4-9-09)  
Sec. 5-28. - Appeal from dangerous dog declaration. 
If the director determines that a dog is dangerous at the conclusion of a hearing conducted under section 5-27, that decision shall be final unless the dog owner applies to a court of competent jurisdiction for any remedies that may be available within ten (10) days after receiving notice that the dog has been finally declared dangerous. The appeal must be a trial de novo and shall be a civil proceeding for the purpose of affirming or reversing the director's determination of dangerousness. 
(Ord. No. 09-4189, 4-9-09)  
Sec. 5-29. - Keeping of dangerous dogs. 
The keeping of a dangerous dog as defined in section 5-24 shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Leash. No person having charge, custody, control or possession of a dangerous dog shall allow the dog to exit its kennel, pen or other proper enclosure unless such dog is securely attached to a leash not more than four (4) feet in length. No such person shall permit a dangerous dog to be kept on a chain, rope or other type of leash outside its kennel or pen unless a person capable of controlling the dog is in physical control of the leash. 
(2)  Muzzle. It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper of a dangerous dog to allow the dog to be outside of its proper enclosure unless it is necessary for the dog to receive veterinary care or exercise. In such cases, the dog shall wear a properly fitted muzzle to prevent it from biting humans or other animals. Such muzzle shall not interfere with the dog's breathing or vision. 
(3)  Confinement. Except when leashed and muzzled as provided in this section, a dangerous dog shall be securely confined indoors or confined in a locked pen or other secure enclosure that is suitable to prevent the entry of children and is designed to prevent the dog from escaping. The enclosure shall include shelter and protection from the elements and shall provide adequate exercise room, light and ventilation. The enclosed structure shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  The structure must have secure sides and a secure top, or all sides must be at least eight (8) feet high; 
b.  The structure must have a bottom permanently attached to the sides or the sides must be embedded not less than one (1) foot into the ground; and 
c.  The structure must be of such material and closed in such a manner that the dog cannot exit the enclosure on its own. 
(4)  Indoor confinement. No dangerous dog shall be kept on a porch, patio or in any part of a house or structure that would allow the dog to exit such building on its own volition. In addition, no such dog shall be kept in a house or structure when the windows or screen doors are the only obstacle preventing the dog from exiting the structure. 
(5)  Signs. All owners, keepers or harborers of dangerous dogs shall display in a prominent place on their premises a sign easily readable by the public using the words "Beware of Dog." 
(6)  Reserved. 
(7)  Animals born of registered dogs. All offspring born of dangerous dogs registered with the department of animal control also must be registered with the department within six (6) weeks of birth. 
(8)  Notification of escape. The owner or keeper of a dangerous dog shall notify the department of animal control immediately if such dog escapes from its enclosure or restraint and is at large. Such immediate notification shall also be required if the dog bites or attacks a person or domestic animal. 
(9)  Failure to comply. It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any owner of a dangerous dog registered with the department of animal control to fail to comply with the requirements and conditions set forth in this section. Any dog found to be in violation of this section shall be subject to immediately seizure and impoundment. In addition, failure to comply with the requirements and conditions set forth in this chapter shall result in the revocation of the dog's license and the permit providing for the keeping of such animal. 
(10)  Removal and concealment prohibited. It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any owner of a dangerous dog to remove from its location or conceal the location of any dangerous dog for the purpose of evading law enforcement or investigative authorities, or for any person to aid and abet in the removal or concealment of a dangerous dog for the purpose of evading law enforcement or investigative authorities. 
(Ord. No. 09-4189, 4-9-09)  
Sec. 5-30. - Permit and tag required for a dangerous dog. 
(a)  The owner of a dangerous dog shall, within three (3) business days after the classification of the dog as dangerous or upon acquisition of such a dog, obtain an annual permit from the department of animal control to harbor the dog. The fee for such permit shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per year. 
(b)  At the time the permit is issued, a red circular tag shall be issued to the owner of the dangerous dog. The tag shall be worn at all times by the dog to clearly and easily identify it as a dangerous dog. 
(c)  The permit for maintaining a dangerous dog shall be presented to an animal control officer upon demand. 
(Ord. No. 09-4189, 4-9-09)  
Sec. 5-31. - Pit bull dogs presumed dangerous. 
There shall be an irrefutable presumption that any dog meeting the definition of pit bull dog as set forth in subsections 5-24(h)(1)—(4), is a dangerous dog and is therefore subject to the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 09-4189, 4-9-09)  
Sec. 5-32. - Notification of intent to impound. 
(a)  When the director of animal control or his designee intends to impound a dog declared to be dangerous for violation of section 5-29 he shall notify the owner or custodian of the dog, by certified mail, of the intended impoundment at least five (5) business days prior to the intended impoundment, except as provided in section 5-33. 
(b)  The notice of intent to impound shall inform the owner or custodian of the dog that he may request in writing, within five (5) business days prior to the intended impoundment, a hearing to contest the intended impoundment and finding of violation. 
(c)  Upon request by the owner or custodian of the dog for a hearing pursuant to subsection (b), a hearing shall be held within ten (10) business days after the request for a hearing. Notice of the date, time and location of the hearing shall be provided by certified mail to the dog's owner or custodian requesting such hearing. 
(d)  If the owner or custodian requests a hearing pursuant to subsection (b), no impoundment shall take place until conclusion of the hearing, except as authorized in section 5-33. 
(Ord. No. 09-4189, 4-9-09)  
Sec. 5-33. - Immediate impoundment. 
(a)  A dog declared to be dangerous may be immediately impounded without a pre-impoundment hearing when the director of animal control or his designee determines such immediate impoundment is necessary for the protection of public health or safety. Such immediate impoundment may be ordered for violation of section 5-29 or when the dog bites a person or domestic animal. 
(b)  The owner or custodian of the dog immediately impounded pursuant to subsection (a) shall be notified of the impoundment by certified mail within five (5) business days after the dog's impoundment. 
(c)  The notice of impoundment shall inform the owner or custodian of the dog that he may request, in writing, a hearing to contest the impoundment within five (5) business days after the mailing of the notice of impoundment. 
(d)  Upon request by the owner or custodian of the dog for a hearing under subsection (c), a hearing shall be held within ten (10) business days after such request. Notice of the date, time and location of the hearing shall be provided by certified mail to the dog owner requesting the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 09-4189, 4-9-09)  
Sec. 5-34. - Impoundment hearing. 
(a)  If after a hearing on impoundment, the director or his designee finds no violation of section 5-29, or that the dog has not bitten an individual, the dog shall be returned to its owner or custodian if already impounded, or shall not be impounded as intended. 
(b)  Incident to the findings and conclusions made at the impoundment hearing, the director or his designee may impose reasonable restrictions and conditions for the maintenance of the dog to ensure the health and safety of the public and the animal. Such conditions may include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Posting of bond or other proof of ability to respond in damages; 
(2)  Specific requirements as to size, construction and design of a kennel in which to house the dog; 
(3)  Requirements as to type and method of restraint and/or muzzling of the dog; 
(4)  Photo identification or permanent marking of the dog for purposes of identification; and 
(5)  Payment of reasonable fees to recover the costs incurred by the department of animal control in ensuring compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 09-4189, 4-9-09)  
Sec. 5-35. - Destruction. 
(a)  The director of animal control or his designee may order the destruction of a dog that it determines to be extremely dangerous to public health or safety, a dog that has made an extremely vicious attack upon an individual, or a dog declared dangerous whose owner is unable or unwilling to adequately restrain it. 
(b)  The director of his designee shall give written notice by certified mail of his intention to destroy such dog to the owner or custodian of the dog, who may request in writing, within ten (10) business days after delivery of such notice, a hearing to contest the intended destruction. 
(c)  If no hearing is requested pursuant to subsection (b), the dog shall be destroyed pursuant to applicable provisions of law. 
(d)  If a hearing is requested pursuant to subsection (b), such hearing shall be held within ten (10) business days after the request; and the dog shall not be destroyed prior to the conclusion of the hearing. 
(e)  The dog owner shall be responsible for payment of all boarding costs and other fees as may be required for the city to humanely and safely keep the animal during any legal proceeding. 
(Ord. No. 09-4189, 4-9-09)  
Sec. 5-36. - Appeal from order of humane destruction. 
If the director or his designee orders a dangerous dog to be humanely destroyed pursuant to section 5-35, that decision shall be final unless the dog owner applies to a court of competent jurisdiction for any remedies that may be available within fifteen (15) days after receiving notice of the destruction order. If an appeal is timely filed, the director shall suspend the destruction order pending the final determination of the court. The appeal hearing must be a trial de novo and shall be a civil proceeding for the purpose of affirming or reversing the director's destruction order. 
(Ord. No. 09-4189, 4-9-09)  
Sec. 5-37. - Change of ownership. 
(a)  Any owner of a dangerous dog who sells or otherwise transfers ownership, custody or residence of the dog shall, within ten business days after such change of ownership or residence, provide written notification to the department of animal control of the name, address and telephone number of the new owner. It also shall be the responsibility of the person transferring ownership or custody of the dog to provide written notification of the dog's classification as dangerous to the person receiving the dog. The previous owner shall furnish a copy of such notification to the department of animal control along with written acknowledgment by the new owner of his receipt of such notification. The director of animal control or his designee shall notify the chief executive and the police department of any changes of ownership, custody or residence of the dog within three (3) business days after receiving the required information from the previous dog owner. 
(b)  Any person receiving a dog classified as dangerous must obtain the required permit, tag and enclosure prior to acquisition of the dog. The new owner shall comply fully with the provisions of this chapter pertaining to the payment of fees, and maintenance, control and ownership of a dangerous dog. Notwithstanding any other section of the Code of Ordinances that may provide to the contrary, the owner shall not be required to carry liability insurance. 
(Ord. No. 09-4189, 4-9-09; Ord. No. 12-4213, 9-13-12)  
Sec. 5-38. - Continuation of dangerous dog declaration. 
Any dog that has been declared dangerous by any agency or department of this city, another municipality, county, or state shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter for the remainder of its life. The person owning or having custody of any dog designated as a dangerous dog by any municipality, county, or state government shall notify the department of animal control of the dog's address and conditions of maintenance within ten (10) days of moving the animal into the City of Bastrop. The restrictions and conditions of maintenance of any dog declared dangerous by this city, another municipality, county or state shall remain in force while the dog remains in the city. 
(Ord. No. 09-4189, 4-9-09)  
Sec. 5-39. - Conflicting ordinances. 
All other ordinances of the City of Bastrop that are in conflict with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict. 
(Ord. No. 09-4189, 4-9-09)  
Sec. 5-40. - Severability. 
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. If any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of the chapter shall for any reason be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this chapter, but they shall remain in effect; it being the legislative intent that this chapter shall remain in effect notwithstanding the validity of any part. 
(Ord. No. 09-4189, 4-9-09)  
Chapter 6 - BUILDINGS; CONSTRUCTION AND RELATED ACTIVITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority, § 5(32), (33). 
Cross reference— Restriction as to time of day because of noise, § 11-4(b)(8); sewers, § 12-20 et seq. 
State Law reference— Building regulation authority, R.S. 33:4721 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-4228, adopted November 13, 2014 , amended §§ 6-1—6-11 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former §§ 6-1—6-11, pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
City of Bastrop Building Official shall mean that employee or individual contracted by the City of Bastrop to serve as the building official for the City of Bastrop and to serve as building codes enforcement officer for the City of Bastrop's incorporated area. 
( Ord. No. 14-4228, 11-13-14 )  
Sec. 6-2. - Creation of enforcement agency. 
The City of Bastrop Building Department is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the building official. 
(a)  Deputies. In accordance with the prescribed procedures of the City of Bastrop Building Department and with the concurrence of the appointing authority, the building official shall have the authority to appoint a deputy building official, the related technical officers, inspectors, plan examiners and other city employees or contract agents. Such deputies shall have powers as delegated by the building official. 
(b)  Enforcement. Enforcement procedures by the code enforcement officers such as the building official, deputies, or third-party providers acting in the capacity of a code enforcement officer shall include examination or review of plans, drawings, or specifications; the conducting of inspections; and the issuance, denial, or revocation of permits. 
(c)  Appointment. The City of Bastrop hereby appoints the Institute for Building Technology and Safety (IBTS) as the building official and the provider of building department services. IBTS shall provide an International Code Certified Building Official and a Certified Flood Manager to deliver services. 
( Ord. No. 14-4228, 11-13-14 )  
Sec. 6-2.1. - Building official—Qualifications. 
To be eligible for appointment, the candidate for the position of building official shall be well-versed in approved methods of building construction and shall be well-versed in a knowledge of the city building code and the other construction codes in effect in the city. The building official shall be in good health, physically capable of making the necessary examinations and inspections. The building official shall not have any interest whatever, directly or indirectly, in the sale or manufacture of any material, process or device entering into or used in or in connection with building construction, alterations, removal and demolition. 
( Ord. No. 14-4228, 11-13-14 )  
Sec. 6-3. - Adoption of state uniform construction codes. 
Pursuant to R.S. 40:1730.21 et seq., the following construction codes (hereinafter sometimes referred to as "code") are hereby adopted as the regulations governing construction of buildings and other structures in City of Bastrop. Unless specified, all standards contained in a referenced code are adopted and included for purposes of this chapter. Unless referenced by name or letter designation, no appendix or appendices to the codes specified herein are adopted. 
(a)  International Building Code, current state adopted edition, as published by the International Code Council, not including 11—Accessibility, 27—Electrical, and 29—Plumbing Systems, including any standards referenced therein, but not including any appendices thereto; and 
(b)  International Existing Building Code, current state adopted edition, as published by the International Code Council, including any standards referenced therein, but not including any appendices thereto and not including Part 1—Administration; 
(c)  International Residential Code (IRC), current state adopted edition, as published by the International Code Council, Existing Buildings and Structures, including any standards referenced therein, but not including any appendices thereto and; but not including Parts I—Administration, V—Mechanical, VII—Plumbing, and VIII—Electrical. The enforcement of the IRC Standards are mandatory only with respect to new construction, reconstruction, additions to homes previously built to the International Residential Code, and extensive alterations. 
(i)  For purposes of this paragraph, an extensive alteration shall mean an alteration when the total area of all the work areas included in the alteration exceeds fifty (50) percent of the area of the dwelling unit. 
(ii)  For purposes of this paragraph, "reconstruction" and "alteration" shall have the same meaning as such terms are defined in Appendix J of the 2006 edition of the International Residential Code. For purposes of this Paragraph, "addition" shall have the same meaning as such term is defined in Part II of the 2006 edition of the International Residential Code. 
(iii)  Part IV—Energy Conservation of the latest edition of the International Residential Code is hereby amended to require that supply and return ducts be insulated to a minimum of R-6. 
(iv)  For purposes of this section, the 2006 edition of the International Residential Code is hereby adopted and amended to include Section R301.2.1.1 of the 2003 edition of the International Residential Code in lieu of Section R301.2.1.1 of the 2006 edition. 
(v)  IRC R301.2.1.1 (Design Criteria) therein shall be amended as follows and shall only apply to the International Residential Code, 2006 edition. 
(1)  Item 6 of Guide to Concrete Masonry Residential Construction in High Winds Areas, as published by the American Concrete Institute, shall be added; and 
(2)  Item 7, Optional Code-plus Fortified for Safer Living, as published by Institute for Business and Home Safety, shall be added; and 
(3)  Item 8, Optional Code-plus Blueprint for Safety, as published by Federal Alliance for Safe Homes, shall be added. 
(d)  The International Mechanical Code (IMC), current state adopted edition, as published by the International Code Council, but not including any appendices thereto; and 
(e)  The Louisiana State Plumbing Code (Part XIV (Plumbing) of the State Sanitary Code) as amended by the state health officer acting through the office of public health of the department of health and hospitals. Nothing in this part shall be construed so as to prevent the state health officer from enforcing Part XIV (Plumbing) of the State Sanitary Code, the enforcement of which is his statutory and regulatory responsibility. 
(f)  The International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC), current state adopted edition, as published by the International Code Council, but not including any appendices thereto; and 
(g)  The National Electrical Code (NEC), current state adopted edition, as published by the National Fire Protection Association. 
(h)  Nothing in this article shall conflict with the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development's regulations regarding manufactured housing construction or the provisions of R.S. 51:912.21 et seq., as it relates to manufactured housing installation. Further, it is the intent of the city that any service, renovation, repair, or warranty work performed on a manufactured home shall be handled under the appropriate federal standards governing manufactured housing construction or state standards governing installation, and all such work shall be under the jurisdiction of the Louisiana Manufactured Housing Commission. Additionally, the exemption for manufactured housing provided for in this article shall extend to and include driveways, steps, decks, or other similar accessory structures or work, but shall not include any additional living area or other type of heated and cooled space outside of the original footprint of the manufactured home. 
( Ord. No. 14-4228, 11-13-14 )  
Sec. 6-4. - Duties and powers of the building official. 
The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the code. The building official shall have the authority to render interpretations of the code and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in conformance with the intent and purpose of the code. Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in the code. 
Applications and permits. The building official shall receive applications, review construction documents and issue permits for the erection and alteration of buildings and structures, inspect the premises for which such permits have been issued and enforce compliance with the provisions of the code. 
Inspections. The building official is authorized to make all of the required inspections, or the building official shall have the authority to accept reports of inspection by a contracted agent (with sufficient certifications) or by certified third-party providers. Reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be completed by an individual listed on the State's list of certified third party providers. The building official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise, subject to the approval of the appointing authority. 
Right of entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of the code, or where the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a structure or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or in violation of the code which makes the structure or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official or designee is authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by the code, provided that if such structure or premises be occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such structure or premises be unoccupied, the building official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry. 
Department records. The building official shall keep official records of applications received, permits and certificates issued, fees collected, reports of inspections, and notices and orders issued. Such records shall be retained in the official records for the period required for the retention of public records. 
Liability. The building official, member of the board of appeals or employee charged with the enforcement of the code, while acting for the City of Bastrop Building Department in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties required by the code or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally and is hereby relieved from personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against an officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of the code shall be defended by legal representative of the City of Bastrop Building Department until the final termination of the proceedings. The building official or any subordinate shall not be liable for cost in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of the code. 
Approved materials and equipment. Materials, equipment and devices approved by the building official shall be constructed and installed in accordance with such approval. 
Used materials and equipment. Used materials, equipment and devices shall not be reused unless approved by the building official. 
Modifications. Wherever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of the code, the building official shall have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases, provided the building official shall first find that special individual reason makes the strict letter of the code impractical and the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose of the code and that such modification does not lessen health, life and fire safety requirements or structural soundness. The details of action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the files of the City of Bastrop Building Department. 
Alternative materials, design and methods of construction and equipment. The provisions of the code are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to prohibit any design or method of construction not specifically prescribed by the code, provided that any such alternative has been approved. An alternative material, design or method of construction shall be approved where the building official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of the code, and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the code. Compliance with the specific performance-based provisions of the Codes in lieu of specific requirements of the code shall also be permitted as an alternate. 
Tests. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of the code, or evidence that a material or method does not conform to the requirements of the code, or in order to substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the building official shall have the authority to require tests as evidence of compliance to be made at no expense to the City of Bastrop Building Department. Test methods shall be as specified in the code or by other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the building official shall approve the testing procedures. Tests shall be performed by an approved agency. Reports of such tests shall be retained by the building official for the period required for retention of public records. 
Cooperation of other officials and officers. The building official may request and shall receive the assistance and cooperation of other city and city officials so far as is required in the discharge of the duties required by the code or other pertinent law or ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 14-4228, 11-13-14 )  
Sec. 6-5. - Permits. 
Required. It shall be unlawful to construct, enlarge, alter, extensively alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of any building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, extensively alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the technical codes adopted in section 6-3, or to cause any such work to be done, without obtaining a properly issued permit from the City of Bastrop Building Official for that work 
Work exempt from permit. Permits shall not be required for the following. Exemption from permit requirements of the code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of the code or any other laws or ordinances of the City of Bastrop. 
Building: 
(1)  One-story detached accessory structures without utilities used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed five hundred (500) square feet (22.30 m 2 ). 
(2)  Fences not over six (6) feet (1,829 mm) high. 
(3)  Retaining walls that are not over four (4) feet (1,219 mm) in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge. 
(4)  Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity does not exceed five thousand (5,000) gallons (18.927 L) and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed 2 to 1. 
(5)  Sidewalks and driveways. 
(6)  Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work. 
(7)  Prefabricated swimming pools that are less than twenty-four (24) inches (610 mm) deep. 
(8)  Swings and other playground equipment. 
(9)  Window awnings supported by an exterior wall which do not project more than fifty-four (54) inches (1,372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not require additional support. 
(10)  Recreational structures, as defined by the Louisiana State Uniform Construction Code Council, once the affidavit is completed and filed with clerk of court. 
(11)  Farm structures, as defined by the Louisiana State Uniform Construction Code Council, once the affidavit is completed and filed with clerk of court. 
Electrical: 
Repairs and maintenance: A permit shall not be required for minor repair work, including the replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles. 
Gas: 
(1)  Portable heating, cooking or clothes drying appliances. 
(2)  Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe. 
(3)  Portable-fuel-cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid. 
Mechanical: 
(1)  Portable heating appliances. 
(2)  Portable ventilation appliances. 
(3)  Portable cooling units. 
(4)  Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by the code. 
(5)  Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe. 
(6)  Portable evaporative coolers. 
(7)  Self-contained refrigeration systems containing ten (10) pounds (4.54 kg) or less of refrigerant or that are actuated by motors of one (1) horsepower (746 W) or less. 
(8)  Portable-fuel-cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid. 
The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe; provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drainpipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in the code. The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures, and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures. 
Emergency repairs. Where equipment replacements and repairs must be performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be submitted within the next working business day to the building official. 
Repairs. Application or notice to the building official is not required for ordinary repairs to structures, replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles. Such repairs shall not include the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or load-bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress requirements; nor shall ordinary repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety. 
Public service agencies. A permit shall not be required for the installation, alteration or repair of generation, transmission, distribution, metering or other related equipment that is under the ownership and control of public service agencies by established right. 
Application for permit. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application therefore in writing on a form furnished by the City of Bastrop Building Department for that purpose. 
Such application shall: 
(1)  Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made. 
(2)  Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by legal description, street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work. 
(3)  Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed work is intended. 
(4)  Be accompanied by construction documents and other information as required by the building official. 
(5)  State the valuation of the proposed work. 
(6)  Be signed by the applicant or the applicant's authorized agent. 
(7)  Give such other data and information as required by the building official. 
The specific information shall, at a minimum, include the following information: 
(a)  Name, address, and daytime telephone number of owner; 
(b)  Name, address, and daytime telephone number of any and all contractors; 
(c)  Location of the construction; 
(d)  Description of the construction, including but not limited to square footage, type of construction, intended occupancy, and whether any work will involve following types: 
(1)  Electrical; 
(2)  Concrete or masonry; 
(3)  Plumbing; 
(4)  Structural; 
(5)  Natural gas, liquefied gas, or other gas fuel; 
(e)  Anticipated completion of construction; and 
Action on application. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined applications for permits and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after filing. If the application or the construction documents do not conform to the requirements of pertinent laws, the building official shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefore. If the building official is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of the code and laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the building official shall issue a permit therefore as soon as practicable. 
Time limitation of application. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned one hundred eighty (180) days after the date of filing unless such application has been pursued in good faith or a permit has been issued; except that the building official is authorized to grant one or more extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. 
Validity of permit. The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of the code or of any other ordinance of the City of Bastrop Building Department. Permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of the code or other ordinances of the City of Bastrop Building Department shall not be valid. The issuance of a permit based on construction documents and other data shall not prevent the building official from requiring the correction of errors in the construction documents and other data. The building official is also authorized to prevent occupancy or use of a structure where in violation of the code or of any other ordinances of City of Bastrop. 
Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days after the time the work is commenced. The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than one hundred eighty (180) days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. 
Suspension or revocation. The building official is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of the code wherever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of the code. 
Placement of permit. The building permit or copy thereof shall be kept on the site of the work, located or visible at the front exterior of the structure, until the completion of the project. 
Responsibility. It shall be the duty of every person who performs work for the installation or repair of building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems, for which the code is applicable, to comply with the code. 
( Ord. No. 14-4228, 11-13-14 )  
Sec. 6-6. - Construction documents. 
Submittal documents. Construction documents, special inspection and structural observation programs and other data shall be submitted in two (2) or more sets with each application for a permit. The construction documents shall be prepared by a registered design professional when the design can't be shown to meet the minimum prescriptive Uniform Construction Codes as adopted by the LSUCCC. Where special conditions exist, the building official is authorized to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a registered design professional. 
Exception: The building official is authorized to waive the submission of construction documents and other data not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such that reviewing of construction documents is not necessary to obtain compliance with the code. 
Information on construction documents. Construction documents shall be drawn upon suitable material. Electronic media documents are permitted to be submitted when approved by the building official. Construction documents shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of the code and relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, as determined by the building official. 
Manufacturer's installation instructions. Manufacturer's installation instructions, as required by this code, shall be available on the job site at the time of inspection. 
Site plan. The construction documents submitted with the application for permit shall be accompanied by a site plan showing the size and location of new construction and existing structures on the site and distances from lot lines. In the case of demolition, the site plan shall show construction to be demolished and the location and size of existing structures and construction that are to remain on the site or plot. 
Examination of documents. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined construction documents for code compliance. 
Approval of construction documents. When the building official issues a permit, the construction documents shall be approved, in writing or by a stamp which states "APPROVED PLANS." One (1) set of construction documents so reviewed shall be retained by the building official. The other set shall be returned to the applicant, shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or his or her authorized representative. 
Third party providers. The building official is authorized to accept reports from certified third party providers, so long as such providers satisfy the state requirements as to qualifications and are recognized by the city as reliable entities. These reports are required to be submitted to the Building Official before the permit application will be considered for approval. 
Previous approvals. The code shall not require changes in the construction documents, construction or designated occupancy of a structure for which a lawful permit has been heretofore issued or otherwise lawfully authorized, and the construction of which has been pursued in good faith within one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of the code and has not been abandoned. 
Phased approval. The building official is authorized to issue a permit for the construction of foundations or any other part of a building or structure before the construction documents for the whole building or structure have been submitted, provided that adequate information and detailed statements have been filed complying with pertinent requirements of the code. The holder of such permit for the foundation or other parts of a building or structure shall proceed at the holder's own risk with the building operation and without assurance that a permit for the entire structure will be granted. 
Amended construction documents. Work shall be installed in accordance with the approved construction documents, and any changes made during construction that are not in compliance with the approved construction documents shall be resubmitted for approval as an amended set of construction documents. 
Retention of construction documents. One (1) set of approved construction documents shall be retained by the building official for a period of not less than one hundred eighty (180) days from date of completion of the permitted work, or as required by state or local laws. 
( Ord. No. 14-4228, 11-13-14 )  
Sec. 6-7. - Temporary structures and uses. 
General. The building official is authorized to issue a permit for temporary structures and temporary uses. Such permits shall be limited as to time of service, but shall not be permitted for more than one hundred eighty (180) days. The building official is authorized to grant extensions for demonstrated cause. 
Conformance. Temporary structures and uses shall conform to the structural strength, fire safety, means of egress, light, ventilation and sanitary requirements of the code as necessary to ensure the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Temporary power. The building official is authorized to give permission to temporarily supply and use power in part of an electric installation before such installation has been fully completed and the final certificate of completion has been issued. The part covered by the temporary certificate shall comply with the requirements specified for temporary lighting, heat or power in the applicable electric code. 
Termination of approval. The building official is authorized to terminate such permit for a temporary structure or use and to order the temporary structure or use to be discontinued. 
( Ord. No. 14-4228, 11-13-14 )  
Sec. 6-8. - Fees. 
Payment of fees. A permit shall not be valid until the fees prescribed by law have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, has been paid. 
Schedule of permit fees. On buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the schedule as established by the applicable governing authority. 
Building permit valuations. Generally, building permit fees shall be calculated based on the square footage under beam as prescribed in the agreements. 
Related fees. The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration, removal or demolition for work done in connection with or concurrently with the work authorized by a building permit shall not relieve the applicant or holder of the permit from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by law. 
Refunds. Before the start of construction and upon surrender of the permit, permit holders can receive a refund of one hundred (100) percent of original cost of inspections not completed. This refund does not apply to permit or plan review fees. 
( Ord. No. 14-4228, 11-13-14 )  
Sec. 6-9. - Inspections. 
(a)  Residential. 
General. Construction or work for which a permit is required and shall be subject to inspection by the building official and such construction or work shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved. Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of the code or of other ordinances of the City of Bastrop Building Department. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of the code or of other ordinances of the City of Bastrop Building Department shall not be valid. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the building official nor the City of Bastrop Building Department shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to allow inspection. 
Preliminary inspection. Before issuing a permit, the building official is authorized to examine or cause to be examined buildings, structures and sites for which an application has been filed. 
Types of inspections. For onsite construction, from time to time the building official, upon notification from the permit holder or his agent, shall make or cause to be made any necessary inspections and shall either approve that portion of the construction as completed or shall notify the permit holder or his or her agent wherein the same fails to comply with the code. 
(i)  Foundation inspection. Inspection of the foundation shall be made after poles or piers are set or trenches or basement areas are excavated and any required forms erected and any required reinforcing steel is in place and supported prior to the placing of concrete. The foundation inspection shall include excavations for thickened slabs intended for the support of bearing walls, partitions, structural supports, or equipment and special requirements for wood foundations. 
(ii)  Plumbing, mechanical, gas and electrical systems inspection. Rough inspection of plumbing, mechanical, gas and electrical systems shall be made prior to covering or concealment, before fixtures or appliances are set or installed, and prior to framing inspection. 
Exception: Back-filling of ground-source heat pump loop systems tested prior to inspection shall be permitted. 
(iii)  Frame and masonry inspection. Inspection of framing and masonry construction shall be made after the roof, masonry, all framing, firestopping, draftstopping and bracing are in place and after the plumbing, mechanical and electrical rough inspections are approved. 
(iv)  Other inspections. In addition to the called inspections above, the building official may make or require any other inspections to ascertain compliance with the code and other laws enforced by the building official. 
(v)  Fire-resistance-rated construction inspection. Where fire-resistance-rated construction is required between dwelling units or due to location on property, the building official shall require an inspection of such construction after all lathing and/or wallboard is in place, but before any plaster is applied, or before wallboard joints and fasteners are taped and finished. 
(vi)  Reinforced masonry, insulating concrete form (ICF) and conventionally formed concrete wall inspection. Reinforced masonry walls, insulating concrete form (ICF) walls and conventionally formed concrete walls located in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1, D2, and E shall be inspected after plumbing, mechanical, and electrical systems embedded within the walls, and reinforcing steel are in place and prior to placement of grout or concrete. Inspection shall verify the correct size, location, spacing, and lapping of reinforcing. For masonry walls, inspection shall also verify that the location of grout cleanouts and size of grout spaces comply with the requirements of the code. 
(vii)  Final inspection. Final inspection shall be made after the permitted work is complete and prior to occupancy. 
Third party providers. The building official is authorized to accept reports from certified third party providers, so long as such providers satisfy the state requirements as to qualifications and are recognized by the city as reliable entities. The inspection reports for the structure are required to be submitted to the building official within three (3) days of the completion of the inspection, and the final inspection must be received before the certificate of occupancy will be issued. 
Inspection requests. It shall be the duty of the permit holder or their agent to notify the building official that such work is ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the person requesting any inspections required by the code to provide access to and means for inspection of such work. 
Approval required. Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the building official. The building official, upon notification, shall make the requested inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the construction that is satisfactory as completed, or shall notify the permit holder or an agent of the permit holder wherein the same fails to comply with the code. Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected and such portion shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the building official. 
(b)  Non-residential. 
General. Construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official and such construction or work shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved. Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of the code or of other ordinances of the City of Bastrop Building Department. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of the code or of other ordinances of the City of Bastrop Building Department shall not be valid. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the building official nor the City of Bastrop Building Department shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to allow inspection. 
Preliminary inspection. Before issuing a permit, the building official is authorized to examine or cause to be examined buildings, structures and sites for which an application has been filed. 
Types of inspections. For onsite construction, from time to time the building official, upon notification from the permit holder or his agent, shall make or cause to be made any necessary inspections and shall either approve that portion of the construction as completed or shall notify the permit holder or his or her agent wherein the same fails to comply with the code. 
(i)  Footing and foundation inspection. Footing and foundation inspections shall be made after excavations for footings are complete and any required reinforcing steel is in place. For concrete foundations, any required forms shall be in place prior to inspection. Materials for the foundation shall be on the job, except where concrete is ready mixed in accordance with ASTM C 94, the concrete need not be on the job. 
(ii)  Concrete slab and under-floor inspection. Concrete slab and under-floor inspections shall be made after in-slab or under-floor reinforcing steel and building service equipment, conduit, piping accessories and other ancillary equipment items are in place, but before any concrete is placed or floor sheathing installed, including the subfloor. 
(iii)  Frame inspection. Framing inspections shall be made after the roof deck or sheathing, all framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place and pipes, chimneys and vents to be concealed are complete and the rough electrical, plumbing, heating wires, pipes and ducts are approved. 
(iv)  Lath and gypsum board inspection. Lath and gypsum board inspections shall be made after lathing and gypsum board, interior and exterior, is in place, but before any plastering is applied or gypsum board joints and fasteners are taped and finished. 
Exception: Gypsum board that is not part of a fire-resistance-rated assembly or a shear assembly. 
(v)  Fire-resistant penetrations. Protection of joints and penetrations in fire-resistance-rated assemblies shall not be concealed from view until inspected and approved. 
(vi)  Energy efficiency inspections. Inspections shall be made to determine compliance with Chapter 13 and shall include, but not be limited to, inspections for: envelope insulation R- and U-Values, fenestration U-Value, duct system R-value, and HVAC and water-heating equipment efficiency. 
(vii)  Other inspections. In addition to the inspections specified above, the building official is authorized to make or require other inspections of any construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of the code and other laws that are enforced by the department of building safety. 
(viii)  Final inspection. The final inspection shall be made after all work required by the building permit is completed. 
Third party providers. The building official is authorized to accept reports from certified third party providers, so long as such providers satisfy the state requirements as to qualifications and are recognized by the city as reliable entities. The inspection reports for the structure are required to be submitted to the building official within three (3) days of the completion of the inspection, and the final inspection must be received before the certificate of occupancy will be issued. 
Inspection requests. It shall be the duty of the permit holder or their agent to notify the building official that such work is ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the person requesting any inspections required by the code to provide access to and means for inspection of such work. 
Approval required. Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the building official. The building official, upon notification, shall make the requested inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the construction that is satisfactory as completed, or shall notify the permit holder or an agent of the permit holder wherein the same fails to comply with the code. Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected and such portion shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the building official. 
( Ord. No. 14-4228, 11-13-14 )  
Sec. 6-10. - Certificate of occupancy. 
Use and occupancy. No building or structure shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof shall be made until the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy therefore as provided herein. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of the code or of other ordinances of the City of Bastrop Building Department. 
Exceptions: 
(1)  Certificates of occupancy are not required for work exempt from permits. 
(2)  Accessory buildings or structures. 
Change in use. Changes in the character or use of an existing structure shall not be made except as specified in the International Building Code. 
Certificate issued. After the building official inspects the building or structure and finds no violations of the provisions of the code or other laws that are enforced by the department of building safety, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy that contains the following: 
(1)  The building permit number. 
(2)  The address of the structure. 
(3)  The name, phone number and address of the owner. 
(4)  A description of that portion of the structure for which the certificate is issued. 
(5)  A statement that the described portion of the structure has been inspected for compliance with the requirements of the code for the occupancy and division of occupancy and the use for which the proposed occupancy is classified. 
(6)  Name, address, and daytime telephone number of any and all contractors. 
(7)  The name of the building official. 
(8)  The edition of the code under which the permit was issued. 
(9)  The use and occupancy of the structure. 
(10)  The type of construction. 
(11)  The design occupant load. 
(12)  If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, whether the sprinkler system is required. 
(13)  Any special stipulations and conditions of the building permit. 
Temporary occupancy. The building official is authorized to issue a temporary certificate of occupancy before the completion of the entire work covered by the permit, provided that such portion or portions shall be occupied safely. The temporary Certificate of Occupancy will be valid for twenty-eight (28) days. 
Revocation. The building official is authorized to, in writing, suspend or revoke a certificate of occupancy or completion issued under the provisions of the code wherever the certificate is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or where it is determined that the building or structure or portion thereof is in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of the code. 
( Ord. No. 14-4228, 11-13-14 )  
Sec. 6-11. - Service utilities. 
Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system that is regulated by the code for which a permit is required, until approved by the building official. 
Temporary connection. The building official shall have the authority to authorize and approve the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility, source of energy, fuel or power. 
Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by the code and the referenced codes and standards in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property or when such utility connection has been made without approval. The building official shall notify the serving utility and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action if not notified prior to disconnection. The owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing as soon as practical thereafter. 
( Ord. No. 14-4228, 11-13-14 )  
Sec. 6-12. - Violations. 
Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish or occupy any building, structure or equipment regulated by the code, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of the code. 
Notice of violation. The building official is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving, removal, demolition or occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the provisions of the code, or in violation of a detail statement or a plan approved thereunder, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of the code. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. 
Prosecution of violation. If the notice of violation is not complied with in the time prescribed by such notice, the Building Official of City of Bastrop may, through the city attorney, seek to enjoin further construction or work which is required to be permitted under this chapter and which construction or work does not have a validly issued permit. Further, the building official may seek to enjoin the occupancy or use of any building or structure which has, without compliance with this chapter, been, in whole or in part, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, demolished, or the occupancy changed or for which the electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system has been erected, installed, enlarged, altered, repaired, removed, converted or replaced in any fashion. 
Violation penalties. Any person who violates a provision of the code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of the code, shall be subject to penalties. 
Penalties. In addition to any legal costs incurred, violators will be required to pay any fees that would have been generated by legal permitting including plan review fees, permitting fees and inspection fees. Payment of these fees is required regardless of the stage of construction. In addition to the aforementioned fees, a fifty (50) percent penalty will apply to each fee. 
Other remedies. The imposition of penalties prescribed in this section shall not preclude the city counselor from instituting appropriate action, including equitable and extraordinary remedies, to prevent any unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair conversion, maintenance or use or to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent the occupancy of a building or structure or portion thereof, or of the premises, or to prevent an illegal act, conduct of business or use in or about the premises. 
( Ord. No. 14-4228, 11-13-14 )  
Sec. 6-13. - Stop work order. 
Notice to owner. Upon notice from the building official that work on any building or structure is being prosecuted contrary to the provisions of the code or in an unsafe and dangerous manner, such work shall be immediately stopped. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent or to the person doing the work and shall state the conditions under which work will be permitted to resume. 
Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. 
Penalties. In addition to any legal costs incurred, any person, partnership, or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this chapter or aids or abets in the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), nor less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. All fines, fees and costs paid by any person, partnership, corporation as described in section 6-13 of this article shall be paid to the city. Stop work order penalties shall be then paid to the contracted provider of services. 
( Ord. No. 14-4228, 11-13-14 )  
Sec. 6-14. - Third party provider registration. 
Any third party provider, herein referred to as TPP, desiring to provide plan review and inspection services shall possess a current registration certificate as issued by the Louisiana State Uniform Construction Code Council. Each individual person conducting plan reviews or inspections shall be certified as described below. 
The TPP shall also provide the city with a five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) certificate of insurance for professional liability, that names the City of Bastrop as additional insured. These policies shall not hereafter be canceled, permitted to expire, or be changed without thirty (30) days' notice in advance to the city. To do so will result in immediate barring of the TPP to provide services in the city. 
( Ord. No. 14-4228, 11-13-14 )  
Sec. 6-15. - Third party provider plan review requirements. 
All plans submitted to the Bastrop Building Code Department shall be reviewed and provide substantial evidence that the structure will be built in compliance with the Louisiana State Uniform Construction Codes, herein referred to as the LSUCC. All plans shall be stamped Approved and include a letter of plan review. Any plans submitted to the Bastrop Building Code Department will be rejected that does not comply with these requirements. On each set of plans submitted, the following shall be addressed: 
(1)  Submit two (2) approved copies of the proposed structure and site. The TPP plan review letter shall be attached to the plans, signed and dated by the individual that conducted the plan review. 
(2)  Plans shall be legible and drawn on sheets no smaller than 8½? × 11?. 
(3)  Plans shall include a site plan in order to comply with the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(4)  Plans shall provide substantial evidence of compliance with the Louisiana State Uniform Construction Codes. 
(5)  Foundation plan showing the foundation type, dimensions, spacing, rebar details and others as required by the codes. If the foundation is a post tension slab, a Louisiana Licensed Engineer's stamped drawing for the slab shall be included. 
(6)  Floor framing, if utilized, shall show the live loads being supported, size, type, spacing, span, headers, girders, type of sheathing and connection methods. 
(7)  Wall framing shall indicate size, type, headers, spacing and span of details. Short-wall bracing details shall be supplied if utilized. 
(8)  Roof framing shall indicate the size, type, spacing and span of the roofing system, including connection methods to wall with type and grade of roof sheathing. Engineered stamped truss plans shall be provided if a truss system is utilized. 
(9)  Electrical details shall include the electrical panel box location and amp size, a visual legend location of electrical components and types. Commercial projects will require the calculated electrical loads to be provided. 
(10)  Mechanical details shall require the location of the supply, return, size and type of HVAC unit. 
(11)  Plumbing details shall indicate the physical location of water heaters, sinks, lavatories, water closets, tubs, showers. Materials used in the drain and vent system shall be indicated with size. 
(12)  Energy compliance shall be provided by providing the R-Values of the floors, walls and ceiling insulation as required. 
(13)  Dimensions shall be provided to adequately show compliance with codes. 
The above list is not all inclusive and other details may be required by the Bastrop Building Official in order to provide for compliance to the LSUCC. 
(A)  Enforcement. The building official shall review all plan reviews submitted to confirm compliance to this ordinance and the LSUCC. The building official shall have the authority to reject TPP plan reviews that do not comply with this article and the LSUCC. Permits shall not be issued until all the TPP plan reviews comply. 
( Ord. No. 14-4228, 11-13-14 )  
Sec. 6-16. - Third party provider inspection requirements. 
All TPP inspectors shall be certified as required by state law and this article. TPP inspectors shall not inspect any structure that does not have the permit posted on site. The TPP inspector shall upon completion of an inspection, sign the permit placard, and provide a copy of the inspection report to the building official within thirty-six (36) hours of completion of the inspection. Failure by the TPP inspector to sign the permit placard, or failure to submit inspection reports, shall result in stop work order being issued by the building official. 
The inspector conducting the inspection shall possess the proper certification, in order to conduct the inspection. Failure to conduct the required inspections shall result in immediate barring of providing services in the city for twelve (12) months. All TPP inspectors shall conduct, at a minimum, the following inspections: 
(1)  Temporary pole inspection: TPP shall provide an inspection report for approval by the building official in order to release temporary utilities. 
(2)  Pre-pour mechanical/electrical/plumbing inspection: Inspections are conducted before items are concealed. 
(3)  Pre-pour footings and foundations inspection: This inspection is required before the concrete is poured. 
(4)  Framing/sheathing inspection: Inspection is required to verify nailing patterns are being followed on walls and roofing before being covered with roofing systems or exterior wall coverings. All interior framing to be verified as well. 
(5)  Mechanical rough-in inspection: Completed after framing, but before insulation. 
(6)  Electrical rough-in inspection: Completed after framing, but before insulation. 
(7)  Plumbing rough-in inspection: Completed after framing, but before insulation. 
(8)  Insulation inspection: Conducted to verify R-Value of insulation. 
(9)  Firewall inspection: Required in some structures. 
(10)  Mechanical final inspection: Completed for occupancy of the structure. 
(11)  Electrical final inspection: Completed for occupancy of the structure. 
(12)  Plumbing final inspection: Completed for occupancy of the structure. 
(13)  Exterior final inspection: Completed for occupancy to verify final grade, landings, sidewalks, stairs, ramps, etc. are complete and use ready. 
(14)  Test records: The TPP shall witness the required tests, indicate the test parameters and provide test reports. 
Manufactured homes shall have the electrical utility hook-up, mechanical hook-up and plumbing hook-up inspections conducted. This requires a minimum of three (3) inspections. Inspection reports shall be turned in within thirty-six (36) hours of the inspection. 
The above list is not all inclusive and other inspections may be required by the building official, depending upon project. The building official has the authority to direct all TPPs as to what inspections and how many are required on each permit due to the complexity of each project. 
(a)  Enforcement. The building official shall conduct, at his discretion in order to confirm compliance, the rough-in inspection and the final inspections for certificate of occupancy. The building official shall have the authority to reject TPP inspections for a violation of code compliance. 
(b)  Notification. The TPP shall notify the building official when the rough-in and final inspections have been scheduled. Notification shall be provided to the building official twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the inspection being conducted by the TPP. 
( Ord. No. 14-4228, 11-13-14 )  
Sec. 6-17. - Responsibilities of the TPP. 
The TPP is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the LSUCC. The TPP shall not make any deviations, variations or interpretations of the code. The entire portion of the LSUCC must be enforced at all times. Only the city building official can provide interpretations of the code. If the TPP encounters a questionable item, the TPP is to contact the city building official for resolution or direction. 
The TPP is hereby authorized to submit plan reviews and conduct inspections for contractors and home owners in which the TPP does not have any vested interest. 
TPP shall not complete inspections on structures where the permit has not been issued or is not posted on site. The TPP is not authorized to issue any permits for the city. The TPP is not authorized to issue any certificate of occupancy for the city. 
( Ord. No. 14-4228, 11-13-14 )  
Sec. 6-18. - Administrative fees. 
Permits applied for, that will utilize the services of a third party provider, shall have to pay administrative fees on each permit. These additional fees will be paid directly to the building official to pay for the costs associated with handling of the permit, a cursory plan review, conducting the rough-in inspections, conducting the final inspections and handling the certificate of occupancy. 
Stop work orders that are issued as a result of a TPP failure to comply with this article will be subject to violations and penalties as described herein. 
( Ord. No. 14-4228, 11-13-14 )  
Sec. 6-19. - TPP violations and penalties. 
Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any TPP, person, firm or corporation providing plan reviews and or inspection to violate this article, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of the ordinance. 
Notice of violation. The building official is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the violation of the provisions of the code, or in violation of a detail statement or a plan approved thereunder, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of the code. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. 
Penalties. In addition to any legal costs incurred, any person, partnership, or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this chapter or aids or abets in the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by the fines shown below, in addition to any other penalties described herein. 
In addition to any fines and or penalties, any person, partnership, corporation or TPP that issues a permit or a certificate of occupancy for any construction regulated by this article will be permanently barred from providing any TPP services in the city, in addition to any legal costs incurred and in addition to any fines. 
All TPP fines, fees and costs paid by any person, partnership, corporation as described in section 6-19 of this article shall paid to the city. 
TPP VIOLATION FINES 
VIOLATION 	EACH OFFENSE 
CONDUCTING INSPECTIONS WITHOUT A PERMIT 	$250.00 
FAILURE TO FILE INSPECTION REPORT, EACH REPORT 	$ 50.00 
ISSUING A PERMIT OR CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY 	$500.00 
TPP STOP WORK ORDER 	$100.00 
 
( Ord. No. 14-4228, 11-13-14 )  
ARTICLE II. - DILAPIDATED AND DANGEROUS BUILDINGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Authority, § 7. 
Cross reference— See also the housing code adopted in § 6-5. 
 
Sec. 6-20. - Condemnation of buildings. 
The City Court of Bastrop, Louisiana or such other court of competent jurisdiction may condemn and authorize the demolition or removal of any building or other structure within the municipality upon determining that it is in a dilapidated or dangerous condition that endangers the public welfare. 
(Code 1966, § 8-18; Ord. No. 15-4231(A), 6-11-15 )  
Sec. 6-21. - Appointment of an attorney at law. 
In the event the building or other structure is unoccupied and its owner is absent from the state unrepresented therein, or in the event the building is owned by a minor who has no tutor, or an interdict who has no curator, the court is authorized to appoint an attorney at law to represent the absentee, minor or interdict in accordance with the Louisiana Code of Civil Procedure, upon whom the notices of the proceedings provided in this article may be served. 
(Code 1966, § 8-30; Ord. No. 15-4231(A), 6-11-15 )  
Sec. 6-22. - Written report; notice to owner. 
(a)  Report: Before a court may condemn any building or other structure, there must be submitted, to the office of the mayor, a written report recommending the demolition or removal of the building or other structure signed by the building official or some other city official or person authorized to act in such matters for the municipality by the mayor. 
(b)  Notice to the resident owner: The mayor or his designee shall thereupon serve notice on the owner of the building or other structure requesting that such owner, within ten (10) days of receipt, fully correct, demolish or remove any building identified within the notice to be in a dilapidated or dangerous condition that endangers the welfare of others. The notice shall further advise the owner that upon his or her failure to correct, demolish or remove the identified building or structure, a request shall be filed with a court of competent jurisdiction requiring the owner to appear in court and show cause, at a place, date and time fixed by the court, why the building or other structure should not be adjudged to be in a dilapidated or dangerous condition, condemned, and ordered to be fully corrected, demolished or removed at the cost of the owner. The notice may be served by the city marshal or by any sheriff, deputy or constable having jurisdiction and power to serve legal process where the owner of the building or other structure is found in the state, and the officer shall make a return of the service as in ordinary cases. 
(c)  Notice to the absent owner: If the building or other structure is unoccupied and its owner is absent from the state or unrepresented therein, or in the event the building or structure is owned by a minor who has no tutor or an interdict who has no curator, the court shall appoint an attorney at law to represent the absentee, minor or interdict upon whom the notices and other proceedings provided in this article may be served. 
(d)  Emergency notice: In the case of grave public emergency or circumstance where the condition of the building or other structure is such that it threatens or causes immediate endangerment of life, injury, loss or damage to a person or property, the city may petition the court to immediately condemn the building or other structure after twenty-four (24) hours notice is served upon the owner or the owner's agent or the occupant, if any, and the attorney at law appointed to represent the absentee owner. 
(Code 1966, §§ 8-19—8-21; Ord. No. 15-4231(A), 6-11-15 )  
Sec. 6-23. - Court proceeding. 
Upon receiving a petition filed by the City of Bastrop for the condemnation of a building or structure represented to be in a dilapidated or dangerous condition that endangers the public welfare, the court is authorized to conduct a hearing by summary or ordinary proceeding, as requested by the City of Bastrop, to determine whether the subject building or structure should be condemned. After the hearing, if, in the opinion of the court, the facts justify it, an order shall be entered condemning the building or structure and ordering that it be demolished or removed within a certain delay. If repairs will correct the dilapidated, dangerous or unsafe condition, the court may grant the owner the option of making such repairs, but in such a case the general nature or extent of the repairs to be made, the time thereof, and the defects to be corrected, shall be specified in the decision of the decree of the court. 
(Code 1966, § 8-22; Ord. No. 15-4231(A), 6-11-15 )  
Sec. 6-24. - Final decision of the court. 
The order or judgment of the court shall issue in writing and shall be final unless appealed within the time delays established for appeal of decisions to the appellate court by the Louisiana Code of Civil Procedure. 
(Code 1966, § 8-23; Ord. No. 15-4231(A), 6-11-15 )  
Secs. 6-25, 6-26. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-4231(A), adopted June 11, 2015 , repealed §§ 6-25, 6-26, which pertained to appeal to district court and appeal of judgment of district court. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Sec. 6-27. - Contract. 
The owner or the owner's designated agent may proceed to demolish and remove the building or other structure, or have it repaired, in accordance with the order or judgment issued by the court, provided the owner or the owner's agent executes a contract in writing obligating such person to have the work done within the required time and files into the record of the court and with the office of the mayor copies of the contract, together with a bond that guarantees performance. 
(Code 1966, § 8-26; Ord. No. 15-4231(A), 6-11-15 )  
Sec. 6-28. - Failure to comply with decision of the court. 
In the event the owner or occupant of the building or other structure fails or refuses to comply with the decision of the court and fails to appeal the decision of the court within the legal delays provided for by law, the mayor may proceed with ordering the demolition or removal of the condemned building or other structure in accordance with the order or judgment issued by the court, in which case neither the mayor, members of the board of alderpersons, employees, agents, contractors nor affiliates of the City of Bastrop shall be liable in damages. 
(Code 1966, § 8-27; Ord. No. 15-4231(A), 6-11-15 )  
Sec. 6-29. - Serving of notice of demolition. 
Prior to the demolition or removal of the building or other structure by the city, the mayor or some official designated by the mayor shall serve notice on the owner, or the owner's agent, and on the occupant of the building or other structure, if any there be, or upon the attorney at law appointed to represent the minor, interdict or absentee owner, giving the time that work will begin upon the demolition or removal of the building or other structure. 
(Code 1966, § 8-28)  
Sec. 6-30. - Lien and privilege for cost of demolition and removal; interest; attorneys fees. 
The city shall have a lien and privilege for the cost of demolishing or removing the building or other structure against the lot and improvements upon which the building or other structure is situated. In order to preserve the lien and privilege it shall be the duty of the mayor to prepare and sign a sworn statement of facts, giving the description of the property and the approximate cost of demolishing or removing the building or other structure, including all attorneys' fees and costs incurred in locating and notifying the property owner together with legal interest, as provided by Civil Code Article 2924, which interest shall be computed from the date of recordation of the lien until paid. The city's privilege and lien shall prime all other liens and privileges against the property filed after the notice to the owner to show cause is filed in the mortgage records. This privilege and lien shall be enforced by ordinary process in the district court having jurisdiction of the immovable within three (3) years after it is perfected. Alternatively, the privilege and lien may be enforced by assessing the amount of the privilege and lien as a tax against the immovable in the same manner as an ordinary property tax, such lien to be collected in the manner fixed for collection of taxes and shall be subject to the same civil penalties for delinquencies. After the city has incurred such costs as constitute the lien and privilege on the property the mayor may send an attested bill of the cost and expenses to the city clerk, who shall add the amount of the bill to the next tax bill of the owner and, when collected, shall be credited to the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 8-29; Ord. No. 89-3459, § 1, 9-14-89)  
Secs. 6-31—6-39. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICAL 
 
Sec. 6-40. - Electrical inspector—Office created; qualifications; conflict of interest. 
(a)  There is hereby created the office of electrical inspector for the city. 
(b)  The inspector shall be well-versed in approved methods of electrical construction for the safety of life and property. The electrical inspector shall also be well-versed in a knowledge of The National Electrical Code, as approved by the American Standards Association. The inspector shall hold membership in the International Association of Electrical Inspectors, and shall serve on any electrical committee of this association to which such inspector may be appointed. 
(c)  The electrical inspector shall have no financial interest in any concern engaged in electrical sales or construction and maintenance or repairs. 
(Code 1966, § 11-01; Ord. No. 3317, § 1, 5-13-86)  
Sec. 6-41. - Same—Appointment; salary as fixed. 
(a)  The electrical inspector and assistants shall be appointed for an indefinite period by the governing body. 
(b)  Each shall receive such salary as may be fixed by the governing body. 
(c)  The electrical inspector may be removed from office for cause only, after a full hearing by the governing body. 
(Code 1966, § 11-02; Ord. No. 3317, § 2, 5-13-86)  
Sec. 6-42. - Same—Right of access to buildings; cutting off current. 
In discharge of official duties, the electrical inspector upon presentation of proper identification shall have the right during reasonable hours to enter any building for the purpose of making any inspection or test of the installation of electric wiring, electric devices and/or electric material or equipment contained therein, and shall have the authority to cause the turning off of all electrical currents, and cut or disconnect, in cases of emergency, any wire where such electrical currents are dangerous to life or property, or may interfere with the operations of the fire department. 
(Code 1966, § 11-04; Ord. No. 3317, § 4, 5-13-86)  
Sec. 6-43. - Same—Records of permits and inspections. 
The electrical inspector shall keep complete records of street addresses of all permits issued, and inspections made, and other official work performed and such records as may be necessary to administer the office and carry out the provisions of this article. Such inspector shall be provided with the necessary clerical and technical help to carry out the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1966, § 11-09; Ord. No. 3317, § 11, 5-13-86)  
Sec. 6-44. - Compliance with city electrical code; special wiring methods. 
(a)  The provisions of the city electrical code, copies of which code are on file in the office of the city clerk, constitute the standards for electrical installation, equipment and appliances in the city, except where such code is inconsistent with applicable statutes; and conformity of installation of electrical equipment with applicable regulations set forth in the city electrical code shall be prima facie evidence that such installations are reasonably safe to persons and property. 
(b)  The electrical inspector may authorize installation of special wiring methods. 
(Ord. No. 3317, § 9, 5-13-86) 
Cross reference— Electrical code adopted, § 6-5.  
Sec. 6-45. - Conduit for wire in fire limits district. 
Any installation of electrical equipment in or on any building or premises located within the fire limits shall be wired with rigid metal conduit or electrical metallic tubing and fittings approved for such, except private residences containing not more than two (2) apartments. All conduit or metallic tubing shall be secured in place by approved straps or hangers in such a manner that it will be permanently rigid. Nails may be used in conjunction with the two-hold-type straps only, and when such straps are attached to wood portions of the building. 
(Ord. No. 3317, § 10, 5-13-86) 
Cross reference— Fire limits, § 6-9.  
Sec. 6-46. - Permits and works progress inspection. 
No alterations, reconnections or additions shall be made in the existing wiring or any building, nor shall any building be wired for the placing of any electric lights, motors, heating devices, or any apparatus requiring the use of electrical current; nor shall any alteration be made in the wiring of any building without first notifying the electrical inspector and securing a permit therefor, (such a permit shall be construed as an application for inspection), except minor repair work, such as replacing flush and snap switches or fuses, changing lamp sockets and receptacles, taping bare joints and repairing drop cords. Applications for such permit, describing such work, shall be made by the person who will do the work, and the permit when issued shall be to such applicant. This section shall not apply to maintenance and repairs on the premises of a person regularly employing journeymen electricians for that purpose, but any person maintaining a journeyman electrician on the premises for maintenance and repairs, must first secure a blanket permit from the city electrical inspector, which shall not permit the person to do work other than specified in the application. Such work shall conform to the requirements of section 6-48. 
(Code 1966, § 11-05; Ord. No. 3317, § 5, 5-13-86)  
Sec. 6-47. - Reinspection; correction of defects; cutting off current. 
(a)  The electrical inspector may make a thorough reinspection of the installation of any electric wiring, electric devices and electric material now installed or that may hereafter be installed in buildings within the city and when the installation of any such wiring, device and/or material is found to be in a dangerous or unsafe condition, the person owning, using or operating the same shall be notified, and shall make the necessary repairs or changes required to place such wiring, devices and material in a safe condition by a registered electrical contractor and have such work completed within fifteen (15) days, or such other period as may be specified by the electrical inspector in the notice. 
(b)  The electrical inspector is empowered to disconnect or order the discontinuance of electrical service to such wiring, device and/or material so found to be defectively installed until the installation of such wiring, device and material has been made safe as directed by the electrical inspector. 
(Code 1966, § 11-07; Ord. No. 3317, § 7, 5-13-86)  
Sec. 6-48. - Construction requirements; inspection before concealment. 
(a)  No certificate of inspection shall be issued unless the electric light, power and heating installations are in strict conformity with the provisions of this article, the statutes of the state, the rules and regulations issued by the American Insurance Association under the authority of the state statutes and unless they are in conformity with the approved methods of construction for safety of life and property. The regulations as laid down in the current edition of the city electrical code, as approved by the American Standards Association; and in the National Electrical Safety Code, as approved by the American Standards Association; and other installation and safety regulations approved by the American Standards Association, shall be prima facie evidence of such approved methods. 
(b)  All wires which are to be hidden from view shall be inspected before concealment, and any person installing such wires shall notify the electrical inspector, giving such inspector twenty-four (24) hours in which to make the required inspection before such wires are concealed. 
(Code 1966, § 11-08; Ord. No. 3317, § 8, 5-13-86)  
Sec. 6-49. - Final inspection; emergency wiring. 
(a)  Upon the completion of the wiring of any building, it shall be the duty of the person installing the same to notify the electrical inspector, who shall inspect the installation within twenty-four (24) hours after the time such notice is given; and if it be found to be substantially in compliance with this article, and does not constitute a hazard to life and property, the electrical inspector shall issue a certificate of inspection authorizing connection to the electrical service and the turning on of the electrical service by the electrical utility company serving the city. 
(b)  Permits for emergency use of current may be issued for thirty-day periods to supply current to wiring and equipment that is considered reasonably safe by the inspector. 
(Code 1966, § 11-06; Ord. No. 3317, § 6, 5-13-86)  
Sec. 6-50. - Fee schedule. 
All fees authorized by this section shall be published in a fee schedule to be contained in the City Register for the City of Bastrop (a document by this name shall be created), in lieu of listing the same in the Code of Ordinances, along with any future modifications thereto, and that the city register shall be a public document that shall be subject to public inspection during regular business hours and shall be maintained by the city clerk. 
(Code 1966, § 11-10; Ord. No. 3317, § 12, 5-13-86; Ord. No. 07-4121, 3-8-07)  
Sec. 6-51. - Liability. 
This article shall not be construed to relieve from, or lessen the responsibility or liability of any party owning, operating, controlling or installing any electric wiring, electric devices and/or electric material, for damages to persons or property caused by any defect in the same, nor damages to persons or property caused by any defect in the same, nor shall the city be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspection authorized herein, or any certificate of inspection issued as herein provided. 
(Code 1966, § 11-11; Ord. No. 3317, § 13, 5-13-86)  
Sec. 6-52. - Examination and registration of electrical contractors. 
(a)  Any person desiring to engage in the business of installing, removing, altering or repairing electrical equipment and/or the manufacture, installing, removing, altering or repair of any electrical sign, display, or outside lighting shall make application to the electrical inspector requesting an examination for a license certificate to cover such operation. The application shall be accompanied by the fees hereinafter provided. Upon receipt of such application, the electrical inspector shall, within fifteen (15) days after receipt of same, give a written examination to determine the qualifications of the applicant. This examination shall be given and the answers to questions shall be reviewed and graded by the electrical inspector. A grade of seventy-five (75) percent shall be the lowest passing grade. The applicant shall be notified as to the results of the examination within thirty (30) days after the examination is taken. The examination shall be given in a fair and impartial manner, covering the field of work that the license certificate is to cover. Any applicant failing to pass the examination shall not be given another until the expiration of three (3) months. 
(b)  Each person doing electrical contracting as defined herein within the city shall pay to the city a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) to be deposited with the general fund of the city for the privilege of taking the test, and if such applicant passes the test, the fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be applied toward the first annual license fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(c)  Each applicant, in addition to paying the annual fee, shall execute and deposit in the office of the mayor, with the application, a bond in the principal sum and amount of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00), with two (2) or more sureties so approved by the governing body, conditioned that the principal therein shall faithfully comply with the terms of this article and shall indemnify and hold harmless the city, and all persons interested, against all costs, expenses, damage and injuries, sustained by the negligence of such principal, such principal's agents, servants, and employees, or failure to comply with the terms of this article in doing work made the subject matter thereof, and otherwise to be in the form and executed as required by the governing body. Such bond shall be renewed annually as a prerequisite to the issuance of a license for the subsequent year. 
(d)  An electrical contractor's license certificate shall entitle the holder to engage in the business of performing any work on any electrical equipment as defined in this Code. Such license certificate shall be valid, unless revoked or suspended as provided in this code, from January first, through December thirty-first of each year, and any license certificate not renewed within thirty (30) days after its expiration, shall be considered as a new application and must be qualified as such. 
(Code 1966, § 11-04; Ord. No. 3317, § 3, 5-13-86)  
Secs. 6-53—6-59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-4242 , adopted June 28, 2016, repealed the former Art. IV, §§ 6-60—6-81, and enacted a new Art. XI as set out herein. The former Art. IV pertained to flood damage prevention. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
Secs. 6-60—6-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PLUMBING AND GAS CODE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— The provisions of Ord. No. 91-3529, §§ 1.0—7.0, were included in the Code pursuant to § 8.0 of this ordinance; designation as Art. V, §§ 6-91—6-111, was at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Technical codes adopted, § 6-5. 
 
Sec. 6-91. - Title. 
(a)  This article may be known and may be cited as "The Bastrop Plumbing and Gas Code." 
(b)  For the purpose of establishing rules, regulations and standards, the following codes have been adopted: 
(1)  Chapter XIV of the Sanitary Code of the State of Louisiana (Plumbing Code) as adopted by the state health officer (in accordance with R.S. 40:4), approved by the Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Resources (in accordance with R.S. 40:2) under the general powers and jurisdiction of the state health officer and the Office of Health Services and Environmental Quality (in accordance with R.S. 40:5) and promulgated in accordance with R.S. 49:951 et seq. on March 20, 1984. 
(2)  The Southern Standard Gas Piping Code, being particularly the 1988 revised edition, together with all subsequent amendments and modifications thereto. 
(3)  The Louisiana State Uniform Construction Code, together with all subsequent amendments and modifications thereto. Any provisions contained in subsections (1) and (2) above that are inconsistent with the Louisiana State Uniform Construction Code shall be superseded by this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 91-3529, § 1(1.1), 9-12-91; Ord. No. 04-4042, 11-11-04) 
State Law reference— R.S. 40:1728.  
Sec. 6-92. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this code is to ensure the health, sanitation, general public safety and welfare by regulating the installation and maintenance of all sewer, gas, and water installations. 
(Ord. No. 91-3529, § 1(1.2), 9-12-91)  
Sec. 6-93. - Scope. 
The provisions of this code shall apply to every plumbing and gas piping installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, fixtures, equipment, appliances, materials, fittings and/or appurtenances thereto, which shall be enforced within the corporate city limits, and areas outside of the city limits which are connected to city sewer. 
(Ord. No. 91-3529, § 1(1.3), 9-12-91)  
Sec. 6-94. - Maintenance. 
All plumbing and gas piping, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards which are required by this code shall be maintained in good working order. The property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of plumbing and gas piping for each separate residence or place of business from property line to structure. 
(Ord. No. 91-3529, § 1(1.4), 9-12-91)  
Sec. 6-95. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
City shall mean the City of Bastrop. 
Code shall mean this code as it may be duly amended, from time to time. 
Firm means and includes all persons other than an individual proprietorship. 
Person means and includes all persons, including, but not limited to, individuals, partnerships, corporations, associations, joint ventures or any other type or form of business entity. 
Plumbing shall include water distribution, sewerage and/or gas piping from property line to structure. 
Plumbing official shall mean the plumbing and gas piping inspector for the City of Bastrop. 
Practical shall mean to have a working knowledge of plumbing and gas piping. 
Test shall mean each pressure tests per Chapter XIV of the Standard Gas Code, 1988 edition. 
(Ord. No. 91-3529, § 1(1.5), 9-12-91)  
Sec. 6-96. - Master plumber—License required. 
No person shall engage in the business of plumbing or gas piping in the city unless the individual or a member of the firm, partnership or corporation has been licensed as a master plumber pursuant to the requirements of the state plumbing board of Louisiana. 
(Ord. No. 91-3529, § 1(2.1), 9-12-91)  
Sec. 6-97. - Same—Responsibility. 
Any licensed master plumber who agrees to, or is hired to install, or who contracts, or subcontracts to install any plumbing, drainage, sewerage or gas piping in the city shall be responsible for the installation of such work in accordance with this code; shall be responsible for securing all permits and for requesting inspection of installations as required by this code; and shall be in violation even if he transfers his duty and responsibility to his employee, the person for whom he has contracted to install plumbing or to any subcontractor, either under the supervision of the master plumber or other contractors. Any exception of the above responsibility shall be temporary and must have the prior approval of the state plumbing official. 
(Ord. No. 91-3529, § 1(2.2), 9-12-91)  
Sec. 6-98. - Unauthorized use of name. 
No individual holding a master plumber's license or a journeyman plumber's license shall allow his name to be used by any other person, firm or corporation, directly or indirectly either to obtain permits, to send in notices, to make returns, or to do any work except as set forth in section 6-99. 
(Ord. No. 91-3529, § 1(2.3), 9-12-91)  
Sec. 6-99. - Journeyman plumber's license required. 
No individual shall engage in the business of installing plumbing work in the city unless licensed as a journeyman plumber under the requirements of the state plumbing board of Louisiana, and shall be under the supervision and control of a master plumber licensed by the state plumbing board of Louisiana, except that a journeyman plumber may repair existing plumbing independently and without the supervision of a master plumber. 
(Ord. No. 91-3529, § 1(2.4), 9-12-91; Ord. No. 92-3571, § 1(2.4), 2-13-92)  
Sec. 6-100. - Plumbing standards. 
(a)  Plumbing code. Chapter XIV of the Sanitary Code of the State of Louisiana, entitled "Plumbing," as adopted by the State Health Officer (in accordance with R.S. 40:4), approved by the Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Resources (in accordance with R.S. 40:2) under the general powers and jurisdiction of the state health officer and the Office of Health Services and Environmental Quality (in accordance with R.S. 40.5) and promulgated in accordance with LSA-R.S. 49:951 et seq., on March 20, 1984, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein as fully as if set out at length. A copy of Chapter XIV of the State Sanitary Code, as amended, shall remain on file in the office of the plumbing official of the city. 
(b)  Gas code. The Southern Gas Piping Code, being particularly the 1988 Revised edition, together with all subsequent amendments and modifications thereto, shall constitute and be the standards for all gas piping within the scope of this code. 
(Ord. No. 91-3529, § 1(3.1, 3.2), 9-12-91)  
Sec. 6-101. - Permits for plumbing works—Required. 
(a)  Generally. No plumbing or gas piping work, unless expressly excepted from this code, shall be started prior to the issuance of a permit by the plumbing official. A permit shall be issued only to a licensed master plumber except as provided for in subsection (b). 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Any person may be allowed to install plumbing in a single family dwelling used exclusively for living purposes, including the usual accessory buildings and quarters in connection with such building, provided the person is the bona fide owner of such dwelling. All work must be installed in accordance with the provisions of this code and related codes as described herein. 
(2)  Only a licensed plumber may install a sewer line that is to be tapped into a city sewer. 
(Ord. No. 91-3529, § 1(4.1, 4.2), 9-12-91)  
Sec. 6-102. - Same—Application; fees. 
All fees authorized by this section shall be published in a fee schedule to be contained in the City Register for the City of Bastrop, in lieu of listing the same in the Code of Ordinances, along with any future modifications thereto. The city register shall be a public document subject to public inspection during regular business hours and shall be maintained by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 91-3529, § 1(4.3), 9-12-91; Ord. No. 12-4215, 9-13-12)  
Sec. 6-103. - Same—Plans and specifications. 
No permit shall be issued until plans and specifications showing the proposed work in necessary detail have been submitted to the plumbing official and he has determined from examination of such plans and specifications that they give assurance that the work will conform to the provisions of this code. If a permit is denied, the applicant may submit revised plans and specifications without payment of any additional fee. If, in the course of the work it is found necessary to make any change from the plans and specifications on which a permit has been issued, amended plans and specifications shall be submitted and a supplementary permit subject to the same conditions applicable to the original application for a permit shall be issued to cover the change. Plans and specifications will not be required for minor work or alterations and repairs, such to be determined by the plumbing official. 
Repairs involving only the working parts of a faucet or valve, the clearance of stoppages, repairing leaks, or replacement of defective faucets or valves may be made without a permit provided no changes are made in the piping to the structure. 
(Ord. No. 91-3529, § 1(4.4), 9-12-91)  
Sec. 6-104. - Plumbing official—Generally. 
(a)  Qualifications. The plumbing official and his assistants must be practical plumbers. The assistant inspectors and other employees of this subdepartment shall be appointed by the plumbing official. 
(b)  Duties. It shall be the duty of the plumbing official under the direct supervision of the building official to issue all notices and certificates and to approve all plans submitted. He shall inspect or cause to be inspected all buildings in the course of erection, alterations or repair, as often as necessary and shall see that all work for plumbing, drainage, and venting is done in accordance with the provisions of this code and other codes adopted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 91-3529, § 1(5.1, 5.2), 9-12-91)  
Sec. 6-105. - Same—Right of entry. 
The plumbing official or his authorized representative of the city is hereby given authority to enter into any and all buildings and places within the city limits for the purpose of inspecting plumbing, drainage and venting and gas piping already constructed or in the course of construction, repair or alteration. 
(Ord. No. 91-3529, § 1(5.3), 9-12-91)  
Sec. 6-106. - Same—Right of plumbing disconnection. 
The plumbing official shall have the authority to disconnect or have disconnected any such pipes, devices, appliances, or equipment in cases of emergency where necessary for the safety of life or property, or to prevent the contamination of the potable water supply and shall order the discontinuance of water, gas or sewerage services to any service installation found not to be installed according to this code or in an unsafe or unsanitary condition, and shall notify the state plumbing board of all violations. 
(Ord. No. 91-3529, § 1(5.4), 9-12-91)  
Sec. 6-107. - Same—Delegation of authority. 
The plumbing official is hereby authorized to delegate any of his authority or duties to any of his assistants. 
(Ord. No. 91-3529, § 1(5.5), 9-12-91)  
Sec. 6-108. - Liability. 
Any officer or employee charged with the enforcement of this code, acting for the city in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself liable personally and he is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties except he shall not be relieved nor shall he be defended by the city's insurance carrier for suits for acts or omissions not in good faith or intentional misconduct or knowing violations of law. Any suit brought against any officer or employee because of such act performed by him in the enforcement of any provision of this code shall be defended by the city's insurance company until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 91-3529, § 1(5.6), 9-12-91)  
Sec. 6-109. - Penalty. 
In all cases where the plumbing official finds that the plumbing code of the city has been or is being violated, he shall cause to be arrested the person or persons violating the law and shall file the necessary charges against such person or persons who shall be dealt with and subject to punishment as herein provided. 
Any person violating any provision of this ordinance shall be punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for not less than thirty (30) days nor more than ninety (90) days or both. 
(Ord. No. 91-3529, § 1(5.7), 9-12-91)  
Sec. 6-110. - Obligations of master plumber. 
(a)  Inspections required. All new plumbing and gas piping work and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes shall be inspected to insure compliance with all the requirements of this code and any other adopted codes of the city, and to assure that the construction of the plumbing and gas piping system and the installation of fixtures is in accordance with the approved plan and the permit issued. 
(1)  The master plumber shall notify the plumbing official of his request for inspection of plumbing work. No inspections except approved emergencies will be made on Saturdays, Sundays or on any city authorized legal holidays. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of the master plumber to ascertain that his work will stand the test or tests prescribed before making his request for inspection. 
(3)  The licensed master plumber or a licensed journeyman plumber must be present at the time of inspection except that an experienced laborer may be present at the time of inspection of the installation of a building sewer line. 
(4)  No part of any sewer, gas or water system shall be covered or concealed until it has been inspected and approved by the plumbing official. If any part is covered or concealed before being tested and approved, it shall be uncovered at the direction of the plumbing official. 
(b)  Reinspection. When the plumbing official finds that the work does not pass the test or is in violation of the requirements of the code, the master plumber shall be required to make the necessary corrections and the work shall then be resubmitted for reinspection. On all work requiring reinspection an additional fee shall be charged as prescribed. 
(c)  Illegal connections. No by-pass pipe or other device or piping arrangement shall be installed to prevent the proper metering of gas, water or disposal of sewer. 
(Ord. No. 91-3529, § 1(6.1—6.3), 9-12-91)  
Sec. 6-111. - Construction. 
Severability is in keeping throughout and within the provisions of this article. If any provision, including inter alia, any exception, part, phrase or term, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby and the validity of the plumbing and gas piping code of the city in all other respects shall not be affected thereby. If any phrase, word, or other portion of this article is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the invalidity shall be limited to that portion of the article. 
(Ord. No. 91-3529, § 1(7.0), 9-12-91)  
Secs. 6-112—6-199. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - ALARMS 
 
Sec. 6-200. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms have the respective means ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm business. The business by an individual, partnership, corporation or other entity of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, installing, or monitoring an alarm system at an alarm site. 
Alarm system. Any assembly of equipment or devices, mechanical or electrical, which is designed, arranged or used for the detection of a hazardous condition or an unauthorized entry or attempted entry into a building, structure or facility, or for altering persons of a hazardous condition, unauthorized entry or the commission of an unlawful act to, on or within a building, structure or facility and which emits a sound or flashing light, or transmits a signal or message when activated, to which the police department and/or fire department of the city is excepted to respond, provided however that this definition shall not include an alarm system installed in a vehicle. 
Alarm user. Any person in control of any building, structure or facility or to a portion thereof wherein an alarm system is maintained. 
False alarm. Any sound or flashing light, signal or message which elicits a response from the police department and/or fire department of the city, which an investigation indicates no hazardous condition, unauthorized entry or the commission of an unlawful act to, on or within a building, structure or facility or which it is otherwise determined that a situation requiring a response from the police and/or fire department did not in fact exist. 
Fire department. The fire department of the city. 
Police department. The police department of the city. 
(Ord. No. 95-3728, § 1, 10-12-95; Ord. No. 95-3732, § 1, 11-9-95)  
Sec. 6-201. - Alarm system operating requirements. 
(a)  An alarm system shall be adjusted to suppress false indications due to: 
(1)  Transient changes in water pipe pressure; 
(2)  Flashes of light; 
(3)  Wind noise caused by rattling or vibration of windows, doors or walls; 
(4)  Vehicular noise; 
(5)  Electrical power fluctuations; 
(6)  Other forces or factors unrelated to an actual emergency. 
(b)  All alarm users shall provide the police and fire departments with the name, telephone number and address of at least two (2) authorized persons, who shall be available to respond and who shall arrive at the building, structure or facility where an alarm has been activated within thirty (30) minutes when requested to do so by the police or fire department. All alarm users shall promptly notify the police and fire departments of any change in the designation or manner of contacting such persons. 
All alarm users shall provide the police department and fire department with a local address at which to mail or deliver any notifications or reports provided for herein. All alarm users shall promptly notify the police and fire departments of any change of such address. 
(c)  Audible alarms shall be adjusted so that the alarm will not sound longer than thirty (30) minutes and must be reset before sounding again. 
(d)  Failure to comply with the provisions of this section may be punishable by a fine up to five hundred ($500.00) dollars or by imprisonment of not more than ten (10) days or both, at the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. No. 95-3728, § 1, 10-12-95)  
Sec. 6-202. - Response to activated alarm system. 
(a)  Generally. Whenever an alarm system is activated in the city, thereby requiring an emergency response to the location from the police department and/or fire department, the senior official of the police or fire department on the scene of the activated alarm who has overall command of the situation shall inspect the area protected by the alarm system and shall determine whether the alarm was a false alarm. 
(b)  Records, decision of cause. The senior officer responding to an alarm dispatch request shall record such information as necessary to permit records to be maintained, including, but not limited to, the following information: 
(1)  Identification of the alarm site; 
(2)  Arrival time at the alarm site and dispatch received time; 
(3)  Date and time; 
(4)  Weather conditions; 
(5)  Area and/or subarea of premise involved; 
(6)  Name of alarm user's representative on premises, if any; 
(7)  Identification of the responsible alarm business; and/or 
(8)  Unable to locate the address. 
The senior officer shall indicate on the dispatch record whether the dispatch was caused by a criminal offense, a hazardous condition, an attempted criminal offense, or was a false alarm dispatch. A copy of this report shall be delivered to the alarm user at the address provided. 
(c)  Appeal, generally. The alarm user may appeal the decision of the chief of the department of the senior official making the report. Such report must be made within fifteen (15) days of the delivery or mailing of the notification provided for above. 
(d)  Appeal process. An alarm user may appeal the decision of the chief to the mayor and board of aldermen by written request delivered to the clerk. Such appeal must be made within fifteen (15) days of the decision of the chief. Upon receipt of such written request, the clerk shall set a hearing at the next available regular meeting of the mayor and board of aldermen, which shall not be less than fifteen (15) days, nor more than thirty (30) days from the receipt of the appeal request. The clerk shall also provide written notice, setting forth the date and time of the appeal hearing, to the alarm user and the respective chief at least ten (10) days prior to the said hearing. 
(e)  Appeal to court. Nothing contained herein shall prevent any alarm user from appealing the decision of the mayor and board of aldermen to any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 95-3728, § 1, 10-12-95)  
Sec. 6-203. - Assistance and compliance with officials on site. 
(a)  All persons in, on, about or who respond by coming to the site of an alarm activation shall obey all reasonable requests for assistance by the police and/or fire department personnel, including but not limited to identifying themselves, stating their purpose at the site, or leaving the premises on request. 
(b)  Such persons shall also promptly notify police and/or fire personnel of any and all known hazards to said personnel which exist within the building, structure, facility or area. 
(Ord. No. 95-3728, § 1, 10-12-95)  
Sec. 6-204. - Fees for false alarms. 
(a)  The alarm user shall be charged a fee for false alarms pursuant to the following schedule: 
(1)  One (1) through three (3): No charge (A warning shall be included in the notification). 
(2)  Four (4) to six (6): Twenty-five ($25.00) dollars each occurrence. 
(3)  Six (6) to twenty-four (24): Fifty ($50.00) dollars each occurrence. 
(4)  Twenty-five (25) or more: Two hundred ($200.00) dollars each occurrence. 
(b)  Alarms shall be counted for the twelve-month period previous to the date of any false alarm. 
(Ord. No. 95-3728, § 1, 10-12-95) 
Cross reference— False alarms, § 8-186.  
Sec. 6-205. - Exceptions regarding accountability for false alarms. 
An alarm user shall not be held accountable for a false alarm caused by: 
(1)  Natural or manmade catastrophe; 
(2)  Vandalism; 
(3)  Telephone line outage; 
(4)  Electrical line outage; 
(5)  Severe weather conditions; 
The alarm user shall have the burden of proving these causes. 
(Ord. No. 95-3728, § 1, 10-12-95)  
Sec. 6-206. - Alarm business responsibilities. 
(a)  Each alarm business shall provide to the police department of the city a form giving the following information for each alarm system installed by them in any business or residence located in the city limits of the city: 
(1)  Name, address, and telephone numbers of the person who will be the alarm user and be responsible for the proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system. 
(2)  The classification of the alarm site as either residential or commercial. 
(3)  For each alarm system located at the alarm site, the purpose of the alarm system, i.e., burglary, hold up, duress, fire, smoke or other. 
(4)  A signed certification from the alarm user and the alarm business stating: 
a.  The date of installation, conversion or take over of the alarm system, whichever is applicable; 
b.  The name, address and phone number of the alarm business performing the installation, conversion or alarm system take over, and responsible for providing repair service to the alarm system; 
c.  The name, address and telephone number of the alarm business monitoring the alarm system, if different from the installing alarm business; 
d.  That a set of written operating instructions for the alarm system, including written guidelines on how to avoid false alarms, have been left with the alarm user; and 
e.  That the alarm business has trained the applicant in proper use of the alarm system, including instructions on how to avoid false alarms. 
(b)  An alarm user shall inform the police chief of the city of any change that alters any information listed above within five (5) business days of such change. 
(c)  Information contained in the information sheet shall be held in confidence by all employees or representatives of the city with access to such information. 
(Ord. No. 95-3732, § 1, 11-9-95)  
Secs. 6-207—6-220. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - FAIR HOUSING[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 99-3873, adopted June 10, 1999, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as §§ 6-1—6-13. Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated, the provisions have been redesignated as §§ 6-221—6-233, at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 6-221. - Policy. 
It is the policy of the City of Bastrop, Louisiana to provide, within constitutional limitations, for fair housing throughout the city. 
(Ord. No. 99-3873, 6-10-99)  
Sec. 6-222. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:] 
Chief executive officer means the mayor of the City of Bastrop, or his designee. 
Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under sections 6-224, 6-225, or 6-226. 
Dwelling means any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one (1) or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion thereof. 
Family includes a single individual. 
Person includes one (1) or more individuals, corporation, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees, in bankruptcy, receivers, and judiciaries. 
To rent includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises owned by the occupant. 
(Ord. No. 99-3873, 6-10-99)  
Sec. 6-223. - Unlawful practice. 
Subject to the provisions of subsection (2) and section 6-227, the prohibitions against discrimination in the sale or rental of housing set forth in section 6-224 shall apply to: 
(1)  All dwellings except as exempted by subsection (2). 
(2)  Nothing in section 6-224 shall apply to: 
a.  Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner: 
Provided, that such private individual owner does not own more than three (3) such single-family houses at any one (1) time; provided further, that in the case of the sale of any such a single-family house by a private individual owner not residing in such house at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident of such house prior to such sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one (1) such sale within any 24-month period; provided further, that such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of, more than three (3) such single-family houses at any one (1) time; provided further, that the sale or rental of any such single-family house shall be exempted from the application of this title only if such house is sold or rented (A) without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent, or salesman, or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesman, or person and (B) without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice of any advertisement or written notice in violation of section 6-224 of this article, but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents abstractors, title companies, and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title, or 
b.  Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four (4) families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one (1) of such living quarters as his residence. 
(3)  For the purposes of subsection (2), a person shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if: 
a.  he has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as principal in three (3) or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein, or 
b.  he has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as agent, other than in the sale of his own personal residence, in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two (2) or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein, or 
c.  he is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, five (5) or more families. 
(Ord. No. 99-3873, 6-10-99)  
Sec. 6-224. - Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing. 
As made applicable by section 6-223 and except as exempted by sections 6-223(2) and 6-227, it shall be unlawful: 
(1)  To refuse to sell or rent, after the making of a bonafide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person on the basis of race, color, sex, religion, national origin, handicap, or familial status. 
(2)  To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges, of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, on the basis of race, color, sex, religion, national origin, handicap, or familial status. 
(Ord. No. 99-3873, 6-10-99)  
Sec. 6-225. - Discrimination in the financing of housing. 
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans, to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefore for the purpose of purchasing constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate against him in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration, or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance, on the basis of the race, color, sex, religion, national origin, handicap or familial status, or of any person associated with him in connection with such loan or other financial assistance, or of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants, or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings in relation to which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given: Provided, that nothing contained in this section shall impair the scope or effectiveness of the exception contained in section 6-223(2). 
(Ord. No. 99-3873, 6-10-99)  
Sec. 6-226. - Discrimination in the providing of brokerage services. 
It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers organization or other service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation, on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, handicap, or familial status. 
(Ord. No. 99-3873, 6-10-99)  
Sec. 6-227. - Exemption. 
Nothing in this article shall prohibit a religious organization, association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operated for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, sex, national origin, handicapped, or familial status. Nor shall anything in this article prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which, as incident to its primary purpose or purposes, provides lodging which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members. 
(Ord. No. 99-3873, 6-10-99)  
Sec. 6-228. - Administration. 
(a)  The authority and responsibility for administering this act shall be in the chief executive officer of the City of Bastrop, Louisiana. 
(b)  The chief executive officer may delegate any of these functions, duties, and powers to employees of the city or to boards of such employees, including functions, duties, and powers with respect to investigating, conciliating, hearing, determining ordering, certifying, reporting or otherwise acting as to any work, business, or matter under this article. The chief executive officer shall by rule prescribe such rights of appeal from the decisions of his hearing examiners to other hearing examiners or to other officers in the city, to boards of officers or to himself, as shall be appropriate and in accordance with law. 
(c)  All executive departments and agencies shall administer their program and activities relating to housing and urban development in a manner affirmatively to further the purposes of this article and shall cooperate with the chief executive officer to further such purposes. 
(Ord. No. 99-3873, 6-10-99)  
Sec. 6-229. - Education and conciliation. 
Immediately after the enactment of this article, the chief executive officer shall commence such educational and conciliatory activities as will further the purposes of this article. He shall call conferences of persons in the housing industry and other interested parties to acquaint them with the provisions of this article and his suggested means of implementing it, and shall endeavor with their advice to work out programs of voluntary compliance and of enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 99-3873, 6-10-99)  
Sec. 6-230. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice or who believes that he will be irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur ("person aggrieved") may file a complaint with the chief executive officer. Complaints shall be in writing and shall contain such information and be in such form as the chief executive officer requires. Upon receipt of such a complaint, the chief executive officer shall furnish a copy of the same to the person or persons who alleged discriminatory housing practice. Within thirty (30) days after receiving a complaint, or within thirty (30) days after the expiration of any period of reference under subsection (c), the chief executive officer shall investigate the complaint and give notice in writing to the person aggrieved whether he intends to resolve it. If the chief executive officer decides to resolve the complaint, he shall proceed to try to eliminate or correct the alleged discriminatory housing practice by informal methods of conference, conciliation, and persuasion. Nothing said or done in the course of such informal endeavors may be made public or used as evidence in a subsequent proceeding under this article without the written consent of the persons concerned. Any employee of the chief executive officer who shall make public any information in violation of this provision shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned not more than six (6) months. 
(b)  A complaint under subsection (a) shall be filed within one hundred and eighty (180) days after the alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred. Complaints shall be in writing and shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a discriminatory housing practice are based. Complaints may be reasonably and fairly amended at any time. A respondent may file an answer to the complaint against him and, with the leave of the chief executive officer, which shall be granted whenever it would be reasonable and fair to do so, may amend his answer at any time. Both complaints and answers shall be verified. 
(c)  If within thirty (30) days after a complaint is filed with the chief executive officer, the chief executive officer has been unable to obtain voluntary compliance with his article, the person aggrieved may, within one year after an alleged discriminatory housing practice, file a complaint with the Secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development. The chief executive officer will assist in this filing. 
(d)  If the chief executive officer has been unable to obtain voluntary compliance within thirty (30) days of the complaint, the person aggrieved may, within two (2) years after the alleged discriminatory housing practice hereafter commence a civil action in any appropriate court, against the respondent named in the complaint, to enforce the rights related to the subject of the complaint. If the court finds that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about to occur, the court may enjoin the respondent from engaging in such practice or order such affirmative action as may be appropriate. 
(e)  In any proceeding brought pursuant to this section, the burden of proof shall be on the complainant. 
(f)  Whenever an action filed by an individual shall come to trial, the chief executive office shall immediately terminate all efforts to obtain voluntary compliance. 
(Ord. No. 99-3873, 6-10-99)  
Sec. 6-231. - Investigations; subpoena; giving of evidence. 
(a)  In conducting an investigation, the chief executive officer shall have access at all reasonable times to premises, records, documents, individuals, and other evidence or possible sources of evidence and may examine, record, and copy such materials and take and record the testimony or statement of such persons as are reasonably necessary for the furtherance of the investigation; provided, however, that the chief executive officer first complies with the provision of the Fourth Amendment relating to unreasonable searches and seizures. The chief executive officer may issue subpoenas to compel his access to or the production of such materials, or the appearance of such persons, and may issue interrogatories to a respondent, to the same extent and subject to the same limitations as would apply if the subpoenas or interrogatories were issued or served in aid of civil action in the United States district court for the district in which the investigation is taking place. The chief executive officer may administer oaths. 
(b)  Upon written application to the chief executive officer, a respondent shall be entitled to the issuance of a reasonable number of subpoenas by and in the name of the chief executive officer to the same extent and subject to the same limitations as subpoenas issued by the chief executive officer himself. Subpoenas issued at the request of a respondent shall show on their face the name and address of such respondent and shall state that they were issued at his request. 
(c)  Witnesses summoned by subpoena of the chief executive officer shall be entitled to the same witness and mileage fees as are witnesses in proceedings in United States district courts. Fees payable to a witness summoned by a subpoena issued at the request of a respondent shall be paid by him. 
(d)  Within five days (5) after service of a subpoena upon any person, such person may petition the chief executive officer to revoke or modify the subpoena. The chief executive officer shall grant the petition if he finds that the subpoena requires appearance or attendance at the unreasonable time or place, that it requires production of evidence which does not relate to any matter under investigation, that it does not describe with sufficient particularity the evidence to be produced, that compliance would be unduly erroneous, or for other good reason. 
(e)  In the case of contumacy or refusal to obey a subpoena, the chief executive officer or other person at whose request it was issued may petition for its enforcement in the municipal or state court for the district in which the person to whom the subpoena was addressed resides, was served, or transacts business. 
(f)  Any person who willfully fails or neglects to attend and testify or to answer any lawful inquiry or to produce records, documents, or other evidence, if in his power to do so, in obedience to the subpoena or lawful order of the chief executive officer, shall be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned not more than six (6) months, or both. Any person, who with intent thereby to mislead the chief executive officer, shall make or cause to be made any false entry or statement of fast in any report, account, record, or other document submitted to the chief executive officer pursuant to his subpoena or other order, or shall willfully neglect or fail to make or cause to be made full, true, and correct entries in such reports, accounts, records, or other documents, or shall willfully mutilate, alter, or by any other means falsify and documentary evidence, shall be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned not more than six (6) months, or both. 
(g)  The city attorney shall conduct all litigation in which the chief executive officer participates as a party or as amicus pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 99-3873, 6-10-99)  
Sec. 6-232. - Interference, coercion, and intimidation. 
It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by sections 6-223, 6-224, 6-225, or 6-226. This section may be enforced by appropriate civil action. 
(Ord. No. 99-3873, 6-10-99)  
Sec. 6-233. - Prevention of intimidation in fair housing cases. 
Whoever, whether or not acting under color of law, by force or threat of force, willfully injuries, intimidates or interferes with, or attempts to injure, intimidate or interfere with: 
(1)  Any person because of his race, color, sex, religion, national origin, handicap, or familial status and because he is or has been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying, or contracting or negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing or occupation of any dwelling, or applying for or participating in any service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwelling; or 
(2)  Any person because he is or has been, or in order to intimidate such person or any person or any class of persons from: 
a.  Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color, sex, religion, national origin, handicap, or familial status, in any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in subsection 6-224(2); or 
b.  Affording another or class of persons opportunity or protection so to participate; or 
c.  Any citizen because he is or has been, or in order to discourage such citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on an account of race, color, sex, religion, national origin, handicap, or familial status in any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in subsection 6-224(2), or participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly opposing a denial of the opportunity to so participate: shall be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or imprisoned not more than six (6) months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 99-3873, 6-10-99)  
Secs. 6-234—6-250. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL/GRADING[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-4046, adopted Jan. 13, 2005, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 6-82 and 6-83. For purposes of clarity, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Art. VIII, §§ 6-251—6-257. 
 
Sec. 6-251. - Introduction; purpose. 
During the construction process, soil is the most vulnerable to erosion by wind and water. This eroded soil endangers water resources by reducing water quality, and causing the siltation of aquatic habitat for fish and other desirable species. Eroded soil also necessitates repair of sewers and ditches, and the dredging of lakes. In addition, clearing grading during constructions causes the loss of native vegetation necessary for terrestrial and aquatic habitat, and to provide a healthy living environment for citizens of the City of Bastrop. 
As a result, the purpose of this local regulation is to safeguard persons, protect property, prevent damage to the environment and promote the public welfare by guiding, regulating, and controlling the design, construction, use, and maintenance of any development or other activity which disturbs or breaks the topsoil or results in the movement of earth on land in the city. 
(Ord. No. 04-4046, 1-13-05)  
Sec. 6-252. - Definitions. 
Certified contractor: An individual who has received training and is licensed by Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality, or who is otherwise qualified to inspect and maintain erosion and sediment control practices. 
Clearing: Any activity which removes the vegetative surface cover. 
Control plan: Indicates the specific measures and sequencing to be used controlling sediment and erosion on a development site both before, during and after construction. 
Drainage way: Any channel that conveys surface runoff throughout the site. 
Erosion control: Measures that prevent erosion. 
Grading: Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting conditions thereof. 
Perimeter control: A barrier that prevents sediment from leaving a site either by filtering sediment-laden runoff, or diverting it to a sediment trap or basin. 
Permit: Improvements and structures for the control of erosion, runoff and grading. 
Phasing: Clearing a parcel of land in distinct phases, with the stabilization of each phase before the clearing of the next. 
Sediment control: Measures that prevent eroded sediment from leaving the site. 
Site: A parcel of land or a contiguous combination thereof, where grading work is performed as a single unified operation. 
Site development: A permit issued by the City of Bastrop for which the construction or alteration of ground. 
Stabilization: The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from eroding. 
Start of construction: The first land-disturbing activity associated with a development, including land preparation such as clearing, grading and filling, installation of streets and walkways; excavation for basements, footings, piers, or foundations; erections of temporary forms; and installation of accessory buildings such as garages. 
Watercourse: Any body of water, including but not limited to lakes, ponds, rivers, streams, and bodies of water which delineated by the City of Bastrop. 
Waterway: A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse, or to the public storm drain. 
(Ord. No. 04-4046, 1-13-05)  
Sec. 6-253. - Permits. 
(a)  No person shall be granted a site development permit for land-disturbing activity which would require the uncovering of forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet without the approval of an erosion and sediment control plan by the public works department. 
(b)  No site development permit is required for the following activities: 
(1)  Any emergency activity which is immediately necessary for the protection of life, property or natural resources. 
(2)  Existing nursery, agricultural, and timber operations conducted as a permitted main or accessory use. 
(c)  Each application shall bear the name(s) and address(es) of the owner or developer of the site, and of any consulting firm retained by the applicant together with the name of the applicant's principal contact at such firm, and shall be accompanied by a filing fee. 
(d)  Each application shall include a statement that any land clearing construction, or development involving the movement of earth shall be in accordance with the erosion and sediment control plan, and that a certified contractor shall be on-site on all days where construction or grading activity takes place. 
(e)  The applicant will be required to file, with the city, a faithful performance bond or bonds, letter of credit, or other improvement security in an amount deemed sufficient by the public works department to cover all costs of improvements, landscaping, and maintenance of improvements for such period as specified by the city and engineering and inspection costs to cover the cost of failure or repair of improvements installed on the site. 
(f)  Review and approval. 
(1)  The public works department will review each application for a site development permit to determine its conformance with the provisions of this local regulation. Within thirty (30) days after receiving an application, the public works department shall in writing: 
a.  Approve the permit application; 
b.  Approve the permit application subject to such reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this regulation, and issue the permit subject to these conditions; or 
c.  Disapprove the permit application, indicating the deficiencies and the procedure for submitting a revised application and/or submission. 
(2)  Failure of the public works department to act on original or revised applications within thirty (30) days or receipt shall authorize the applicant to proceed in accordance with the plans as filed unless such time is extended by agreement between the applicant and the public works department. Pending preparation and approval of a revised plan, development activities shall be allowed to proceed in accordance with conditions established by the public works department. 
(Ord. No. 04-4046, 1-13-05)  
Sec. 6-254. - Erosion and sediment control plan. 
(a)  The erosion and sediment control plan shall include: 
(1)  A natural resources map identifying soils, forest cover, and resources protected under other chapters of this code. This map shall be at a scale no smaller than one (1) inch = one hundred (100) feet. 
(2)  A sequence of construction of the development site, including stripping and clearing, rough grading, construction of utilities, infrastructure, and buildings, and final grading and landscaping. Sequencing shall identify the expected date of which clearing will begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas, and the sequence of clearing, installation of temporary erosion and sediment measures, and establishment of permanent vegetation. 
(3)  All erosion and sediment control measures necessary to meet the objectives of this local regulation throughout all phases of construction and permanently, after completion of development of the site, depending on the complexity of the project, and drafting of intermediate plans may be required at the close of each season. 
(4)  Seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method or seedbed preparations, expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and fertilizer application, and kin and quantity of mulching for both temporary and permanent vegetative maintenance. 
(b)  Modifications to the plan. 
(1)  Major amendments of the erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted to the public works department, and shall be processed and approved, or disapproved, in the same manner as the original plans. 
(2)  Field modifications of a minor nature may be authorized by the public works department by written authorization to the permitee. 
(Ord. No. 04-4046, 1-13-05)  
Sec. 6-255. - Design requirements. 
Grading, erosion control practices, sediment control practices, and waterway crossing shall meet the design criteria as published by the public works department, and shall be adequate to prevent transportation of sediment from the site to the satisfaction of the public works department. 
(1)  Clearing and grading. 
a.  Clearing and grading of natural resources, such as forest and wetlands shall not be permitted, except when in compliance with all other chapters of this Code. 
b.  Clearing techniques that retain natural vegetation and retain natural drainage patterns, as described by the public works department shall be used to the satisfaction of the public works department. 
c.  Clearing, except that necessary to establish sediment control devices, shall not begin until all sediment control devices have been installed and have been stabilized. 
d.  Cut and fill slopes shall be no greater than 2:1, except as approved by the public works department to meet other community or environmental objectives. 
(2)  Erosion control. 
a.  Soil must be stabilized within five (5) days of clearing or inactivity in construction. 
b.  If vegetative erosion control methods, such as seeding, have not become established within two (2) weeks, the public works department may require that the site be reseeded, or that a non-vegetative option be employed. 
c.  On steep slopes or in drainage ways, special techniques that meet the design criteria outlined in writing by the public works department shall be used to ensure stabilization. 
d.  Soil stockpiles must be stabilized or covered at the end of each work day. 
e.  At the close of the construction season, the entire site must be stabilized using a heady mulch layer, or other method that does not require germination to control erosion. 
f.  Techniques shall be employed to prevent the blowing of dust or sediment from the site. 
g.  Techniques that divert upland runoff past disturbed slopes shall be employed. 
(3)  Sediment controls. 
a.  Sediment controls shall be provided in the form of settling basins or sediment traps or tanks, and perimeter controls. 
b.  Where possible, settling basins shall be designed in a manner that allows adaptation to provide long-term stormwater management. 
c.  Adjacent properties shall be protected by the use of a vegetated buffer strip, in combination with perimeter controls. 
(4)  Waterways and watercourses. 
a.  When a wet watercourse must be crossed regularly during construction, a temporary stream crossing shall be provided, and an approval obtained from the public works department. 
b.  When in-channel work is conducted, the channel shall be stabilized before, during and after work. 
c.  All on-site stormwater conveyance channels shall be designed according to the criteria outlined by the public works department. 
d.  Stabilization adequate to prevent erosion must be provided at the outlets of all pipes and paved channels. 
(5)  Construction site access. 
a.  A temporary access road shall be provided at all sites. 
b.  Other measures may be required at the discretion of the public works department in order to ensure that sediment is not tracked onto public streets by construction vehicles, or washed into storm drains. 
(Ord. No. 04-4046, 1-13-05)  
Sec. 6-256. - Inspection. 
(a)  The public works department or designated agent shall make inspections as hereinafter required and shall either approve that portion of the work completed or shall notify the permitee wherein the work fails to comply with the erosion and sediment control plan as approved. Plans for grading, stripping, excavating, and filling work bearing the stamp of approval of the public works department, shall be maintained at the site during the progress of the work. In order to obtain inspections, the permitee shall notify the public works department at least two (2) working days before the following: 
(1)  Start of construction. 
(2)  Erosion and sediment control measures are in place and stabilized. 
(3)  Site clearing has been completed. 
(4)  Rough grading has been completed. 
(5)  Final grading has been completed. 
(6)  Close of the construction season. 
(7)  Final landscaping. 
(b)  The permitee or his/her agent shall make regular inspections of all control measures in accordance with the inspection schedule outlined on the approved erosion and sediment control plan(s). The purpose of such inspections will be to determine the overall effectiveness of the control plan, and the need for additional control measures. All inspections shall be documented at the time interval specified in the approved permit. 
(c)  The public works department, or its designated agent shall enter the property of the applicant as deemed necessary to make regular inspections to ensure the validity of the reports filed under subsection (b) above. 
(Ord. No. 04-4046, 1-13-05)  
Sec. 6-257. - Enforcement; severability 
(a)  Stop-work order; revocation of permit. In the event that any person holding a site development permit pursuant to this article violates the terms of the permit, or implements site development in such a manner as to materially adversely affect the health, welfare, or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood or development site so as to be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood, the public works department may suspend or revoke the site development permit. 
(b)  Violations and penalties. No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair, or maintain any grading, excavation or fill, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any terms of this article. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each day during which any violation of any of the provisions of this article is committed, continued or permitted, shall constitute a separate offense. Upon conviction of any such violation, such person, partnership, or corporation shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. In addition to any other penalty authorized by this section, any person, partnership, or corporation convicted of violating any of the provisions of this article shall be required to bear the expense of such restoration. 
(c)  Severability. The provisions and sections of this article shall be deemed to be severable, and the invalidity to any portion of this article shall not affect the validity of the remainder. 
(Ord. No. 04-4046, 1-13-05)  
Secs. 6-258—6-275. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER RUNOFF CONTROL[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-4046, adopted Jan. 13, 2005, set out provisions intended for use as § 6-84. For purposes of clarity, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Art. IX, §§ 6-276—6-285. 
 
Sec. 6-276. - General provisions. 
(a)  Findings. It is hereby determined that: 
(1)  Land development projects and associated increases in impervious cover alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream channel erosions, and sediments transport and deposition; 
(2)  This stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities of water-borne pollutants; and, 
(3)  Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff from development sites. 
Therefore, the City of Bastrop established this set of water quality and quantity policies applicable to all surface waters to provide reasonable guidance for the regulation of stormwater runoff for the purpose of protecting local water resources from degradation. It is determined that the regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from land development projects and other construction activities in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, and nonpoint source pollution associated with stormwater runoff is in the public interest and will prevent threats to public health and safety. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish minimum stormwater management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the general health, safety, and welfare of the public residing in watersheds within this jurisdiction. This article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(1)  Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from any development in order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases in stream temperature, and stream bank erosion and to maintain the integrity of stream channels. 
(2)  Minimize increases in nonpoint source pollution caused by stormwater runoff from development which would otherwise degrade local water quality. 
(3)  Minimize the total amount volume of surface water runoff which flows from any specific site during and following development to not exceed the predevelopment hydrologic regime to the maximum extent practicable. 
(4)  Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater management controls and properly maintained and pose no threat to public safety. 
(c)  Applicability. This article shall be applicable to all subdivision or site plan applicants, unless eligible for an exemption or granted a waiver by the city under the specifications of section 6-279 of this article. This article also applies to land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development that meets the following applicability criteria, even though multiple separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. In addition, all plans must also be reviewed by local environmental protection officials to ensure that established water quality standards will be maintained during and after development of the site and that post-construction runoff levels are consistent with any local and regional watershed plans. 
To prevent the adverse impacts of stormwater runoff, the city has developed a set of performance standards that must be met at new development sites. These standards apply to any construction activity disturbing one (1) or more acres of land. The following activities may be exempt from these stormwater performance criteria: 
(1)  Any logging and agricultural activity which is consistent with an approved soil conservation plan or a timber management plan prepared or approved by the department of environmental quality, as applicable. 
(2)  Additions or modifications to existing single-family structures. 
(3)  Developments that do not disturb more than one (1) acre of land, provided they are not part of a larger common development plan; 
(4)  Repairs to any stormwater treatment practice deemed necessary by the city. 
When a site development plan is submitted that qualifies as a redevelopment project as defined in section 6-277 of this article, decisions on permitting and on-site stormwater requirements shall be governed by special stormwater sizing criteria found in the current stormwater design manual. This criteria is dependent on the amount of impervious area created by the redevelopment and its impact on water quality. Final authorization of all redevelopment projects will be determined after a review by the city. 
(d)  Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements. This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, stature, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any other provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(e)  Severability. If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(f)  Development of a stormwater design manual. The city may furnish additional policy, criteria and information including specifications and standards, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article and may provide such information in the form of a stormwater design manual. 
This manual will include a list of acceptable stormwater treatment practices, including the specific design criteria and operation and maintenance requirements for each stormwater practice. The manual may be updated and expanded from time to time, at the discretion of the city, based on improvements in engineering, science, monitoring and local maintenance experience. Stormwater treatment practices that are designed and constructed in accordance with these design and sizing criteria will be presumed to meet the minimum water quality performance standards. 
(Ord. No. 04-4046, 1-13-05)  
Sec. 6-277. - Definitions. 
Accelerated erosion: Erosion caused by development activities that exceeds the natural processes by which the surface of the land is worn away by the action of water, wind, or chemical action. 
Applicant: A property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed an application for a stormwater management permit. 
Building: Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls and a roof, designed for the shelter of any person, animal, or property, and occupying more than one hundred (100) square feet of area. 
Channel: A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite beds and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
Dedication: The deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for general public use. 
Detention: The temporary storage of storm runoff in a stormwater management practice with the goals of controlling peak discharge rates and providing gravity settling of pollutants. 
Detention facility: A detention basin or alternative structure designed for the purpose of temporary storage of stream flow or surface runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
Developer: A person who undertakes land disturbance activities. 
Drainage easement: A legal right granted by a landowner to grantee allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes. 
Erosion and sediment control plan: A plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during construction activities. 
Fee in lieu: A payment of money in place of meeting all or part of the stormwater performance standards required by this article. 
Hotspot: An area where land use or activities generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
Hydrologic soil group (HSG): A natural resource conservation service classification system in which soils are categorized into four (4) runoff potential groups. The groups range from A soils, with high permeability and little runoff productions, to D soils, which have low permeability and produce much more runoff. 
Impervious cover: Those surfaces that cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall (e.g., building rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc.). 
Industrial stormwater permit: A national pollutant discharge elimination system permit issued to a commercial industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
Infiltration: The process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil. 
Infiltration facility: Any structure or device designed to infiltrate retained water to the subsurface. These facilities may be above grade or below grade. 
Jurisdictional wetland: An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
Land disturbance activity: Any activity which changes the volume or peak flow discharge rate of rainfall runoff from the land surface. This may include the grading, digging, cutting, scraping, or excavating of soil, placement of fill materials, paving, construction, substantial removal or vegetation, or any activity which bares soil or rock or involves the diversion or piping of any natural or manmade watercourse. 
Landowner: The legal or beneficial owner of land, including those holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding proprietary rights to the land. 
Maintenance agreement: A legally recorded document that acts as a property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance of stormwater management practices. 
Nonpoint source pollution: Pollution from any source other than from any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances, and shall include, but not be limited to, pollutants from agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Offset fee: A monetary compensation paid to a local government for failure to meet pollutant load reduction targets. 
Off-site facility: A stormwater management measure located outside the subject property boundary in the permit application for land development facility. 
On-site facility: A stormwater management measure located within the subject property boundary described in the permit for land development activity. 
Recharge: The replenishment of underground water reserves. 
Redevelopment: Any construction, alteration or improvement exceeding square feet in areas where existing land use is high density commercial, industrial, institutional or multi-family residential. 
Stop-work order: An order issued which requires that all construction activity on a site be stopped. 
Stormwater management: The use of structural or non-structural practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff pollutant loads, discharge volumes, peak flow discharge rates and detrimental changes in stream temperature that affect water quality and habitat. 
Stormwater retrofit: A stormwater management practice designed for an existing development site that previously had either no stormwater management practice or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
Stormwater runoff: Flow on the surface of the ground, resulting from precipitation. 
Stormwater treatment practices (STPS): Measure, either structural or nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective, practical means of preventing or reducing point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and water bodies. 
Water quality volume (WQV): The storage needed to capture and treat ninety (90) percent of the average annual stormwater runoff volume. Numerically (WQV) will vary as a function of long-term rainfall statistical data. 
Watercourse: A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either natural or manmade, which gathers or carries surface water. 
(Ord. No. 04-4046, 1-13-05)  
Sec. 6-278. - Permit procedures and requirements. 
(a)  Permit required. No land owner or land operator shall receive any of the building, grading or other land development permits required for land disturbance activities without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  Unless specifically excluded by this article, any land owner or operator desiring a permit for a land disturbance activity shall submit to the city a permit application on a form provided for that purpose. 
(2)  Unless otherwise excepted by this article, a permit application must be accompanied by the following in order that the permit application be considered: 
a.  A stormwater management concept plan. 
b.  A maintenance agreement. 
c.  Non-refundable permit review fee. 
(3)  The stormwater management plan shall be prepared to meet the requirements of section 6-280 of this article, the maintenance agreement shall be prepared to meet the requirements of section 6-284 of this article, and fees shall be those established by the city. 
(c)  Application review fees. The fee for review of any land development application shall be based on the amount of land to be disturbed at the site, and the fee structure shall be established by the city. 
(d)  Application procedure. 
(1)  Applications for land disturbance activity permits must be filed with the city on a regular business day. 
(2)  A copy of this permit application shall be forwarded to the city for review. 
(3)  Permit applications shall include the following: 
a.  Two (2) copies of the stormwater management concept plan. 
b.  Two (2) copies of the maintenance agreement. 
c.  Any required review fees. 
(4)  Within ten (10) business days of the receipt of a complete permit application, including all documents as required by this article, the city shall inform the applicant whether the application, plan and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved. 
(5)  If the permit application, stormwater management plan or maintenance agreement are disapproved, the applicant may revise the stormwater management plan or agreement. If additional information is received to inform the applicant that the plan and maintenance agreement are either approved or disapproved. 
(6)  If the permit application, final stormwater management plan and maintenance agreement are approved by the city, all appropriate land disturbance activity permits shall be issued. 
(e)  Permit duration. Permits issued under this section shall be valid from the date of issuance through the date the city notifies the permit holder that all stormwater management practices have passed and final inspection required under permit condition. 
(Ord. No. 04-4046, 1-13-05)  
Sec. 6-279. - Waivers to stormwater management requirements. 
(a)  Waivers for providing stormwater management. 
(1)  Every applicant shall provide for stormwater management as required by this article, unless a written request is filed to waive this requirement. Requests to waive the stormwater management plan requirements shall be submitted to the city for approval. 
(2)  The minimum requirements for stormwater management may be waived in whole or in part upon written request of the applicant, provided that at least one (1) of the following conditions applies: 
It can be demonstrated that the proposed development is not likely to impair attainment of the objectives of this article. 
(3)  Alternative minimum requirements for on-site management of stormwater discharges have been established in a stormwater management plan that has been approved by the city and the implementations of the plan is required by local ordinance. 
a.  Provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site facility. The off-site facility is required to be in place, to be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there is a legally obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the stormwater practice. 
b.  The city finds that meeting the minimum on-site management requirements is not feasible due to the natural or existing physical characteristics of a site. 
c.  Non-structural practices will be used on the site that reduce: 
1.  The generation of stormwater from the site. 
2.  The size and cost of stormwater storage. 
3.  The pollutants generated at the site. 
These non-structural practices are explained in detail in the current design manual and the amount of credit available for using such practices shall be determined by the city. 
(4)  In instances where one (1) of the conditions above applies, the city may grant a waiver from strict compliance with these stormwater management provisions, as long as acceptable mitigation measures are provided. However, to be eligible for a variance, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the variance will not result in the following impacts to the downstream waterways: 
a.  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures. 
b.  Degradation of biological functions or habitat. 
c.  Accelerated stream bank or streambed erosion or siltation. 
d.  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life and/or property. 
(5)  Furthermore, where compliance with minimum requirements for stormwater management is waived, the applicant will satisfy the minimum requirements by meeting one (1) of the mitigation measures selected by the city. Mitigation measures may include, but are not limited to the following: 
a.  The purchase and donation or privately owned lands, or the grant of an easement to be dedicated for preservation and/or reforestation. These lands should be located adjacent to the stream corridor in order to provide permanent buffer areas to protect water quality and aquatic habitat. 
b.  The creation of a stormwater management facility or other drainage improvements on previously developed properties, public or private, that currently lack stormwater management facilities designed and constructed in accordance with the purposes and standards of this article. 
c.  Monetary contributions (fee-in-lieu) to fund stormwater management activities such as research and studies (e.g., regional wetland delineation studies, stream monitoring studies for water quality and macro invertebrates, stream flow monitoring, threatened and endangered species studies, hydrologic studies, and monitoring of stormwater management practices). 
(b)  Fee in lieu of stormwater management practices. 
(1)  Where the city waives all or part of the minimum stormwater management requirements, or where the waiver is based on the provision of adequate stormwater facilities provided downstream of the proposed development, the applicant shall be required to pay a fee in an amount as determined by the city. 
(2)  When an applicant obtains a waiver of the required stormwater management, the monetary contribution required shall be in accordance with a fee schedule (unless the developer and the stormwater authority agree on a greater alternate contribution) established by the city, and based on the cubic feed of storage required for stormwater management of the development in question. All of the monetary contributions shall be credited to an appropriate capital improvements program project, and shall be made by the developer prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. 
(c)  Dedication of land. In lieu of a monetary contribution, an applicant may obtain a waiver of the required stormwater management by entering into an agreement with the city for the granting of an easement or the dedication of land by the applicant, to be used for the construction on an off-site stormwater management facility. The agreement shall be entered into by the applicant and the city prior to the recording of plats or, if no record plat is required, prior to the issuance of the building permit. 
(Ord. No. 04-4046, 1-13-05)  
Sec. 6-280. - General performance criteria for stormwater management. 
Unless judged by the city to be exempt or granted a waiver, the following performance criteria shall be addressed for stormwater management at all sites: 
(1)  All site designs shall establish stormwater management practices to control the peak flow rates of stormwater discharge associated with specified design storms and reduce the generation of stormwater. These practices should seek to utilize pervious areas for stormwater treatment and to infiltrate stormwater runoff from driveways, sidewalks, rooftops, parking lots, and landscaped areas to the maximum extent practical to provide treatment for both water quality and quantity. 
(2)  All stormwater runoff generated from new development shall not discharge untreated stormwater directly into a jurisdictional wetland or local water body without adequate treatment. Where such discharges are proposed, the impact of the proposal on wetland functional values shall be assessed using a method acceptable to the city. In no case shall the impact on functional values be any less than allowed by the Army Corp of Engineers (ACE) or the department of environmental quality (DEQ) responsible for natural resources. 
(3)  Annual groundwater recharge rates shall be maintained, by promoting infiltration through the use of structural and non-structural methods. At a minimum, annual recharge from the pose development site shall mimic the annual recharge from pre-development site conditions. 
(4)  For new development, structural stormwater treatment practices shall be designed to remove seventy-five (75) percent of the average annual post development total suspended solids load (TSS). It is presumed that STP complies with this performance standard if it is: 
a.  Sized to capture the prescribed water quality volume (WQV). 
b.  Designed according to the specific performance criteria in the local stormwater design manual, constructed properly, and maintained regularly. 
(5)  To protect stream channels from degradation, a specific channel protection criteria shall be provided as prescribed in the current stormwater manual. 
(6)  Stormwater discharges to critical areas with sensitive resources (i.e., cold water fisheries, shellfish beds, swimming beaches, recharge areas, water supply reservoirs) may be subject to additional performance criteria, or may need to utilize or restrict certain stormwater management practices. 
(7)  Certain industrial sites are required to prepare and implement a stormwater pollution prevention plan, and shall file a notice of intent (NOI) under the provisions of the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) general permit. The stormwater pollution prevention plan requirement applies to both existing and new industrial sites. 
(8)  Stormwater discharges from land uses or activities with higher potential pollutant loadings, know as "hotspots", may require the use of specific structural STP's and pollution prevention practices. 
(9)  Prior to design, applicants are required to consult with the city to determine if they are subject to additional stormwater design requirements. 
(10)  The calculations for determining peak flows found in the stormwater design manual shall be used for sizing all stormwater management practices. 
(Ord. No. 04-4046, 1-13-05)  
Sec. 6-281. - Basic stormwater management design criteria. 
(a)  Minimum control requirements. 
(1)  All stormwater management practices will be designed so that specific storm frequency storage volumes (e.g., recharge, water quality, channel protection, 10-year, 100-year) as identified in the current stormwater design manual are met, unless the city grants the applicant a waiver or the applicant is exempt from such requirements. 
(2)  In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum, control requirements, the city of reserves the right to impose any and all additional requirements deemed necessary to control the volume, timing, and rate of runoff. 
(b)  Site design feasibility. Stormwater management practices for a site shall be chosen based on the physical conditions of the site. Among the factors that should be considered: 
(1)  Topography. 
(2)  Maximum drainage area. 
(3)  Depth to water table. 
(4)  Soils. 
(5)  Slopes. 
(6)  Terrain. 
(7)  Head. 
(8)  Location in relation to environmentally sensitive features or ultra-urban areas. 
Applicants shall consult the stormwater design manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting a stormwater management practice. 
(c)  Conveyance issues. All stormwater management practices shall be designed to convey stormwater to allow for maximum removal of pollutants and reduction in flow velocities. This shall include, but not limited to: 
(1)  Maximizing of flow paths from inflow points to outflow points. 
(2)  Protection of inlet and outfall structures. 
(3)  Elimination of erosive flow velocities. 
(4)  Providing of under drain systems, where applicable. 
The stormwater design manual shall provide detailed guidance on the requirements for conveyance for each of the approved stormwater management practices. 
(d)  Pretreatment requirements. Every stormwater treatment practice shall have an acceptable form of water quality pretreatment, in accordance with the pretreatment requirements found in the current stormwater design manual. Certain stormwater treatment practices, as specified in the stormwater design manual, are prohibited even with pretreatment in the following circumstances: 
(1)  Stormwater is generated from highly contaminated source areas known as "hotspots". 
(2)  Stormwater is carried in a conveyance system that also carries contaminated, non-stormwater discharges. 
(3)  Stormwater is being managed in a designated groundwater recharge area. 
(4)  Certain geologic conditions exist (e.g., karst) that prohibit the proper treatment of stormwater. 
(e)  Treatment/geometry conditions. All stormwater management practices shall be designed to capture and treat stormwater runoff according to the specifications outlined in the stormwater design manual. These specifications will designate the water quantity and quality treatment criteria that apply to an approved stormwater management practice. 
(f)  Landscaping plans required. All stormwater management practices must have a landscaping plan detailing both the vegetation to be in the practice and how and who will manage and maintain this vegetation. This plan must be prepared by a registered landscape architect, soil conservation district or a party with like qualifications, as determined by the city. 
(g)  Maintenance agreements. All stormwater treatment practices shall have an enforceable operation and maintenance agreement to ensure the system functions as designed. This agreement will include any and all maintenance easements required to access and inspect stormwater treatment practices, and to perform routine maintenance as necessary to ensure proper functioning of the stormwater treatment practice. In addition, a legally binding covenant specifying the parties responsible for the proper maintenance of all stormwater treatment practices shall be secured prior to issuance of any permits for land disturbance activities. 
(h)  Non-structural stormwater practices. The use of non-structural stormwater treatment practices is encouraged in order to minimize the reliance on structural practices. Credit in the form of reductions in the amount of stormwater that must be managed can be earned through the use of non-structural practices are explained in detail in the current design manual and applicants wishing to obtain credit for the use of non-structural practices must ensure that these practices are documented and remain unaltered by subsequent property owners. 
(Ord. No. 04-4046, 1-13-05)  
Sec. 6-282. - Requirements for stormwater management plan approval. 
(a)  Stormwater management plan required for all developments. 
(1)  No application for development will be approved unless it includes a stormwater management plan detailing in concept how runoff and associated water quality impacts resulting from the development will be controlled or managed. This plan must be prepared by an individual approved by the city and must indicate whether stormwater will be managed on-site or off-site and, if on-site, the general location any type of practices. 
(2)  The stormwater management plan(s) shall be referred for comment to all other interested agencies, and any comments must be addressed in a final stormwater management plan. This final plan must be signed by a licensed professional engineer (PE), who will verify that the design of all stormwater management practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the submittal checklist found in the stormwater design manual. No building, grading, or sediment control permit shall be issued until a satisfactory final stormwater management plan, or a waiver thereof, shall have undergone a review and has been approved by the city after determining that the plan or waiver is consistent with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Stormwater management concept plan requirements. 
(1)  A stormwater management concept plan shall be required with all permits and will include sufficient information (e.g., maps, hydrologic calculations, etc.) to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the project site, the potential impacts of all proposed development of the site, both present and future, on the water resources, and the effectiveness and acceptability of the measures proposed for managing stormwater generated at the project site. The intent of this conceptual planning process is to determine the type of stormwater management measures of stormwater runoff from future development. To accomplish this goal, the following information shall be included in the concept plan: 
a.  A map (or maps) indicating the location of existing and proposed building, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural stormwater management and sediment control facilities. The map(s) will also clearly show proposed land use with tabulation of the percentage of surface area to be adapted to various uses; drainage patterns; locations of utilities, road and easements; the limits of clearing and grading; a written description of the site plan and justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be required. 
b.  To show that the proposed stormwater measures are capable of controlling runoff from the site in compliance with this article and the specifications of the stormwater design manual. 
c.  A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project and a description of the watershed and its relation to the project site. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site. Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
d.  A written description of the required maintenance burden for any proposed stormwater management facility. 
e.  The city may also require a concept plan to consider the maximum development potential of a site under existing zoning, regardless of whether the applicant presently intends to develop the site to its maximum potential. 
(2)  For development or redevelopment occurring on a previously developed site, and applicant shall be required to include within the stormwater concept plan measures for controlling existing stormwater runoff discharges from the site in accordance with the standards of this article to the maximum extent practicable. 
(c)  Final stormwater management plan requirements. After review of the stormwater management concept plan, and modifications to that plan as deemed necessary by the city, a final stormwater management plan must be submitted for approval. The final stormwater management plan, in addition to the information from the concept plan, shall include all of the information required in the final stormwater management plan checklist found in the stormwater design manual. This includes: 
(1)  Contact information. The name, address, and telephone number of all persons having a legal interest in the property and the tax reference number and parcel number of the property or properties affected. 
(2)  Topographic base map. A one (1) inch = two hundred (200) feet topographic base map of the site which extends a minimum of fifty (50) feet beyond the limits of the proposed development and indicates existing surface water drainage including streams, ponds, culverts, ditches, and wetlands; current land use including all existing structures; locations of utilities, roads, and easements; and significant natural and manmade features not otherwise shown. 
(3)  Calculations. Hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations for the pre-development and post-development conditions for the design storms specified in this article. Such calculations shall include: 
a.  Description of the design storm frequency, intensity, and duration. 
b.  Time of concentration. 
c.  Soil curve numbers or runoff coefficients. 
d.  Peak runoff rates and total runoff volumes for each watershed area. 
e.  Infiltration rates, where applicable. 
f.  Culvert capacities. 
g.  Data on the increase in rate and volume runoff for the design storms referenced in the stormwater design manual. 
h.  Documentation of sources for all computation methods and field test results. 
(4)  Soils information. If a stormwater management control measure depends on thy hydrologic properties of soils (e.g., infiltration basins), then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report shall be based on the on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The number and location of required soil borings or soil sites shall be determined based on what is needed to determine the suitability and distribution of soil types present at the location of the control measure. 
(5)  Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of all stormwater management facilities shall include detailed maintenance and repair procedures to ensure their continued function. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility that need to be maintained and the equipment and skills or training necessary. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
a.  Landscaping plan. The applicant must present a detailed plan for management of vegetation at the site after construction is finished, including who will be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation at the site and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. This plan must be prepared by a registered landscape architect or by the soil conversation district. 
b.  Maintenance easements. The applicant must ensure access to all stormwater treatment practices at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance easements needed on a permanent basis. These easements will be recorded with the plan and will remain in effect even with transfer of title to the property. 
c.  Maintenance agreement. The applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of the land served by any on-site stormwater management measure in accordance with the specifications of this article. 
d.  Erosion and sediment control plans for construction of stormwater management measures. The applicant must prepare an erosion and sediment control plan for all construction activities related to implementing any on-site stormwater management practices. 
e.  Other environmental permits. The applicant shall assure that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the final stormwater design plan. 
(d)  Performance bond/security. 
(1)  The city may, at its discretion, require the submittal of a performance security of bond prior to issuance of a permit in order to insure that the stormwater practices are installed by the permit holder as required by the approved stormwater management plan. The amount of the installation performance security shall be the total estimated construction cost of the stormwater management practices approved under the permit, plus twenty-five (25) percent. The performance security shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure to complete work specified in the stormwater management plan. 
(2)  The installation performance security shall be released in full only upon submission of "as built plans" and written certification by a registered professional engineer that the stormwater practice has been installed in accordance with the approved plan and other applicable provisions of this article. The city will make a final inspection of the stormwater practice to ensure that it is in release of the performance security based on the completion of various development stages can be done at the discretion of the city. 
(Ord. No. 04-4046, 1-13-05)  
Sec. 6-283. - Construction inspection. 
(a)  Notice of construction commencement. 
(1)  The applicant must notify the city in advance before the commencement of construction. Regular inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the staff of the city or certified by a professional engineer or their designee who has be approved by the city. All inspections shall be documented and written reports prepared that contain the following information: 
a.  The date and location of the inspection. 
b.  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan. 
c.  Variations from the approved construction specifications. 
d.  Any violations that exist. 
(2)  If any violations are found, the property owner shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. No added work shall proceed until any violations are corrected and all work previously completed has received approval by the city. 
(b)  As built plans. All applications are required to submit actual "as built" plans for any stormwater management practices located on-site after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and must be certified by a professional engineer. A final inspection by the city is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
(c)  Landscaping and stabilization requirements. 
(1)  Any area of land from which the natural vegetative cover has been either partially or wholly cleared or removed by development activities shall be re-vegetated within ten (10) days from the substantial completion of such clearing and construction. The following criteria shall apply to re-vegetation efforts: 
a.  Re-seeding must be done with an annual or perennial cover crop accompanied by placement of straw mulch or its equivalent of sufficient coverage to control erosion until such time as the cover crop is established over ninety (90) percent of the seeded area. 
b.  Re-planting with native woody and herbaceous vegetation must be accompanied by placement of straw mulch or its equivalent of sufficient coverage to control erosion until the planting are established and are capable of controlling erosion. 
c.  Any area of re-vegetation must exhibit survival of a minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of the cover crop throughout the year immediately following re-vegetation. Re-vegetation must be repeated in successive years until the minimum seventy-five (75) percent survival for one (1) year is achieved. 
(2)  In addition to the above requirements, a landscaping plan must be submitted with the final design describing the vegetative stabilization and management techniques to be used at a site after construction is completed. This plan will explain not only how the site will be stabilized after construction, but who will be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation at the site and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. This plan must be prepared by a registered landscape architect or by the soil conservation district, and must be approved prior to receiving a permit. 
(Ord. No. 04-4046, 1-13-05)  
Sec. 6-284. - Maintenance and repair of stormwater facilities. 
(a)  Maintenance easement. Prior to the issuance of any permit that has a stormwater management facility as one (1) of the requirements of the permit, the applicant or owner of the site must execute a maintenance easement agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of land served by the stormwater management facility. The agreement shall proved for access to the facility at reasonable times for periodic inspections by the city, or their contractor or agent, and for regular or special assessments of property owners to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper working condition to meet design standards and any other provisions established by this article. The easement agreement shall be recorded by the city in the land records. 
(b)  Maintenance covenants. 
(1)  Maintenance of all stormwater management facilities shall be ensured through the creation of a formal maintenance covenant that must be approved by the city and recorded into the land record prior to final plan approval. As part of the covenant, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility. The covenant shall also include plans for periodic inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled cleanouts. 
(2)  The city, in lieu of a maintenance covenant, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this chapter and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
(c)  Requirements for maintenance covenants. All stormwater management facilities must undergo, at the minimum, an annual inspection to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of this article and accomplishment of its purpose. These needs may include: removal of silt, litter and other debris from all catch basins, inlets and drainage pipes, grass cutting and vegetation removal, and necessary placement of landscape vegetation. Any maintenance needs found must be addressed in a timely manner, as determined by the city, and the inspection and maintenance requirement may be increased as deemed necessary to ensure proper functioning of the stormwater management facility. 
(d)  Inspection of stormwater facilities. Inspection programs may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspections of drainage basins or areas identified as higher than typical sources of sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses or industries of a type associated with higher than usual discharges of contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are more likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of state or federal water or sediment quality standards or the NPDES stormwater permit; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in drainage control facilities; and evaluating the condition of drainage control facilities and other stormwater treatment practices. 
(e)  Right of entry for inspection. When any new drainage control facility is installed on private property, or when any new construction is made between private property and a public drainage control system, sanitary sewer or combined sewer, the property owner shall grant to the city the right to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is occurring or has occurred, and to enter when necessary for abatement of public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article. 
(f)  Records of installation and maintenance activities. Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall make records of the installation and of all maintenance and repairs, and shall retain the records for at least ten (10) years. These records shall be made available to the city during inspection of the facility and at other reasonable times upon request. 
(g)  Failure to maintain practices. If a responsible party fails or refuses to meet the requirements of all maintenance covenants, the city, after reasonable notice, may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance needs by performing all necessary work to place the facility in proper working condition. In the event that the storm water management facility becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the city shall notify the responsible party for maintenance of the stormwater management facility in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible party shall have not more than ten (10) days to effect maintenance and repair of the facility in an approved manner. After proper notice, the city may assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of repair work and any penalties; and the cost of the work shall be a lien on the property, or prorated against the beneficial users of the property, and may be placed on the tax bill and collected as ordinary taxes by the city. 
(Ord. No. 04-4046, 1-13-05)  
Sec. 6-285. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. Any development activity that is commenced or is conducted contrary to this article, may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
(b)  Notice of violation. When the city determines that an activity is not being carried out in accordance with the requirements of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to the owner(s) of the property. The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner(s) or applicant(s); 
(2)  The address when available or a description of the building, structure of land upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the development into compliance with this article and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person(s) to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the municipality by filing a written notice of appeal within fifteen (15) days of service of notice of violation. 
(c)  Stop-work orders. Persons receiving a notice of violation will be required to halt all construction activities. This "stop-work order" will be in effect until the city confirms that the development activity is in compliance and the violation has been satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a notice of violation in a timely manner can result in civil, criminal, and/or monetary penalties in accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in this article. 
(d)  Civil and criminal penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided herein or by law, any person(s) who violate the provisions of this article shall be punished by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Such person(s) shall be guilty of a separate offense for each day during which the violation occurs or continues. 
(e)  Restoration of lands. Any violator may be required to restore land to its undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not undertaken within a reasonable time after notice, the city may take necessary corrective action, the cost of which shall become a lien upon the property until paid in full. 
(f)  Holds on occupation permits. Occupational permits will not be granted until all corrections to all stormwater practices have been made and accepted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 04-4046, 1-13-05)  
Secs. 6-286—6-299. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGES INTO STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-4224, adopted June 12, 2014 , amended article X in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article X, §§ 6-300—6-320, pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
Sec. 6-300. - Purpose/intent. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of City of Bastrop, Louisiana, through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination system (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges by any user; 
(2)  To prohibit Illicit Connections and Discharges to the municipal; separate storm sewer system; 
(3)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article; 
(4)  To maintain and improve the quality of surface water and groundwater within the City of Bastrop; 
(5)  To prevent the discharge of contaminated stormwater runoff from industrial, commercial, residential, and construction sites into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) and natural waters affected by the City of Bastrop; 
(6)  To promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the improper discharge of hazardous substances, petroleum products, household hazardous waste, industrial waste, sediment from construction sites, pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, and other contaminants into the storm sewers and natural waters of the City of Bastrop; 
(7)  To encourage the recycling of used motor oil and safe disposal of other hazardous consumer products; 
(8)  To facilitate compliance with state and federal standards and permits by owners and operators of industrial and construction sites within the City of Bastrop; and 
(9)  To enable the City of Bastrop to comply with all federal and state laws and regulations applicable to stormwater discharges. 
( Ord. No. 14-4224, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 6-301. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following shall mean: 
Authorized enforcement agency: Employees or designees of the director of the municipal agency designated to enforce this ordinance. 
Best management practices (BMPS): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating, procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
City: The City of Bastrop or the Mayor and Board of Alderman of the City of Bastrop or any designated official. 
Clean Water Act: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C., 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Constructive activity: Activity subject to NPDES construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of five (5) acres or more. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
Hazardous materials: Any material, including any substance, waste or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
Illegal discharge: Any direst or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the storm drain system, except as exempted in section 6-306 of this article. 
Illicit connections: All illicit connection is defined as either of the following: Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyance which allows any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Industrial activity: Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26(b)(14). 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge Permit: means a permit issued by EPA (or by a state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C., 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
Non-stormwater discharge: Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Person: Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation, or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owners agent. 
Pollutant: Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents, oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid waste; refuse, rubbish, contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coli form and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from construction and building structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Premises: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parceling strips. 
Release: Any spill, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping, or disposing into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or the waters of the United States. 
Rubbish: Non putrescible solid waste, excluding ashes that consist of (a) combustible waste materials, including paper, rags, cartons, wood, furniture, rubber, plastics, yard trimmings, leaves and similar materials; and (b) noncombustible waste materials, including glass, crockery, tin cans, aluminum cans, metal furniture, and similar materials that do not burn at ordinary incinerator temperatures (one thousand six hundred (1,600) to one thousand eight hundred (1,800) degrees Fahrenheit). 
Sanitary sewer or sewer: The system of pipes, conduits, and other conveyances, which carry industrial waste and domestic sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, to the city sewage treatment plant (and to which stormwater, surface water, and ground water are not intentionally admitted). 
Septic tank waste: Any domestic sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers and septic tanks. 
Service stations: Any retail establishment engaged in the business of selling fuel for motor vehicles that is dispensed from stationary storage tanks. 
Sewage or sanitary sewage: The domestic sewage and/or industrial waste that are discharged into the city sewer system and passes through the sanitary sewer system to the city sewage treatment plant for treatment. 
Site: The land or water area where any facility or activity is physically located or conducted, including adjacent land used in connection with the facility or activity. 
Storm drainage system: Publicly-owned facilities by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures. 
Stormwater: Any surface flow, runoff: and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. Stormwater runoff, snow melts runoff, surface runoff and drainage. 
Stormwater pollution prevention plan: A document which best describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business identifies sources of pollution or containment at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable. 
Used oil (or used motor oil): Any oil that has been refined from crude oil or a synthetic oil that, as a result of use, storage, or handling, has become unsuitable for its original purpose because of impurities or the loss of original properties but that may be suitable for further use and is recyclable in compliance with state and federal law. 
Wastewater: Any water or other liquid, other than containment stormwater, discharged from facility. 
Wetland: An area that is inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
( Ord. No. 14-4224, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 6-302. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system generated on any developed and undeveloped land unless explicitly exempted by an authorized enforcement agency. 
( Ord. No. 14-4224, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 6-303. - Responsibility for administration. 
The City of Bastrop shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement agency may be delegated in writing by the director of the authorized enforcement agency to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the agency. 
( Ord. No. 14-4224, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 6-304. - Severability. 
The provisions of this article are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this article or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of the ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 14-4224, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 6-305. - Ultimate responsibility. 
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this article are minimum standards; therefore this article does not intent nor imply that compliance by any person will endure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharges of pollutants. 
( Ord. No. 14-4224, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 6-306. - Discharge prohibitions. 
(a)  Prohibitions of illegal discharges: No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows: 
(1)  The following discharges are exempt from discharges established by this article: water line flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverting stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs. Noncommercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated-typically less that one PPM chlorine), firefighting activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants. 
(2)  Discharge specified in writing by the authorized enforcement agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
(3)  Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the authorized enforcement agency prior the time of the test. 
(4)  The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under the NDPES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system. 
(b)  Specific prohibition of illicit connections and requirements: 
(1)  The specific prohibitions and requirements in this section are not inclusive of all the discharges prohibited by the general prohibition in section 6-306. 
(2)  No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the MS4 any discharge that causes or contributes to causing the city to violate a water quality standard, the city's NPDES permit, or any state-issued discharge permit for discharges from its MS4. 
(3)  No person shall dump, spill, leak, pump, pour, emit, empty, discharge, leach, dispose, or otherwise introduce or cause, allow, or permit to be introduced any of the following substances into the MS4: 
a.  Any used motor oil, antifreeze, or any other motor vehicle fluid; 
b.  Any industrial waste; 
c.  Any hazardous waste, including hazardous household waste; 
d.  Any domestic sewage or septic tank waste, grease trap waste, or grit trap waste; 
e.  Any garbage, rubbish or yard waste; 
f.  Any wastewater from a commercial carwash facility; from any vehicle washing, cleaning or maintenance at any new or used automobile or other vehicle dealership, rental agency, body shop, repair shop, or maintenance facility; or from any washing, cleaning, or maintenance of any business or commercial or public service vehicle, including a truck, bus, or heavy equipment, by a business or public entity; 
g.  Any wastewater from the washing, cleaning, de-icing, or other maintenance of aircraft; 
h.  Any wastewater from commercial floor, rug, or carpet cleaning; 
i.  Any effluent from a cooling tower, condenser, compressor, emission scrubber, emission filter or the blow-down from a boiler; 
j.  Any runoff or wash down from any animal pen, kennel, or fowl or livestock containment area; 
k.  Any discharge from water line disinfection by super-chlorination or other means if it contains any harmful quantity of chlorine or any other chemical used in line disinfection; 
l.  Any fire protection water containing oil or hazardous substances or materials; 
m.  Any water from a water curtain in a spray room used for painting vehicles or equipment; 
n.  Any contaminated runoff from a vehicle wrecking; 
o.  Any substance or material that will damage, block, or clog the MS4; 
p.  Any release from a petroleum storage tank (PST), or any leachate or runoff from soil contamination by a leaking PST, or any discharge of pumped, confined, or treated wastewater from the remediation of such PST release, unless the discharge satisfies all of the following criteria: 
1.  Compliance with all state and federal standards and requirements; 
2.  No discharge containing harmful quantity of any pollutant; and 
3.  No discharge containing more than fifty (50) parts per billion of benzene, five hundred (500) parts per billion combined total quantities of benzene, toluene, ethyl benzene, and xylene, (BTEX); or fifteen (15) mg/l of total petroleum hydrocarbons (TPH). 
q.  The following non-stormwater sources may be discharged from the MS4 provided that they have not been determined by the city to be substantial sources of pollutants to the MS4. The operator must utilize best management practices to limit discharge of the following non-stormwater sources: 
1.  Any wastewater from a commercial mobile power washer or from the washing of other cleaning of a building exterior that contains any harmful quantity of soap, detergent, degreaser, solvent or any other harmful cleaning substance. 
2.  Any wastewater from the wash down or other cleaning of pavement that contains any harmful quantity of soap, detergent, solvent, degreaser, emulsifier, dispersant, or any other cleaning substance; or any wastewater from the wash down or other cleaning of any pavement where any spill, leak or other release of oil, motor fuel, or other petroleum or hazardous substance has occurred, unless all harmful quantities of such released material have been previously removed; 
3.  Any ready-mixed concrete, mortar, ceramic, or asphalt base material or hydro mulch material, or from the cleaning of commercial vehicles or equipment containing, or used in transporting or applying, such material. 
4.  No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the MS4 any harmful quantity of sediment, silt, earth, soil or other material associated with clearing, grading, excavation or other construction activities in excess of what could be retained on site or captured by employing sediment and erosion control measures to the maximum extent practicable. 
5.  No person shall connect a line conveying sanitary sewage, domestic, or industrial, to the MS4, or allow such a connection to continue. 
6.  Person shall cause or allow any pavement wash water from a commercial facility to be discharged into a MS4 unless such waste water has passed through a properly functioning and maintained, grease, oil and sand interceptor before discharging into the MS4. 
( Ord. No. 14-4224, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 6-307. - Used oil regulation. 
No person shall: 
(1)  Discharge used oil into the MS4 or a sewer, drainage system, surface water, groundwater, or water source; 
(2)  Knowingly mix or commingle used oil with solid waste that is to be disposed in a landfill or knowingly directly dispose of used oil on land or in a landfill; 
(3)  Apply used oil to a road or land for dust suppression, weed abatement, or other similar use that introduces used oil into the environment. 
( Ord. No. 14-4224, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 6-308. - Swimming pool regulation. 
Requirements for two (2) types of discharges: 
(1)  Filter back washing: 
a.  Back wash water may be disposed of and filters may be rinsed on the pool/spa owner's property. This should be done in an area that will absorb the water. 
b.  Water from back washing a pool or spa containing chlorine <1 mg/l, total suspended solids <45 mg/1, pH in the range of 7 to 8, no harmful quantities of muriatic acid or other chemical used in the treatment or disinfection of the water, free of color, algae, and other contaminants may be discharged off the owner's property to the MS4. 
c.  The following restrictions apply to back wash water discharge activities: 
1.  Discharges may not be drained onto a neighbor's property or across a sidewalk. 
2.  Discharge water may not cause erosion or transport sediment. 
3.  Discharges may not be drained into unpaved alleys. 
4.  Discharges may not cause an accumulation of water along the curb line gutter of a paved street. 
5.  Back wash water discharged unable to meet the restrictions outlined above must be discharged to the sanitary sewer system with approval from the wastewater superintendent and the city plumbing inspector. 
(2)  Swimming pool/spa draining: 
a.  Water from draining a pool or spa containing chlorine <1 mg/l, total suspended solids <45 mg/1, pH in the range of 7 to 8, no harmful quantities of muriatic acid or other chemical used in the treatment or disinfection of the water, free of color, algae, and other contaminants may be discharged off the owner's property to the MS4. 
b.  The following restrictions apply to swimming pool and spa discharge activities: 
1.  Discharges may not be drained onto a neighbor's property or across a sidewalk. 
2.  Discharge water may not cause erosion or transport sediment. 
3.  Discharges may not be drained into unpaved alleys. 
4.  Discharges may not cause an accumulation of water along the curb line gutter of a paved street. 
5.  Swimming pools or spas water discharge unable to meet the restrictions outlined above must be discharged to the sanitary sewer system in the event there is no subsurface drainage is available. To discharge to the sanitary sewer prior approval from the wastewater superintendent and the city plumbing inspector must be obtained. 
( Ord. No. 14-4224, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 6-309. - Discharge from dumpster area. 
For all new construction of commercial facilities requiring suitable cleaning and supplies such as high pressure pumps, hot water, steam, and detergents necessary for the effective cleaning of equipment and receptacles of solid waste collection must meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Liquid waste generated by cleaning operation cannot be discharged into the MS4 without a valid NPDES permit from the department of environmental quality. 
(2)  Liquid waste generated by cleaning operation not meeting criteria in subsection (1) above, must be discharged to the sanitary sewer by means approved by the City of Bastrop. 
(3)  Discharges entering the sanitary sewer must meet local discharge limits found in city ordinance. Discharges unable to meet these discharges limits must be pretreated on site to reduce pollutant concentration prior to discharging to the sanitary sewer. 
( Ord. No. 14-4224, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 6-310. - Suspension of MS4 access. 
(a)  Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The City of Bastrop may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or Waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or Waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to any person. 
(b)  Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement agency will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the authorized enforcement agency for a reconsideration and hearing. A person commits an offense, if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the authorized enforcement agency. 
( Ord. No. 14-4224, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 6-311. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
(1)  Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction activity. The operator shall certify all state requirements have been met by signing a certification statement as part of the grading application and/or building permit application. Refer to current specific NPDES permit for site applicability and NOI requirements. 
(2)  Access to facilities. 
(a)  The City of Bastrop shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this ordinance as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements allow access to representatives of the authorized enforcement agency. 
(b)  Facility operators shall allow the City of Bastrop ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law. 
(c)  The City of Bastrop shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the option of the authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge. 
(d)  The City of Bastrop has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devises used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to insure their accuracy. 
(e)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the City of Bastrop and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access as shall be borne by the operator. 
(f)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the City of Bastrop access to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this article. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this article. 
(g)  If the City of Bastrop has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement agency may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(3)  All operators of construction sites shall use best management practices to control and reduce the discharge, to the MS4 and to waters of the United States, of sediment, silt, earth, soil, and other material associated with the clearing, grading, excavation, and other construction activities to the maximum extent practicable. Such best management practices may include, but not be limited to, the following measures: 
(a)  Ensuring that existing vegetation is preserved where feasible and that disturbed portions of the site are stabilized as soon as practicable in portions of the site where construction activities have temporarily or permanently ceased. Stabilization measures may include: temporary seeding, permanent seeding, mulching, geotextiles, sod stabilization, vegetative buffer strips, protection of trees, preservation of mature vegetation, and other appropriate measures; 
(b)  Use of structural practices to divert flows from exposed soils, store flows, or otherwise limit runoff and the discharge of pollutants from the site to the extent feasible; 
(c)  Minimization of the tracking of sediments off site by vehicles, the generation of dust, and the escape of other windblown waste from the site; 
(d)  Prevention of the discharge of building materials, including cement, lime, concrete, and mortar, to the MS4 or waters of the United States; 
(e)  Providing general good housekeeping measures to prevent and contain spills of paints, solvents, fuels, septic waste, and other hazardous chemicals and pollutants associated with construction, and to assure proper clean and disposal of any such spills in compliance with state, federal, and local requirements; 
(f)  Implementation of proper waste disposal and waste management techniques, including covering waste materials and minimizing ground contact with hazardous chemicals and trash; 
(g)  Timely maintenance of vegetation, erosion and sediment control measures and other best management practices in good and effective operating condition; and 
(h)  Installation of structural measures during the construction process to control pollutants in stormwater discharges that will occur after construction operations have been completed. Structural measures should be placed on upland soils to the degree attainable. Such installed structural measures may include, but not be limited to, the following: stormwater detention structures (including wet ponds); flow attenuation by use of open vegetative swales and natural depressions; other velocity dissipation devices, infiltration of runoff on site; and sequential systems which combine several practices. Operators of construction sites are only responsible for the installation and maintenance of stormwater management measures prior to final stabilization of the site, and are not responsible for maintenance after stormwater discharges associated with construction activity have terminated. 
(4)  Personnel (provided by the operator of the construction site) shall inspect disturbed areas of any construction site (meeting criteria of current NPDES permit) that have not been finally stabilized, areas used for storage of materials that are exposed to precipitation, structural control measures, and locations where vehicles enter or exit the site in accordance with the current NPDES permit. All erosion and sediment control measures and other identified best management practices shall be observed in order to ensure that they are operating correctly and effective in preventing significant impacts to receiving waters and the MS4. Based on the results of the inspections, best management practices shall be revised as appropriate, and as soon as is practicable. 
(5)  The city may require any plans and specification that are prepared for the construction of site improvements to illustrate and describe the best management practices required by subsection (3)(a) above that will be implemented at the construction site. The city may deny approval of any building permit, site development plan, or any other city approval necessary to commence or continue construction, or to assume occupancy, on the grounds that the management practices described in the plans or observed upon the site inspection by the city are determined not to control and reduce the discharge of sediment, silt, earth, soil, and other materials associated with clearing, grading, exaction, and other construction activities to the maximum extent practicable. 
(6)  Any owner of a site of construction activity, whether or not he/she is an operator, is jointly and severally responsible for compliance with the requirements in this section. 
(7)  Any contractor or subcontractor on a site of construction activity, who is not an owner or operator, but who is responsible under his/her contract or subcontract for implementing best management practices control measure, is jointly and severally responsible for any willful or negligent failure on his/her part to adequately implement that control measure if such failure causes or contributes to causing the city to violate a water quality standard, the city's NPDES permit, or any state-issued discharge permit for discharges from its MS4. 
(8)  Based on the results of the inspections required by subsection (4), the site description and/or the pollution prevention measures shall be revised as appropriate, but in no case later that one (1) calendar day following the inspection. Such modifications shall provide for timely implementation of any changes to the SWPPP within one (1) calendar day following the inspection. 
(9)  Upon final stabilization of the construction site, the owner or the duly authorized representative thereof, shall submit written certification to the city that the site has been finally stabilized. The city may withhold an occupancy or user permit for any premises constructed on the site until certification of final stabilization has been filed and the city has determined, following any appropriate inspection, that final stabilization has, in fact, occurred and that any required permanent structural controls have been completed. 
( Ord. No. 14-4224, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 6-312. - Site applicability. 
Construction activity, including clearing, grading and excavation activities, that result in the disturbance of one (1) or more acres of total land area shall comply with the requirements of this chapter. This also applies to building construction (including residential) on lots less than one (1) acre (see section 6-313). 
( Ord. No. 14-4224, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 6-313. - Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater pollutants by the use of best management practices. 
The City of Bastrop will adopt requirement identifying best management practices for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the U.S. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premise, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as necessary for compliance with requirement of the NPDES permit. 
( Ord. No. 14-4224, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 6-314. - Watercourse protection. 
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. 
( Ord. No. 14-4224, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 6-315. - Compliance monitoring. 
(a)  Right of entry: Inspection and sampling. The city shall have the right to enter the premises of any person discharging stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or to waters of the United States to determine if the discharger is complying with all requirements of this chapter and with state or federal discharge permit, limitation, or requirements. Dischargers shall allow the city ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and for the performance of any additional duties. Dischargers shall make available to the city, upon request, any SWPPPs, modifications thereto, self-inspection reports, monitoring records, compliance evaluations, notices of intent, and any other records, reports, and other documents related to compliance with this chapter and with any state or federal discharge permit. 
(1)  Where a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharge shall make necessary arrangement with its security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, city personnel will be permitted to enter without delay for the purpose of performing his/her responsibilities. 
(2)  The city shall have the right to set up on the discharger's property, or require installation of such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the discharger's operation. 
(3)  The city may require any discharger to the MS4 or waters of the United States to conduct specified sampling, testing, analysis, and other monitoring of its stormwater discharges, and may specify the frequency and parameters of any such required monitoring. 
(4)  The city may require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary at the discharger's expense. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the discharger at the written or verbal request of the city and shall not be replaced. The cost of clearing such access shall be borne by the discharger. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to the discharger's premises shall be a violation of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 14-4224, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 6-316. - Enforcement. 
Notice of violation. Whenever the City of Bastrop finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the authorized enforcement agency may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation: 
(a)  The performance of monitoring, analysis, and reporting; 
(b)  The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
(c)  The violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
(d)  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
(e)  Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and 
(f)  The implementation of source control or treatment BPMs. If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property are required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be complete. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. 
( Ord. No. 14-4224, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 6-317. - Appeal's notice of violation. 
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the authorized enforcement agency. The notice of appeal must be received within five (5) days from the date of notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the appropriate authority or his/her designee shall take place within fifteen (15) days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the municipal authority of their designee shall be final. 
( Ord. No. 14-4224, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 6-318. - Enforcement measure after appeal. 
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within fifteen (15) days of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of the authorized enforcement agency, then representatives of the authorized enforcement agency shall enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
( Ord. No. 14-4224, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 6-319. - Cost of abatement of the violation. 
Within thirty (30) days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objection to the amount of the assessment within fifteen (15) days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the decision of the municipal authority or by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation. The liability shall be paid. 
( Ord. No. 14-4224, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 6-320. - Compensatory action. 
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this article, the authorized enforcement agency may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory action, such as a storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek, cleanup, etc. 
( Ord. No. 14-4224, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 6-321. - Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of the article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken. 
( Ord. No. 14-4224, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 6-322. - Criminal prosecution. 
Any person that has violated or continues to violate this ordinance shall be liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law, and shall be subject to a criminal penalty of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation per day and/or imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed thirty (30) days. 
First offense: $250.00 per day per offense. 
Second offense: $500.00 per day per offense. 
Third offense and thereafter: $1,000.00 per day per offense. 
The authorized enforcement agency may recover all attorneys' fees court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this ordinance, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
( Ord. No. 14-4224, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 6-323. - Charges and fees. 
The city may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of constructing, operating, and maintaining the city's MS4, and for reimbursement of costs of implementing its stormwater management program as required by EPA or the state, and the cost of implementing this chapter, which costs may include, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including cost of collecting and analyzing discharges and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by dischargers; 
(2)  Fees for spills and release reports and responding to spills and releases of oil, hazardous and extremely hazardous substances, and other pollutants, which will include the lab charges for samples pulled; 
(3)  Fees for the discharges of stormwater into the city's separate storm sewer system; 
(4)  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained in this chapter. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the city; 
(5)  The fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per permit fee for each new construction of business or residence, regardless of size; and 
(6)  The fee of fifty cents ($0.50) for residential customers and one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) for commercial customers for each meter. 
( Ord. No. 14-4224, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 6-324. - Remedies not exclusive. 
The remedies listed in this ordinance are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state, or local law and it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies. 
( Ord. No. 14-4224, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 6-325. - Adoption of ordinance. 
This article shall be in full force and effect fifteen (15) days after its final passage and adoption. All prior ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this article are hereby repealed. 
( Ord. No. 14-4224, 6-12-14 )  
ARTICLE XI. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION ORDINANCE  
DIVISION 1. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND METHODS 
 
Sec. 6-326. - Statutory authorization. 
The Legislature of the State of Louisiana has in statute LRS 38:84 delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the City of Bastrop of Morehouse Parish, Louisiana, does ordain as follows. 
(Ord. No. 16-4242 , Art. 1, § A, 6-28-16)  
Sec. 6-327. - Findings of fact. 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of the City of Bastrop are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 16-4242 , Art. 1, § B, 6-28-16)  
Sec. 6-328. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 16-4242 , Art. 1, § C, 6-28-16)  
Sec. 6-329. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this ordinance uses the following methods: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. No. 16-4242 , Art. 1, § D, 6-28-16)  
Secs. 6-330—6-339. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 6-340. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
Alluvial fan flooding means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths. 
Apex means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
Appurtenant structure means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. 
Area of future conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the one-percent-annual chance (100-year) flood based on future conditions hydrology. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one (1) percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed rate making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V. 
Base flood means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation. The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a one (1) percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year - also called the base flood. 
Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. 
Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
Development means any man-made change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means, for insurance purposes, a non-basement building, which has its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study (FIS). See flood elevation study. 
Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding). 
Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
Flood proofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway. See "regulatory floodway." 
Functionally dependent use means a use, which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or; 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Levee means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
New construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is (i) built on a single chassis; (ii) four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; (iii) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (iv) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
Special flood hazard area. See "area of special flood hazard." 
Start of construction. (For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: (1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions or (2) Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
Variance means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.) 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. No. 16-4242 , Art. 2, 6-28-16)  
DIVISION 3. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 6-341. - Lands to which this article applies. 
The ordinance shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard with the jurisdiction of City of Bastrop. 
(Ord. No. 16-4242 , Art. 3, § A, 6-28-16)  
Sec. 6-342. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Morehouse Parish, Louisiana and Incorporated Areas," dated July 6, 2016, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) dated July 6, 2016, and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. 
(Ord. No. 16-4242 , Art. 3, § B, 6-28-16)  
Sec. 6-343. - Establishment of development permit. 
A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 16-4242 , Art. 3, § C, 6-28-16)  
Sec. 6-344. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 16-4242 , Art. 3, § D, 6-28-16)  
Sec. 6-345. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 16-4242 , Art. 3, § E, 6-28-16)  
Sec. 6-346. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this ordinance, all provisions shall be; (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes. 
(Ord. No. 16-4242 , Art. 3, § F, 6-28-16)  
Sec. 6-347. - Warning and disclaimer or liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 16-4242 , Art. 3, § G, 6-28-16)  
DIVISION 4. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 6-348. - Designation of the floodplain administrator. 
The building official is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance - National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(Ord. No. 16-4242 , Art. 4, § A, 6-28-16)  
Sec. 6-349. - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Review permit application to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(3)  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this article. 
(4)  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
(5)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
(6)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency which is the department of transportation and development, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(7)  Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(8)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with division 3, section 6-342, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of division 5. 
(9)  When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the community. 
(10)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than 1 foot, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by Section 65.12. 
(Ord. No. 16-4242 , Art. 4, § B, 6-28-16)  
Sec. 6-350. - Permit procedures. 
(1)  Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
(a)  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(b)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed; 
(c)  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of division 5, section 6-353(2); 
(d)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; 
(e)  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with division 4, section 6-349(1); 
(2)  Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this article and the following relevant factors: 
(a)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(b)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(c)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(d)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(e)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(f)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
(g)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
(h)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(i)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use. 
(Ord. No. 16-4242 , Art. 4, § C, 6-28-16)  
Sec. 6-351. - Variance procedures. 
(1)  The appeal board, as established by the community, shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this article. 
(2)  The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(3)  Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(4)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(5)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this article. 
(6)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (½) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in section 6-350(2) of this division have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (½) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(7)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this article (division 1, section 6-328). 
(8)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(9)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(10)  Prerequisites for granting variances: 
(a)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(b)  Variances shall only be issued upon: (i) showing a good and sufficient cause; (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (iii) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(c)  Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(11)  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that (i) the criteria outlined in division 4, section 6-351(1)—(9) are met, and (ii) the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Ord. No. 16-4242 , Art. 4, § D, 6-28-16)  
DIVISION 5. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 
 
Sec. 6-352. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(5)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(6)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and, 
(7)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. No. 16-4242 , Art. 5, § A, 6-28-16)  
Sec. 6-353. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in (i) division 3, Section 6-342, (ii) division 4, section 6-349(8), or (iii) division 5, section 6-354(3), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in division 4, section 6-350(1)a., is satisfied. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(3)  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two (2) openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable State and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
b.  Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
c.  Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of paragraph (4) of this section be elevated so that either: 
i.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation, or 
ii.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(5)  Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either (i) be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, or (ii) be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or (iii) meet the permit requirements of division 4, section 6-350(1), and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in paragraph (4) of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Ord. No. 16-4242 , Art. 5, § B, 6-28-16)  
Sec. 6-354. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(1)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with division 1, sections 6-327, 6-328, and 6-329 of this article. 
(2)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet Floodplain Development Permit requirements of division 3, section 6-343; division 4, section 6-350; and the provisions of division 5 of this article. 
(3)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to division 3, section 6-342 or division 4, section 6-349(8) of this article. 
(4)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(5)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 16-4242 , Art. 5, § C, 6-28-16)  
Sec. 6-355. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in division 3, section 6-342, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified). 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures; 
(a)  Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified), or 
(b)  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base specified flood depth in an AO zone, or below the base flood elevation in an AH zone, level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. 
(3)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in division 4, section 6-350 are satisfied. 
(4)  Require within zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. 16-4242 , Art. 5, § D, 6-28-16)  
Sec. 6-356. - Floodways. 
Floodways located within areas of special flood hazard established in division 3, section 6-342, are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  If division 5, section 6-356(1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of division 5. 
(3)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulation, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by Section 65.12. 
(Ord. No. 16-4242 , Art. 5, § E, 6-28-16)  
Sec. 6-357. - Severability. 
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this article is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 16-4242 , Art. 5, § F, 6-28-16)  
Sec. 6-358. - Penalties for noncompliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this article by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days, or both, for each violation. Each day the violation continues shall be deemed a new violation. In addition, the violator shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent City of Bastrop from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 16-4242 , Art. 5, § G, 6-28-16)  
Chapter 7 - CEMETERIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority as to cemeteries, R.S. 8:101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 7-1. - Cemetery superintendent. 
The governing body shall appoint a cemetery superintendent who shall serve until removed by action of the governing body unless such term is sooner terminated by resignation or death. 
(1)  The governing body shall fix the salary of the superintendent and may change the same at will. 
(2)  The superintendent shall be responsible to the governing body for the control and management of the municipal cemeteries and shall make reports annually showing in detail all amounts expended for upkeep and showing all receipts for the sale of lots. 
(3)  The superintendent shall make and keep a record of all lots sold, showing the names of the purchasers, and file same with the city clerk, who shall keep on file a record of such sales and shall keep on file plats showing the location, size, etc., of all unsold lots. 
(Code 1966, § 9-08; Ord. No. 2829, 11-9-76)  
Sec. 7-2. - New private cemeteries prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to open, establish, or use any new or additional privately owned cemetery within the corporate limits of the city, provided that the provisions hereof shall not apply to the territorial extension of any existing cemetery by the enclosure therein of lots lying contiguous thereto. 
(Code 1966, § 9-01; Ord. No. 2829, 11-9-76)  
Sec. 7-3. - Future municipal cemeteries. 
Any land hereafter acquired by the city for cemetery purposes and all sales of lots and all burials therein shall be subject to all the provisions, rules and regulations contained in this chapter relating to the operation, management, care, and upkeep of municipal cemeteries insofar as the same are applicable thereto. 
(Code 1966, § 9-02; Ord. No. 2829, 11-9-76)  
Sec. 7-4. - Plats. 
All tracts or parcels of land which are now, or may hereafter, be owned by the city and set apart and dedicated for use as public cemeteries shall be surveyed and laid out into roads and other passageways, blocks and lots, and plats and maps thereof shall be made and filed in the office of the city clerk, these to be open to inspection by the public; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to what is known and referred to as the "old cemetery," wherein there are no lots for sale. 
(Code 1966, § 9-03; Ord. No. 2829, 11-9-76)  
Sec. 7-5. - Prices and deeds. 
The governing body shall fix the price of lots in the cemeteries. The sale of lots in municipal cemeteries shall be under the control of the city clerk and superintendent of cemeteries, subject to the rules and regulations and the general supervision of the governing body. The city clerk and the superintendent of cemeteries, or either of them, may grant to such persons as either deems proper, deeds of conveyance to such lots as may be purchased. Deeds must be signed by the city clerk. 
(Code 1966, § 9-04; Ord. No. 2829, 11-9-76)  
Sec. 7-5.1. - Prices. 
All vacant lots or grave spaces in municipal cemeteries shall be sold at a fixed rate of not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) per burial space. Said rate, hereafter, is subject to modification by the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 04-4034, § 1, 7-8-04)  
Sec. 7-6. - Perpetual care. 
All graves and all vacant lots in municipal cemeteries are entitled to perpetual care by the city, the expenses of such care to be borne by the city. The word "care" as herein used shall include cutting of grass upon the lots or graves at reasonable intervals, the raking and cleaning of lots or graves, the pruning or trimming of trees or shrubs, and such work as may be necessary to keep the lots and the graves in a neat condition; but shall not include maintenance or repair of any markers or monuments or the planting of flowers or shrubs upon the lots. 
(Code 1966, § 9-05; Ord. No. 2829, 11-9-76)  
Sec. 7-7. - Fences, shelters and unsightly shrubs prohibited; flowers; removal of prohibited items. 
No fences or enclosures around grave lots shall be permitted, provided that concrete coping may be built around the lots if it does not extend above the level of the lot. No shelters or houses of any kind shall be erected on the lots and no trees or shrubs shall be planted on the lots. Trees and shrubbery may be planted and maintained along the roadways provided they are planted at such distance from the lots that the roots thereof will not interfere with the graves or the tombs. It is permissible for the owners of lots to plant flowers of the annual variety. All dead flowers shall be removed within ten (10) days, and if not so removed by the owner, may be removed by the superintendent or persons designated by the superintendent. In all cases where there are at present shelters or housing built over graves, the superintendent of cemeteries shall remove the same in case they are allowed to fall into decay or become unsightly and likewise the superintendent may remove all enclosures now around lots when they are permitted to fall into decay or become unsightly and remove all trees and shrubbery now on lots if such trees or shrubbery are injurious to adjacent lots or graves and may remove all dead or decaying trees, but no monument or marker shall be removed by the superintendent. 
(Code 1966, § 9-06; Ord. No. 2829, 11-9-76)  
Sec. 7-8. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-4241 , adopted June 9, 2016, repealed § 7-8, which pertained to monument permits; mausoleums. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Sec. 7-9. - Cemetery fund. 
The city clerk shall set up on the books of the city a separate account to be known as the "Cemetery Fund" and shall credit such account with the amounts received from the levy of the ad valorem tax and received from the sale of cemetery lots. All expenses for the care and upkeep of the cemeteries and the payment of the salaries of the superintendent and laborers, shall be charged to such account. The city clerk shall reserve and set aside ten (10) percent of the sale price of each lot or grave space sold, such fund to be used for the purchase of new cemetery sites. 
(Code 1966, § 9-09; Ord. No. 2829, 11-9-76)  
Sec. 7-10. - Unlawful acts generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or leave a municipal cemetery except through the gates. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person other than cemetery employees or police officers to be within the cemeteries except during daylight hours. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have or carry any firearms within the cemeteries without the written permission of the superintendent; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply in the case of military funerals and exercises on Memorial Day. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any dog to be in the cemeteries. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle within the cemeteries except on roads designated for that purpose, provided that this provision shall not apply to the superintendent or persons in the city's employ. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle in a reckless or negligent manner. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person not the owner of the lot or not a cemetery employee, to cut, remove, injure, or carry away any flowers, shrubs, or plants from any lot, or to deface, damage, or mark upon any markers, headstones, monuments or other structures, or for any person other than the owner to remove, destroy or carry away vases, flower pots, urns, or other objects which have been placed on any lot or grave; provided, however, that such may be removed if they are broken, or otherwise in a state of disrepair. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or possess refreshments or liquors within the cemeteries, or to enter any cemetery while intoxicated. 
(Code 1966, § 9-10; Ord. No. 2829, 11-9-76) 
State Law reference— Vandalism in cemetery, R.S. 14:225.  
Sec. 7-11. - Desecration of graves. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to desecrate a grave. Desecration of graves is the: 
(1)  Unauthorized opening of any place of interment, or building wherein the dead body of a human being is located, with the intent to remove or to mutilate the body, or any part thereof, or any article interred or intended to be interred with such body; or 
(2)  Intentional or criminally negligent damaging, in any manner, of any grave, tomb or mausoleum erected for the dead. 
(Code 1966, § 10-132; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:101.  
Chapter 8 - CRIMINAL CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— General penalty, § 1-8; alcoholic beverage offenses, Ch. 4; unlawful acts in cemeteries, § 7-10; cruelty to animals, § 5-6; fireworks, § 9-20 et seq.; littering, § 10-20 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 8-1. - Definitions. 
In this chapter the terms enumerated shall have the designated meanings: 
Another: Any person or legal entity, including the state or any subdivision thereof. 
Anything of value: The broadest possible construction, including any conceivable thing of the slightest value, movable or immovable, corporeal or incorporeal, public or private, and including transportation, telephone and telegraph services, or any other service available for hire. It must be construed in the broad popular sense of the phrase, not necessarily as synonymous with the traditional legal term "property." In all cases involving shoplifting the term "value" is the actual retail price of the property at the time of the offense. 
Cannabis: Includes all parts of plants and the genus Cannabis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such plant, its seeds or resin, but shall not include the mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination. 
City: This city or any agency, board, commission, department or institution of same. 
Dangerous weapon: Includes any gas, liquid or other substance or instrument which, in the manner used, is calculated or likely to produce death or great bodily harm. 
Foreseeable: That which ordinarily would be anticipated by a human being of average reasonable intelligence and perception. 
Marijuana: All parts of plants of the genus Cannabis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such plant, its seeds or resin, but shall not include the mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination. 
Property: Both public and private property, movable and immovable, and corporeal and incorporeal property. 
Public officer, public office, public employee or position of public authority: Any executive, ministerial, administrative, judicial or legislative officer, office, employee or position of authority respectively, of the state or any parish, municipality, district or other political subdivision. Unless otherwise specified, local references are to those who function in the city. 
State: This state, or any parish, municipality, district or other political subdivision thereof, or any agency, board, commission, department or institution of this state, parish, municipality, district or other political subdivision thereof. 
Whoever: In a penalty clause, refers only to natural persons insofar as imprisonment is provided, but insofar as a fine may be imposed "whoever" in a penalty clause refers to any person. 
(Code 1966, § 10-2; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:2.  
Sec. 8-2. - Interpretation. 
The provisions of this chapter cannot be extended by analogy so as to create crimes not provided for herein; however, in order to promote justice and to effect the objects of the law, all of its provisions shall be given a genuine construction, according to the fair import of their words, taken in their usual sense, in connection with the context, and with reference to the purpose of the provisions. 
(Code 1966, § 10-3; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:3.  
Sec. 8-3. - Civil remedies not affected. 
Nothing in this chapter shall affect any civil remedy provided by the law pertaining to civil matters, or any legal power to inflict penalties for contempt. 
(Code 1966, § 10-4; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:6.  
Secs. 8-4—8-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ELEMENTS OF CRIME 
 
Sec. 8-20. - Crime defined. 
A crime is that conduct which is defined as criminal in this chapter, in other chapters of this Code of Ordinances, or in other ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 10-16; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:7.  
Sec. 8-21. - Criminal conduct. 
Criminal conduct consists of: 
(1)  An act or a failure to act that produces criminal consequences and which is combined with criminal intent; or 
(2)  A mere act or failure to act that produces criminal consequences, where there is no requirement of criminal intent; or 
(3)  Criminal negligence that produces criminal consequences. 
(Code 1966, § 10-17; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:8.  
Sec. 8-22. - Criminal consequences. 
Criminal consequences are any set of consequences prescribed in the various articles of this chapter as necessary to constitute any of the various crimes defined herein. 
(Code 1966, § 10-18; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:9.  
Sec. 8-23. - Criminal intent—Definition. 
Criminal intent may be specific or general: 
(1)  Specific criminal intent is that state of mind which exists when the circumstances indicate that the offender actively desired the prescribed criminal consequences to follow such person's act or failure to act. 
(2)  General criminal intent is present whenever there is specific intent, and also when the circumstances indicate that the offender, in the ordinary course of human experience, must have adverted to the prescribed criminal consequences as reasonably certain to result from such person's act or failure to act. 
(Code 1966, § 10-19; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:10.  
Sec. 8-24. - Same—How expressed. 
The definitions of some crimes require a specific criminal intent, while in others no intent is required. Some crimes consist merely of criminal negligence that produces criminal consequences. However, in the absence of qualifying provisions, the terms "intent" and "intentional" have reference to "general criminal intent." 
(Code 1966, § 10-20; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:11.  
Sec. 8-25. - Criminal negligence. 
Criminal negligence exists when, although neither specific nor general criminal intent is present, there is such disregard of the interest of others that the offender's conduct amounts to a gross deviation below the standard of care expected to be maintained by a reasonably careful person under like circumstances. 
(Code 1966, § 10-21; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:12.  
Secs. 8-26—8-29. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CULPABILITY 
 
Sec. 8-30. - Insanity. 
If the circumstances indicate that because of mental disease or mental defect, the offender was incapable of distinguishing between right and wrong with reference to the conduct in question, the offender shall be exempt from criminal responsibility. 
(Code 1966, § 10-31; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:14.  
Sec. 8-31. - Intoxication. 
The fact of an intoxicated or drugged condition of the offender at the time of the commission of the crime is immaterial, except as follows: 
(1)  Where the production of the intoxication or drugged condition has been involuntary, and the circumstances indicate this condition is the direct cause of the commission of the crime, the offender is exempt from criminal responsibility. 
(2)  Where the circumstances indicate that an intoxicated or drugged condition has precluded the presence of a specific criminal intent or of special knowledge required in a particular crime, this fact constitutes a defense to a prosecution for that crime. 
(Code 1966, § 10-32; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:15.  
Sec. 8-32. - Mistake of fact. 
Unless there is a provision to the contrary in the definition of a crime, reasonable ignorance of fact or mistake of fact which precludes the presence of any mental element required in that crime is a defense to any prosecution for that crime. 
(Code 1966, § 10-33; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:16.  
Sec. 8-33. - Mistake of law. 
Ignorance of the provisions of this chapter, this Code of Ordinances, or other ordinance of the city, is not a defense to any criminal prosecution. However, mistake of law which results in the lack of an intention that consequences which are criminal shall follow, is a defense to a criminal prosecution under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Where the offender reasonably relied on an act of this city in repealing an existing criminal provision, or in otherwise purporting to make the offender's conduct lawful; or 
(2)  Where the offender reasonably relied on a final judgment of a competent court of last resort that a provision making the conduct in question criminal was unconstitutional. 
(Code 1966, § 10-34; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:17.  
Sec. 8-34. - Justification generally. 
The fact that an offender's conduct is justifiable, although otherwise criminal, shall constitute a defense to prosecution for any crime based on that conduct. This defense of justification can be claimed under the following circumstances: 
(1)  When the offender's conduct is an apparently authorized and reasonable fulfillment of any duties of public office; or 
(2)  When the offender's conduct is a reasonable accomplishment of an arrest which is lawful under the laws of the state or of this city; or 
(3)  When for any reason the offender's conduct is authorized by law; or 
(4)  When the offender's conduct is reasonable discipline of minors by their parents, tutors or teachers; or 
(5)  When the crime consists of a failure to perform an affirmative duty and the failure to perform is caused by physical impossibility; or 
(6)  When any crime is committed through the compulsion of threats by another of death or great bodily harm, and the offender reasonably believes the person making the threats is present and would immediately carry out the threats if the crime were not committed; or 
(7)  When the offender's conduct is in defense of persons or of property under any of the circumstances described in sections 8-35 through 8-37. 
(Code 1966, § 10-35; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:18.  
Sec. 8-35. - Use of force or violence in defense. 
The use of force or violence upon the person of another is justifiable, when committed for the purpose of preventing a forcible offense against the person or a forcible offense or trespass against property in a person's lawful possession; provided that the force or violence used must be reasonable and apparently necessary to prevent such offense, and that this section shall not apply where the force or violence results in a homicide. 
(Code 1966, § 10-36; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:19.  
Sec. 8-36. - Aggressor cannot claim self-defense. 
A person who is the aggressor or who brings on a difficulty cannot claim the right of self-defense unless such aggressor withdraws from the conflict in good faith in such a manner that such aggressor's adversary knows or should know that such aggressor desires to withdraw and discontinue the conflict. 
(Code 1966, § 10-37; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:21.  
Sec. 8-37. - Defense of others. 
It is justifiable to use force or violence in the defense of another person when it is reasonably apparent that the person attacked could have justifiably used such means personally, and when it is reasonably believed that such intervention is necessary to protect the other person. 
(Code 1966, § 10-38; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:22.  
Sec. 8-38. - Principals. 
All persons concerned in the commission of a crime, whether present or absent, and whether they directly commit the act constituting the offense, aid and abet in its commission, or directly or indirectly counsel or procure another to commit the crime, are principals and are guilty of a crime. 
(Code 1966, § 10-39; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:24.  
Secs. 8-39—8-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - INCHOATE OFFENSES 
 
Sec. 8-50. - Conspiracy. 
(a)  Criminal conspiracy is the agreement or combination of two (2) or more persons for the specific purpose of committing any crime; provided that an agreement or combination to commit a crime shall not amount to a criminal conspiracy unless, in addition to such agreement or combination, one (1) or more of such parties does an act in furtherance of the object of the agreement or combination. If the intended basic crime has been consummated, the conspirators may be tried for either the conspiracy or the completed offense, and a conviction for one shall not bar prosecution for the other. 
(b)  Whoever is a party to a criminal conspiracy to commit any crime shall be fined or imprisoned, or both, in the same manner as for the offense contemplated by the conspirators; but such fine or imprisonment shall not exceed one-half of the largest fine, or one-half the longest term of imprisonment prescribed for such offense, or both. 
(Code 1966, § 10-51; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:26.  
Sec. 8-51. - Attempt. 
(a)  Any person who, having a specific intent to commit a crime, does or omits an act for the purpose of and tending directly toward the accomplishing of such person's object is guilty of an attempt to commit the offense intended; and it shall be immaterial whether, under the circumstances, such person would have actually accomplished such person's purpose. 
(b)  Mere preparation to commit a crime shall not be sufficient to constitute an attempt; but lying in wait with a dangerous weapon with the intent to commit a crime, or searching for the intended victim with a dangerous weapon with the intent to commit a crime, shall be sufficient to constitute an attempt to commit the offense intended. 
(c)  An attempt is a separate but lesser grade of the intended crime; and any person may be convicted of an attempt to commit a crime, although it appears on the trial that the crime intended or attempted was actually perpetrated by such person in pursuance of such attempt. 
(d)  Whoever attempts to commit any crime shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  If the offense so attempted is theft or receiving stolen things, he shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisoned for not more than six (6) months or both. 
(2)  In all other cases such person shall be fined or imprisoned or both, in the same manner as for the offense attempted; such fine or imprisonment shall not exceed one-half of the largest fine, or one-half of the longest term prescribed for the offense so attempted, or both. 
(Code 1966, § 10-52; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:27.  
Secs. 8-52—8-59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON 
 
Sec. 8-60. - Battery defined. 
Battery is the intentional use of force or violence upon the person of another; or the intentional administration of a poison or other noxious liquid or substance to another. 
(Code 1966, § 10-61; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:33.  
Sec. 8-61. - Simple battery. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of simple battery. Simple battery is a battery committed without the consent of the victim. 
(Code 1966, § 10-62; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:35.  
Sec. 8-62. - Battery of a police officer. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of battery of a police officer. 
(1)  Battery of a police officer is a battery committed without the consent of the victim when the offender has reasonable grounds to believe the victim is a police officer acting in the performance of his duty. 
(2)  For the purposes of this section, "police officer" shall include commissioned police officers, sheriffs, deputy sheriffs, marshals, deputy marshals, correctional officers, constables, wildlife enforcement agents, and probation and parole officers. 
(b)  Whoever commits the crime of battery of a police officer which produces an injury that requires medical attention shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and imprisoned not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than six (6) months without benefit of suspension of a sentence. 
(Code 1966, § 10-63; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82; Ord. No. 91-3555, § 1, 9-12-91; Ord. No. 94-3655, § 1, 3-10-94) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:34.2.  
Sec. 8-63. - Assault defined. 
Assault is an attempt to commit a battery, or the intentional placing of another in reasonable apprehension of receiving a battery. 
(Code 1966, § 10-64; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:36.  
Sec. 8-64. - Simple assault. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of simple assault. Simple assault is an assault committed without a dangerous weapon. 
(b)  Whoever commits a simple assault shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than six (6) months, or both. 
(Code 1966, § 10-65; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:38.  
Sec. 8-65. - Aggravated assault. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of aggravated assault. Aggravated assault is an assault committed with a dangerous weapon. 
(Code 1966, § 10-66; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:37.  
Sec. 8-66. - Negligent injuring. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of negligent injuring. Negligent injuring is the inflicting of any injury upon the person of another by criminal negligence. 
(b)  The violation of a statute or ordinance shall be considered only as presumptive evidence of such negligence. 
(Code 1966, § 10-67; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:39.  
Sec. 8-67. - Terrorizing. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of terrorizing. Terrorizing is the intentional communication of information, known by the offender to be false, that the commission of a crime of violence is imminent or in progress or that a circumstance dangerous to human life exists or is about to exist; and thereby causing any person to be in sustained fear for such person's or another person's safety; causing evacuation of a building, a public structure, or a facility of transportation; or causing other serious disruption to the public. 
(Code 1966, § 10-68; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:40.1.  
Sec. 8-68. - False imprisonment. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of false imprisonment. False imprisonment is the intentional confinement or detention of another, without such other's consent and without proper legal authority. 
(Code 1966, § 10-69; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:46.  
Sec. 8-69. - Battery of a school teacher. 
(a)  Definitions: 
(1)  Battery of a school teacher is a battery committed without the consent of the victim when the offender has reasonable grounds to believe that the victim is a school teacher acting in the performance of employment duties. 
(2)  School teacher shall include any teacher or instructor, administrator, staff person or employee of any public or private, elementary, secondary, vocational-technical training, special or post-secondary school or institution. 
(b)  Violations; penalties: 
(1)  Whoever commits the crime of battery of a school teacher shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and imprisoned not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than six (6) months without benefit of suspension of sentence, except as provided for in subsection (b)(2) herein. 
(2)  The court, in its discretion, may suspend the imposition of sentence and place the offender on probation with a condition that he shall spend two (2) days in jail or perform five (5) days of community service work. Failure to successfully complete community service work, as determined by the supervisor of the program to which he is assigned, shall result in revocation of probation and the imposition of the original sentence. 
(Ord. No. 90-3480, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Secs. 8-70—8-79. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES AFFECTING PROPERTY RIGHTS 
 
Sec. 8-80. - Criminal damage to property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of criminal damage to property. Criminal damage to property is the intentional damaging of any property of another, without the consent of the owner. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) shall apply only if the value of the property damage is less than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Code 1966, § 10-66; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:56.  
Sec. 8-80.1. - Criminal damage to property by defacing with graffiti. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally deface with graffiti immovable or movable property, whether publicly or privately owned, without the consent of the owner. 
(b)  As used in this section, the following terms mean: 
"Deface" or "defacing" is the damaging of immovable or movable property by means of painting, marking, scratching, drawing, or etching with graffiti. 
"Graffiti" includes but is not limited to any sign, inscription, design, drawing, diagram, etching, sketch, symbol, lettering, name, or marking placed upon immovable or movable property in such a manner and in such a location as to deface the property and be visible to the general public. 
(c)  Whoever commits the crime of criminal damage to property by defacing with graffiti shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than six (6) months in the parish jail, or both. 
(d)  (1)  The court, in addition to any punishment imposed under the provisions of this section, may order the offender to clean up, repair, or replace any property damaged by the act or to pay restitution to the owner of the damaged property. 
(2)  The court may also order the offender to perform the following hours of community service: 
a.  For a first conviction, not to exceed thirty-two (32) hours over a period not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days. 
b.  For a second or subsequent conviction, sixty-four (64) hours over a period not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days. 
(e)  If a minor is personally unable to pay a fine levied for acts prohibited by this section or make restitution as may be ordered by the court, the parent or guardian of the minor shall be liable for payment of the fine or restitution. A court may waive payment of the fine or restitution, or any part thereof, by the parent or guardian of the minor upon a finding of good cause. 
(Ord. No. 09-4194, 12-10-09)  
Sec. 8-81. - Criminal damage to coin-operated devices. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of criminal damage to coin-operated devices. Criminal damage to a coin-operated device is the intentional damaging of any coin-operated device belonging to another. 
(b)  Coin-operated device means any parking meter, pay telephone, vending machine, money-changing machine, or any other coin-activated device designed to accept money for a privilege, service, or product. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, the value of damages shall be determined by the actual costs of repair, or replacement if necessary. 
(Code 1966, § 10-87; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:56.1.  
Sec. 8-82. - Criminal mischief. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of criminal mischief. Criminal mischief is the intentional performance of any of the following acts: 
(1)  Tampering with any property of another, without the consent of the owner, with the intent to interfere with the free enjoyment of any rights of anyone thereto, or with the intent to deprive anyone entitled thereto of the full use of the property; or 
(2)  Giving of any false alarm of fire, or notice which would reasonably result in emergency response; or 
(3)  Driving of any tack, nail, spike or metal over one and one-half (1½) inches in length into any tree located on lands belonging to another, without the consent of the owner, or without the later removal of the object from the tree; or 
(4)  The felling, topping or pruning of trees or shrubs within the right-of-way of a city street, avenue, alley, road or highway without prior written approval of the superintendent of public works or chief of police or a representative, provided prior written approval is not required for agents or employees of public utility companies in situations of emergency where the person or property of others is endangered; or 
(5)  Giving of any false report or complaint to any officer of the law relative to the commission of, or an attempt to commit, a crime; or 
(6)  Throwing any stone or any other missile in any street, avenue, alley, road or highway, or open space or public square, or enclosure, or throwing any stone or other missile from any place into any street, avenue, road, highway, alley, open space, public square or enclosure; or 
(7)  Taking temporary possession of any part or parts of a place of business, or remaining in a place of business after the person in charge of such business or portion of such business has directed such person to leave the premises and to desist from the temporary possession of any part or parts of such business. 
(Code 1966, § 10-88; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82; Ord. No. 95-3726, § 1, 9-14-95) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:59.  
Sec. 8-83. - Damaging, defacing or improperly using property at city hall and police station complex. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Intentionally damage, without the consent of the city, any property within the bounds of the city hall or police station complex; or 
(2)  Deface any property within the bounds of the city hall or police station complex by making, without the consent of the city, signs or figures thereon, or by posting or writing on or otherwise attaching to such property any indecent or obscene word, words, or sentences; or 
(3)  Wade, swim, sit, stand or lie, without the consent of the city, in any fountain or pool within the bounds of the city hall or police station complex; or 
(4)  Throw or intentionally drop, without the consent of the city, any object other than coins into any fountain or pool at the city hall or police station complex. 
(Code 1966, § 10-89; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82)  
Sec. 8-84. - Defacing buildings. 
It shall be unlawful to deface any building within the corporate limits of the city, by making signs or figures thereon, or by writing any indecent or obscene word, words, or sentences on any building, room, hall, closet, wall, or fence. 
(Code 1966, § 10-90; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82)  
Sec. 8-85. - Criminal trespass. 
(a)  No person shall without authorization intentionally enter any structure, watercraft, or movable. 
(b)  No person shall intentionally enter immovable property owned by another: 
(1)  When such person knows such person's entry is unauthorized, or 
(2)  Under circumstances where such person reasonably should know such person's entry is unauthorized. 
(c)  The following shall be affirmative defenses to a prosecution pursuant to subsection (b)(2) hereof: 
(1)  That unfenced cultivated property, or unfenced improved pasturelands lacked a posted sign or sign of similar meaning at points of normal ingress and egress; that unfenced forest lands owned by a person, consisting of five hundred (500) acres or less, lacked a posted sign or sign of similar meaning at points of normal ingress and egress, and a posted sign or sign of similar meaning at intervals of not more than fifty (50) feet on or near the boundary line from which entry was made. 
(2)  That unfenced horticultural property or unimproved pasturelands lacked a posted sign or sign of similar meaning at intervals of not more than six hundred sixty (660) feet on or near the boundary line from which entry was made. 
(3)  That forest lands were not fenced with not less than three-strand wire or its equivalent, or that forest lands which were fenced as required above lacked a posted sign or sign of similar meaning at points of normal ingress and egress, and in addition, lacked the letters "NO," at least five (5) inches in height, on trees or other markers or a posted sign or sign of similar meaning at intervals of not more than fifty (50) feet on or near the boundary line from which entry was made. 
(4)  That the person was on the property for the purpose of managing such person's or such person's employer's livestock located on the property of another. 
(5)  That the person entered upon the immovable property owned by another due to an emergency. 
(6)  That the entry was consented to by a holder of a possessory interest in the property. 
(7)  That the entry was by a registered land surveyor, and such surveyor's personnel, engaged in the "practice of land surveying," as defined in R.S. 37:682, or a person employed by a public utility acting in the course and scope of such person's employment relating to operation, repair or maintenance of a public utility facility who entered upon unfenced immovable property which lacked a posted sign or sign of similar meaning at points of normal ingress and egress. 
(8)  That the person was unarmed and entered immovable property for the sole purpose of retrieving a dog. 
(Code 1966, § 10-91; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:63.  
Sec. 8-86. - Illegal posting. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of illegal posting on public or private property. Illegal posting is the posting or the placing and/or maintaining of posted signs on property by anyone other than: 
(1)  The owner or the owner's duly authorized agent or representative. 
(2)  The lessee or the lessee's duly authorized agent or representative. 
(Code 1966, § 10-92; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:63.1.  
Sec. 8-87. - Destruction, defacing or removing of posted signs. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally and without authority destroy, deface or remove posted signs, or signs designating or purporting to designate the boundary lines of immovable property. 
(b)  Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(Code 1966, § 10-93; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:63.2.  
Sec. 8-88. - Entry on or remaining in places or on land after being forbidden. 
It shall be unlawful for any person without authority to go into or upon or remain in or upon or attempt to go into or upon or remain in or upon any structure, watercraft, or any other movable or immovable property, which belongs to another, including public buildings and structures, ferries, and bridges, or any part, portion, or area thereof, after having been forbidden to do so, either orally or in writing, including by means of any sign hereinafter described, by any owner, lessee, or custodian of the property or by any other authorized person. For the purposes of this section, the above-mentioned sign means a sign or signs posted on or in the structure, watercraft, or any other movable or immovable property, including public buildings and structures, ferries and bridges, or any part, portion or area thereof, at a place or places where such sign or signs may be reasonably expected to be seen. 
(Code 1966, § 10-94; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:63.3.  
Sec. 8-89. - Aiding and abetting others to enter or remain on premises where forbidden. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to incite, solicit, urge, encourage, exhort, instigate or procure any other person to go into or upon or to remain in or upon any structure, watercraft, or any other movable or immovable, which belongs to another, including public buildings and structures, ferries, and bridges, or any part, portion or area thereof, knowing that such other person has been forbidden to go or remain there, either orally or in writing, including by means of any sign hereinafter described, by the owner, lessee or custodian of the property or by any other authorized person. For the purposes of this section, the above-mentioned sign means a sign or signs posted on or in the structure, watercraft or any other movable or immovable, including public buildings and structures, ferries and bridges, or any part, portion or area thereof, at a place or places where such sign or signs may be reasonably expected to be seen. 
(b)  Any law enforcement officer investigating a complaint that the provisions of this section are being or have been violated or any such officer making any arrest for violation of the provisions of this section, is hereby vested with authority to require any person involved in such investigation or arrest to identify such person's self to such officer. Upon demand of such officer, the person involved shall inform the officer of such person's true name and address. 
(Code 1966, § 10-95; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:63.4.  
Sec. 8-90. - Theft. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of theft. Theft is the misappropriation or taking of anything of value which belongs to another, either without the consent of the other to the misappropriation or taking, or by means of fraudulent conduct, practices or representations. An intent to deprive the other permanently of whatever may be the subject of the misappropriation or taking is essential. 
(Code 1966, § 10-96; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:67.  
Sec. 8-91. - Theft of dogs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of theft of dogs. Theft of dogs is the misappropriation or taking of any dog which belongs to another, either without consent of the other to the misappropriation or taking, or by means of fraudulent conduct, practices or representations. An intent to deprive the other permanently of whatever may be the subject of the misappropriation or taking is essential. 
(Code 1966, § 10-97; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:67.2.  
Sec. 8-92. - Unauthorized use of access or credit card. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of unauthorized use of access or credit card. 
(1)  Access card shall mean and include any card, plate, account number, paper, book or any other device issued to a person which authorized such person to obtain credit, money, goods, services or anything of value, whether contemporaneous or not, by use of any credit or deferred payment plan with issuer or by use of debiting or charging such person's demand deposit or savings or time account with issuer or by debiting or charging any other funds such person has on deposit with issuer. 
(2)  Revoked access card shall mean an access card which has been cancelled or terminated by the issuer of such access card. 
(3)  Issuer shall be the depository and/or creditor issuing the access card, directly or through another entity. 
The aggregate amount or value of credit, money, goods, services or anything else of value obtained shall determine the value of the misappropriation or taking when the offender has obtained the credit, money, goods, services or anything else of value from any one (1) issuer or the offender has used an access card, or referred to a nonexistent access card on two (2) or more occasions within any consecutive ninety-day period. This section shall not apply if such value is one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more. 
(b)  Whoever, directly or indirectly, by agent or otherwise, with intent to defraud: 
(1)  Uses a forged access card, 
(2)  Makes reference by number or other description to a nonexistent access card, 
(3)  Steals or wrongfully appropriates an access card, or 
(4)  Uses an access card belonging to another person without authority of such person, thereby obtaining, whether contemporaneously or not, credit, money, goods, services, or anything of value, shall be guilty of theft. 
(c)  Whoever, directly or indirectly, by agent or otherwise, with intent to defraud, uses a revoked access card, thereby obtaining, whether contemporaneously or not, credit, money, goods, services or anything of value shall be guilty of theft. For purposes of this subsection, it shall be presumptive evidence that a person used a revoked access card with intent to defraud if the person, directly or indirectly, by agent or otherwise, uses the access card after actually receiving oral or written notice that the access card has been cancelled or terminated, or if such person, directly or indirectly, by agent or otherwise, uses the access card at a time period more than five (5) days after written notice of the termination or cancellation of such access card has been deposited by registered or certified mail in the United States mail system. Such notice shall be addressed to the person to whom such access card has been issued at the last known address for such person as shown on the records of the issuer. 
(d)  Whoever, directly or indirectly, by agent or otherwise, with the intent to defraud, uses an access card to obtain, whether contemporaneously or not, money, goods, services or anything of value, and the final payment for such items is to be made by debiting or charging such person's demand deposit or savings or time account with issuer, or by debiting or charging any other funds such person has on deposit with issuer, and there are not sufficient funds on deposit to the credit of such person with the issuer to make payment in full of such items obtained, such person shall have committed the crime of theft. Such person's failure to pay the amount due on such items obtained: 
(1)  Within ten (10) days after written notice of such amount due has been deposited by certified or registered mail in the United States mail system addressed to the person to whom such access card has been issued at the last known address for such person as shown on the records of issuer; or 
(2)  Within ten (10) days of delivery or personal tender of such written notice shall be presumptive evidence of such person's intent to defraud. 
(e)  As used herein, the access card itself shall be a thing of value, with a value less than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(f)  In addition to any other fine or penalty imposed, the court may, at its discretion, order, as a part of the sentence, restitution. 
(Code 1966, § 10-99; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:67.3.  
Sec. 8-93. - Theft of utility service; prima facie evidence of intent thereof. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of theft of utility service. Theft of utility service is the misappropriation, taking, or use of any electricity, gas, water, or telecommunications which belongs to another, is held for sale by another, or is being distributed by another, without consent of the owner, seller, or distributor or by means of fraudulent conduct, practices, or representations. A taking, misappropriation, or use includes the diversion by any means or device of any quantity of electricity, gas, water, or telecommunications from the wires, cables, pipes, mains, or other means of transmission of such person, or by directly or indirectly preventing a metering device from properly registering the quantity of electricity, gas, water, or telecommunications actually used, consumed, or transmitted. 
(b)  The trier of fact may infer that there was a misappropriation, taking, or using without the consent of the owner, seller, or distributor, or that there was fraudulent conduct, practices, or representations when: 
(1)  There is on or about any wire, cable, pipe, main, or meter, or the equipment to which such wire, cable, pipe, main, or meter is affixed or attached, any device or any other means resulting in the diversion of electricity, gas, water, or telecommunications or any device or any other means resulting in the prevention of the proper action or accurate registration of the meter or meters used to measure the quantity of electricity, gas, water, or telecommunications actually used, consumed, or transmitted, or interfering with the proper action or accurate registration of such meter or meters; 
(2)  The person charged had custody or control of the room, structure, or place where such device, other means, or such wire, cable, pipe, main, meter, or equipment affixed or attached thereto was located; and 
(3)  The person charged benefited from the misappropriation of such utility service. 
(Code 1966, § 10-100; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:67.6.  
Sec. 8-94. - Avoiding payment for telecommunications services, cable television services, or multipoint distribution system service. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of avoiding payment for telecommunications services, cable television services, or multipoint distribution system service. Avoidance of payment for telecommunications, cable television or multipoint distribution system services is the avoidance, attempt to avoid, or the causing of another person to avoid, the lawful charges, in whole or in part, for any telephone, telegraph, cable or multipoint distribution system service utilized or for the transmission of a message, signal, or other communication over telephone, telegraph, cable facilities, or multipoint distribution system: 
(1)  By the use of a code, prearranged scheme, or other similar stratagem or device whereby such person, in effect, sends or receives information; or 
(2)  By rearranging, tampering or interfering with, or making unauthorized connection with any facilities or equipment of a telephone or telegraph company, whether physically, inductively, acoustically, or otherwise; or 
(3)  By intercepting and decoding a transmission by a multipoint distribution system without the authorization of the provider of the service, the person intentionally or knowingly attaches to, causes to be attached to, or incorporates in a television set, video tape recorder, or other equipment designed to receive a television transmission a device that intercepts and decodes the transmission; or 
(4)  By the use of any other fraudulent means, method, trick, or device. 
(b)  Nothing herein shall prohibit the use of earth station receivers to receive satellite communications. 
(Code 1966, § 10-101; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:221.  
Sec. 8-95. - Unauthorized use of a movable. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of unauthorized use of a movable. Unauthorized use of a movable is the intentional taking or use of a movable which belongs to another, either without the other's consent, or by means of fraudulent conduct, practices, or representations, but without any intention to deprive the other of the movable permanently. The fact that the movable so taken or used may be classified as an immovable, according to the law pertaining to civil matters, is immaterial. 
(Code 1966, § 10-102; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:68.  
Sec. 8-96. - Unauthorized removal of shopping carts or baskets. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove a shopping cart or basket belonging to another from the parking area or grounds of any store without authorization therefor. 
(b)  Whoever commits the crime of unauthorized removal of shopping carts or baskets from the parking area or grounds of a store shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(Code 1966, § 10-103; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:68.1.  
Sec. 8-97. - Illegal possession of stolen things. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of illegal possession of stolen things. Illegal possession of stolen things is the intentional possessing, receiving, or concealing of anything of value which has been the subject of any robbery or theft, under circumstances which indicate that the offender knew or had good reason to believe that the thing was the subject of one (1) of these offenses. 
(Code 1966, § 10-104; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:69.  
Sec. 8-98. - Issuing worthless checks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of issuing worthless checks. Issuing worthless checks is the issuing, in exchange for anything of value, whether the exchange is contemporaneous or not, with intent to defraud, of any check, draft, or order for the payment of money in the amount of less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) upon any bank or other depository, knowing at the time of the issuing that the offender has not sufficient credit with the bank, or other depository for the payment of such check, draft, or order in full upon its presentation. This provision shall not apply to payments on installment contracts or open accounts. 
(b)  The offender's failure to pay a check, draft, or order, issued for value, within ten (10) days after notice of its nonpayment upon presentation has been deposited by certified mail in the United States mail system addressed to the issuer thereof either at the address shown on the instrument or the last known address for such person shown on the records of the bank upon which such instrument is drawn or within ten (10) days after delivery or personal tender of the written notice to such issuer by the payee or such person's agent, shall be presumptive evidence of such person's intent to defraud. 
(c)  In addition to any other fine or penalty imposed under this section, the court may, at its discretion, order as part of the sentence, restitution in the amount of the check or checks. 
(Code 1966, § 10-105; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:71.  
Sec. 8-99. - Theft of goods. 
(a)  Theft of goods is the misappropriation or taking of anything of value which is held for sale by a merchant, either without the consent of the merchant to the misappropriation or taking, or by means of fraudulent conduct, practices or representations and intent to derive the merchant permanently of whatever may be subject of the misappropriation or taking is essential and may be inferred when a person: 
(1)  Intentionally conceals, on his person or otherwise, goods held for sale; 
(2)  Alters or transfers any price marking reflecting the actual retail price of the goods; 
(3)  Transfers goods from one (1) container or package to another or places goods in any container, package, or wrapping in a manner to avoid detection; 
(4)  Willfully causes the cash register or other sales recording device to reflect less than the actual retail price of the goods; 
(5)  Removes any price marking with the intent to deceive the merchant as to the actual retail price of the goods; 
(6)  Damages or consumes goods or property so as to render it unmerchantable. 
(b)  When the misappropriation or taking amounts to a value of less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) the offender shall be imprisoned for not more than six (6) months or may be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or both. 
(c)  When there has been a misappropriation or taking by a number of distinct acts of the offender, the aggregate of the amount of the misappropriations or takings shall determine the grade of the offense. 
(Ord. No. 94-3670, § 1, 7-19-94; Ord. No. 99-3896, 11-11-99)  
Sec. 8-100. - Leased movables; obtaining by false representation; failure to return or surrender. 
No person leasing a movable shall obtain or retain possession of the movable by: 
(1)  Making a false statement or false representation of a material fact, where such false statement or false representation is made with the intent to obtain or retain possession of the movable; or 
(2)  Intentionally failing to return or surrender the movable when obligated under the terms of the lease, or after the expiration or cancellation of the lease. The lessee's failure to return or surrender the movable within fifteen (15) calendar days or the number of days for which the movable was leased, whichever is less, after the date written notice requesting return or surrender of the movable was delivered or tendered to the lessee's last known address shall be presumptive evidence that the failure to return or surrender the movable was intentional. In order for the presumption to arise the written notice must be sent by the lessor or the city attorney by means of registered or certified mail. 
(Ord. No. 95-36, § 1, 4-13-95)  
Sec. 8-101. - Vehicular trespass. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly enter into or upon the motor vehicle, boat, or aircraft of another without the consent of its owner or of any person who has a right to possession superior to that of the entrant when the entrant is not otherwise privileged to do so. 
(b)  Enter into or upon means: 
(1)  To open or unlock any door, window, or other access opening of any motor vehicle, boat or aircraft; 
(2)  To be astride of any motor vehicle, boat or aircraft; or 
(3)  To be supported by any motor vehicle, boat or aircraft. 
(c)  An entrant is privileged to enter if: 
(1)  He is attempting to render aid or assistance to an ill or injured person; 
(2)  He reasonably believes that the entry is necessary to person or property; or 
(3)  He is a state or local law enforcement officer in the performance of his official duties. 
(d)  Whoever commits the crime of vehicular trespass shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or imprisoned for not more than six (6) months or both. 
(Ord. No. 95-3727, § 1, 9-14-95) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 95-3727, adopted Sep. 14, 1995, provided for the addition of § 8-99 herein. Inasmuch as provisions designated as such existed prior to adoption of said ordinance, said section has been included herein. as § 8-101.  
Secs. 8-102—8-108. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES AFFECTING PUBLIC MORALS 
 
Sec. 8-109. - Contributing to the delinquency of juveniles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to contribute to the delinquency of juveniles. Contributing to the delinquency of juveniles is the intentional enticing, aiding or permitting, by anyone over the age of seventeen (17), of any child under the age of seventeen (17) and no exception shall be made for a child who may be emancipated by marriage or otherwise, to: 
(1)  Beg, sing, sell any article or play any musical instrument in any public place for the purpose of receiving alms; or 
(2)  Associate with any vicious or disreputable persons, or frequent places where the same may be found; or 
(3)  Visit any place where beverages of either high or low alcoholic content are the principal commodity sold, given away, or consumed; or 
(4)  Visit any place where any gambling device is found, or where gambling habitually occurs; or 
(5)  Habitually trespass where it is recognized such person has no right to be; or 
(6)  Use any vile, obscene, or indecent language; or 
(7)  Absent such person's self or remain away, without authority of such person's parents or tutor, from such person's home or place of abode; or 
(8)  Violate any law of the state within the city or ordinance of the city; or 
(9)  Visit any place where sexually indecent and obscene material, of any nature, is offered for sale, displayed or exhibited. 
(b)  Lack of knowledge of the juvenile's age shall not be a defense. 
(Code 1966, § 10-117; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:92.  
Sec. 8-110. - Prostitution. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of prostitution. Prostitution is: 
(1)  The practice by a person of indiscriminate sexual intercourse with others for compensation. 
(2)  The solicitation by one (1) person of another with the intent to engage in indiscriminate sexual intercourse with the latter for compensation. 
(Code 1966, § 10-119; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:82.  
Sec. 8-111. - Soliciting for prostitutes. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of soliciting for prostitutes. Soliciting for prostitutes is the soliciting, inviting, inducing, directing or transporting a person to any place with the intention of promoting prostitution. 
(Code 1966, § 10-120; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:83.  
Sec. 8-112. - Letting premises for prostitutes. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of letting premises for prostitutes. Letting premises for prostitution is the granting of the right of use or the leasing of premises, knowing that they are to be used for the practice of prostitution, or allowing the continued use of the premises with such knowledge. 
(Code 1966, § 10-121; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:85.  
Sec. 8-113. - Operation of places of prostitution. 
(a)  No person shall maintain, operate, or knowingly own any place or any conveyance used for the purpose of lewdness, assignation, or prostitution, or shall rent or let any place or conveyance to any person with knowledge of or good reason to believe that the lessee intends to use the place or conveyance for the purpose of lewdness, assignation, or prostitution, or reside in, enter, or remain in any place for the purpose of lewdness, assignation, or prostitution. 
(b)  Whoever violates or aids, abets, or participates in the violation of this section shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), imprisoned for not less than thirty (30) days nor more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(Code 1966, § 10-122; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:282.  
Sec. 8-114. - Gambling—General. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of gambling. Gambling is the intentional conducting, or directly assisting in the conducting, as a business, of any game, contest, lottery, or contrivance whereby a person risks the loss of anything of value in order to realize a profit. 
(Code 1966, § 10-124; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
Cross reference— Charitable games of chance, § 13-40 et seq. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:90.  
Sec. 8-115. - Same—In public. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of gambling in public. Gambling in public is the aiding or abetting or participation in any game, contest, lottery, or contrivance, in any location or place open to the view of the public or the people at large, such as streets, highways, vacant lots, neutral grounds, alleyway, sidewalk, park, beach, parking lot, or condemned structures whereby a person risks the loss of anything of value in order to realize a profit. 
(b)  This section shall not prohibit activities authorized under the charitable raffles, bingo and keno licensing laws, nor shall it apply to bona fide fairs and festivals conducted for charitable purposes. 
(Code 1966, § 10-125; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:90.2; charitable raffles, bingo and keno licensing law, R.S. 33:4861.1 et seq.  
Sec. 8-115.1. - Same—Owner prohibited to rent or let premises for. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly and intentionally rent, let or permit any premises, building, room or place for the purpose of being used as a place to bet, wager or gamble in any manner whatsoever. A place, within the intent of this section, shall be considered as used for gambling if anything of value be bet therein for gambling or wagering. 
(b)  Whoever rents or lets premises for gambling shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor [or] imprisoned for not more than six (6) months or both. 
(Ord. No. 90-3480, § 2, 4-12-90)  
Sec. 8-116. - Keeping a disorderly place. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of keeping a disorderly place. Keeping a disorderly place is the intentional maintaining of a place to be used habitually for any illegal purpose. 
(Code 1966, § 10-126; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:104.  
Sec. 8-117. - Letting a disorderly place. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of letting a disorderly place. Letting a disorderly place is the granting of the right of use of any premises knowing that it is to be used as a disorderly place, or allowing the continued use of the premises with such knowledge. 
(Code 1966, § 10-127; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:105.  
Sec. 8-118. - Unlawful sales to minors and purchases by minors generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make unlawful sales to minors. Unlawful sales to minors is the selling or otherwise delivering for value by anyone over the age of seventeen (17) years of any firearm, or other instrumentality customarily used as a dangerous weapon, to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. Lack of the knowledge of the minor's age shall not be a defense. 
(Code 1966, § 10-128; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
Cross reference— Sale, etc., of alcoholic beverages to or by minors, § 4-25 et seq. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:91.  
Sec. 8-119. - Possession of marijuana, tetrahydrocannabinol or chemical derivatives thereof. 
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly or intentionally to possess marijuana, tetrahydrocannabinol or chemical derivatives thereof. 
(Code 1966, § 10-235; Ord. No. 88-3397, § 1, 6-14-88)  
Sec. 8-119.1. - Drug paraphernalia—Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person or corporation, knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, to sell, lend, rent, lease, give, exchange, or otherwise distribute to any person any drug paraphernalia. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person or corporation, knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, to display for sale or possess with the intent to distribute, any drug paraphernalia. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, any drug paraphernalia, to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance, as defined in the Louisiana Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Law, R.S. 40:9. 
(Ord. No. 10-4195, 4-8-10)  
Sec. 8-120. - Model glue, use of; unlawful sales to minors; penalties. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "model glue" shall mean any glue or cement of the type commonly used in the building of model airplanes, boats and automobiles and which contains one (1) or more of the following volatile solvents: (1) toluol, (2) hexane, (3) trichlorethylene, (4) acetone, (5) toluene, (6) ethyl acetate, (7) methyl ethyl ketone, (8) trichlorochthane, (9) isopropanol, (10) methyl isobutyl ketone, (11) methyl cellosolve acetate, (12) cyclohexanone, or (13) any other solvent, material, substance, chemical or combination thereof having the property of releasing toxic vapors. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally smell or inhale the fumes of any type of model glue for the purpose of causing a condition of, or inducing symptoms of, intoxication, elation, euphoria, dizziness, excitement, irrational behavior, exhilaration, paralysis, stupefaction or dulling of the senses or nervous system; or for the purpose of, in any manner, changing, distorting or disturbing the audio, visual or mental processes; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the inhalation of any anesthesia for medical or dental purposes. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell any type of model glue to a minor for any reason whatsoever. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or otherwise transfer possession of any type of model glue to any minor for any purpose whatsoever, unless the minor receiving possession of the model glue is the child or ward of and under the lawful custody of the vendor, donor or transferor of the glue. 
(e)  Any person violating any provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days for each such offense or both. 
(Code 1966, § 10-129; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:93.1.  
Sec. 8-121. - Peeping tom. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to perform such acts as will make him a "peeping tom" on or about the premises of another, or go upon the premises of another for the purpose of becoming a "peeping tom." 
(b)  "Peeping tom" as used in this section means one who peeps through windows or doors, or other like places, situated on or about the premises of another for the purpose of spying upon or invading the privacy of persons spied upon without the consent of the persons spied upon. It is not a necessary element of this offense that the "peeping tom" be upon the premises of the person being spied upon. 
(Code 1966, § 10-130; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:284.  
Sec. 8-122. - Skateboarding, bicycle riding on premises where forbidden. 
No person shall ride a bicycle or use, operate or ride a skateboard in or upon any movable or immovable which belongs to another knowing that such person has been forbidden to go or be there either orally or in writing, including by means of any sign hereinafter described by the owner, lessee, or custodian of the property or by any other authorized person. For purposes of this section the above mentioned sign means the sign or signs posted at a place where such sign or signs may be reasonably expected to be seen. 
(Ord. No. 93-3646, § 1, 10-14-93)  
Sec. 8-123. - Indecent exposure. 
The crime of indecent exposure is the intentional: 
(1)  Exposure of the genitals, buttocks, pubic hair, anus, vulva, or female breast nipples in any public place open to the public view, or in any prison or jail, with the intent of arousing sexual desire or which appeals to prurient interest or is patently offensive. 
(2)  Exposure of underwear or undergarments by intentionally wearing pants, trousers or outer garments below the waist or natural beltline of a person, in any public place or place open to public view. 
(3)  Whoever commits the crime of indecent exposure shall be sentenced to a term of incarceration of up to six (6) months in jail, assessed a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both. 
(Ord. No. 04-4023, § 1, 5-13-04) 
State Law reference— R.S. 14:106(A)(1), Defining the crime of obscenity.  
Secs. 8-124—8-129. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - OFFENSES AFFECTING THE PUBLIC GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 8-130. - Simple obstruction of a highway of commerce. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of simple obstruction of a highway of commerce. Simple obstruction of a highway of commerce is the intentional or criminally negligent placing of anything or performance of any act on any railway, railroad, navigable waterway, road, highway, thoroughfare, or runway of an airport, which will render movement thereon more difficult. 
(b)  Whoever commits the crime of simple obstruction of a highway of commerce shall be fined not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(Code 1966, § 10-151; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:97.  
Sec. 8-131. - Obstructing public passages. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully obstruct the free, convenient and normal use of any public sidewalk, street, highway, bridge, alley, road, or other passageway, or the entrance, corridor or passage of any public building, structure, watercraft or ferry, by impeding, hindering, stifling, retarding or restraining traffic or passage thereon or therein. 
(b)  This section shall not be applicable to the erection or construction of any barricades or other forms of obstruction as a safety measure in connection with construction, excavation, maintenance, repair, replacement or other work, in or adjacent to any public sidewalk, street, highway, bridge, alley, road or other passageway, nor to the placing of barricades or other forms of obstruction by governmental authorities, or any officer or agent thereof, in the proper performance of duties. 
(Code 1966, § 10-152; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:100.1.  
Sec. 8-132. - Disturbing the peace. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb the peace. Disturbing the peace is the doing of any of the following in such manner as would foreseeably disturb or alarm the public: 
(1)  Engaging in a fistic encounter; or 
(2)  Addressing any offensive, derisive, or annoying words to any other person who is lawfully in any street, or other public place; or call any other person by any offensive or derisive name, or make any noise or exclamation in any other person's presence and hearing with the intent to deride, offend, or annoy such person, or to prevent such person from pursuing such person's lawful business, occupation, or duty; or 
(3)  Appearing in an intoxicated condition; or 
(4)  Engaging in any act in a violent and tumultuous manner by any three (3) or more persons; or 
(5)  Holding an unlawful assembly; or 
(6)  Interrupting of any lawful assembly of people. 
(b)  Whoever commits the crime of disturbing the peace shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(Code 1966, § 10-153; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:103.  
Sec. 8-132.1. - Public drinking prohibited. 
(a)  "Public drinking" is the imbibing or drinking of alcoholic beverages, as hereinafter defined, in and upon any public street, alley, sidewalk, right-of-way, park, playground, square or unenclosed public place in the city. 
(b)  "Alcoholic beverage" is defined as beer, porter, ale, fruit juices or wine of an alcoholic content not exceeding that now or hereafter permitted by law, but greater than one-half of one (1) percent of alcohol by volume, or any malt, vinous, spirituous alcoholic or intoxicating liquors containing more than six (6) percent of alcohol by volume. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink any alcoholic beverage as defined herein, in or upon any public street, alley, sidewalk, right-of-way, park, playground, square or unenclosed public place in the city. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to carry any opened glass or paper container, drinking glass or opened metal container containing any alcoholic beverages, as defined herein, or to drink any such alcoholic beverage from any opened glass or paper container, drinking glass or opened metal container in or on any public street, sidewalk, right-of-way, park, playground, square, unenclosed public place in the city. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any opened drinking containers containing alcoholic beverages, as defined herein, in or upon the parking lot or other property belonging to or adjacent to any licensed premises as defined in Chapter 4 of this Code. 
(f)  For the purpose of discouraging public drinking, it shall be unlawful for any person to remove an open container containing alcoholic beverages, as defined herein, from any business, lounge, restaurant or establishment which is licensed under the provisions of Chapter 4 of this Code. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to leave the premises licensed to sell alcoholic beverages under Chapter 4 of this Code after being told to do so by the owner, manager, or any employee thereof. For purpose of this section, the premises shall include the entire property owned or under the control of the licensee, including the parking area. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for any person to expose their genitals, pubic hair, anus, vulva or female breast nipples, in any premises licensed to sell alcoholic beverages under Chapter 4 of this Code. 
(i)  Whoever is found guilty of a violation of this section shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisoned in the jail for not more than six (6) months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 90-3494, § 1, 6-18-90)  
Sec. 8-133. - Obstruction of firemen. 
It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally to obstruct any fireman while in the performance of such fireman's official duties. Obstructing a fireman is hereby defined as intentionally hindering, delaying, hampering, interfering with, or impeding the progress of, any regularly employed member of a fire department of any municipality, parish or fire protection district of the state, or any volunteer fireman of the state while in the performance of such fireman's official duties; or cursing, reviling or using any opprobrious language directed at any such fireman while in the performance of such fireman's official duties. This provision does not attempt to prohibit any obstruction made felonious under the provisions of R.S. 14:327. 
(Code 1966, § 10-155; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:327.  
Sec. 8-134. - Obstruction of fire prevention. 
It shall be unlawful to interfere with fire prevention by the intentional performance of any of the following acts: 
(1)  Defacing or destroying fire warning notices or posters. 
(2)  Damaging, destroying, removing or in any manner interfering with the use of any tools, equipment, towers, buildings or telephone lines used in the detection, reporting or suppression of fire. 
(Code 1966, § 10-156; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:206.  
Sec. 8-134.1. - Obstruction of fire lanes. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally occupy or obstruct any area that is marked or posted as a fire lane as referenced in sections 10 and 28.16 of the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Bastrop, Louisiana, through the placement of any motor vehicle, watercraft or movable in a filing. 
(b)  Whoever commits an obstruction of fire lanes shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than six (6) months, or both. 
( Ord. No. 14-4226, 7-10-14 )  
Sec. 8-135. - Telephone communications; improper language, harassment. 
(a)  No person shall: 
(1)  Engage in or institute a telephone call, telephone conversation, or telephone conference, with another person, anonymously or otherwise, and therein use obscene, profane, vulgar, lewd, lascivious, or indecent language, or make any suggestion or proposal of an obscene nature or threaten any illegal or immoral act with the intent to coerce, intimidate, or harass another person; or 
(2)  Make repeated telephone communications anonymously or otherwise in a manner reasonably expected to annoy, abuse, torment, harass, embarrass or offend another, whether or not conversation ensues; or 
(3)  Make a telephone call and intentionally fail to hang up or disengage the connection; or 
(4)  Knowingly permit any telephone under such person's control to be used for any purpose prohibited by this section. 
(b)  Any offense committed by use of a telephone set forth in this section shall be deemed to have been committed at either the place where the telephone call or calls were originated or received. 
(Code 1966, § 10-157; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:285.  
Sec. 8-136. - Riot. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in a riot or incite any other person to riot. 
(b)  A riot is a public disturbance involving an assemblage of three (3) or more persons acting together or in concert which by tumultuous and violent conduct, or the imminent threat of tumultuous and violent conduct, results in injury or damage to persons or property or creates a clear and present danger of injury or damage to persons or property. 
(c)  Inciting to riot is the endeavor by any person to incite or procure any other person to create or participate in a riot. "To incite" means to urge on, stimulate or prompt to action, instigate, stir up or set in motion. 
(d)  Any law enforcement officer, peace officer or public official responsible for keeping the peace may issue a command to disperse under the authority of R.S. 14:329.1 through 14:329.8 if such officer or official reasonably believes that a riot is occurring or about to occur. The command to disperse shall be given in a manner reasonably calculated to be communicated to the assemblage. 
(Code 1966, § 10-158; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82)  
Sec. 8-137. - Wrongful use of public property; permits for use of public property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to wrongfully use public property. Wrongful use of public property is: 
(1)  The intentional entering of or onto any public property without the permission of the lawful custodian thereof, or the custodian's designated representative, at any time when the public property is not open to the public and the remaining in or occupying of any public property after having been requested to leave by the lawful custodian thereof, or the custodian's designated representative, or any law enforcement or peace officer, and 
(2)  The depriving of the general public of the intended use of public property without a permit. 
(b)  In accordance with the provisions of this Code and the law of this city, permits to occupy or use public property may be obtained from the lawful custodian thereof, or the custodian's designated representative, upon written application therefor. All such applications shall: (1) describe the public property sought to be occupied or used, and (2) state the period of time during which the public property will be occupied or used. The lawful custodian, or the custodian's designated representative, may issue the permit if the lawful custodian or the custodian's designated representative determines that the use or occupation of the public property will not reasonably interfere with the intended or customary use of the public property by the general public and that the intended use will not destroy or damage the public property. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, the term "public property" means any public land, building, facility, structure or enclosure used for a public purpose or as a place of public gathering, owned and/or under the control of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 10-159; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:329.4.  
Sec. 8-138. - Resisting an officer. 
(a)  Resisting an officer is the intentional interference with, opposition or resistance to, or obstruction of an individual acting in his official capacity and authorized by law to make a lawful arrest, lawful detention, or seizure of property or to serve any lawful process or court order when the offender knows or has reason to know that the person arresting, detaining, seizing property, or serving process is acting in his official capacity. 
(b)  (1)  The phrase "obstruction of" as used herein shall, in addition to its common meaning, signification, and connotation mean the following: 
a.  Flight by one sought to be arrested before the arresting officer can restrain him and after notice is given that he is under arrest. 
b.  Any violence toward or any resistance or opposition to the arresting officer after the arrested party is actually placed under arrest and before he is incarcerated in jail. 
c.  Refusal by the arrested or detained party to give his name and make his identity known to the arresting or detaining officer or providing false information regarding the identity of such party to the officer. 
d.  Congregation with others on a public street and refusal to move on when ordered by the officer. 
(2)  The word "officer" as used herein means any peace officer, as defined in Louisiana Statute R.S. 40:2402, and includes deputy sheriffs, municipal police officers, probation and parole officers, city marshals and deputies, and wildlife enforcement agents. 
(c)  Whoever commits the crime of resisting an officer shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars or be imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(Code 1966, § 10-160; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82; Ord. No. 91-3555, § 1, 9-12-91; Ord. No. 10-4195, 4-8-10) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:108.  
Sec. 8-139. - Flight from an officer. 
No driver of a motor vehicle shall intentionally refuse to bring a vehicle to a stop knowing that such driver has been given a visual and audible signal to stop by a police officer when the officer has reasonable grounds to believe that the driver has committed an offense. The signal shall be given by an emergency light and a siren on a vehicle marked as a police vehicle. 
(Code 1966, § 10-161; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:108.1.  
Sec. 8-140. - False swearing. 
(a)  False swearing is the intentional making of a written or oral statement, known to be false, under sanction of an oath or an equivalent affirmation, where such oath or affirmation is required by law; provided that this section shall not apply where such false statement is made in, or for use in, a judicial proceeding or any proceeding before a board or official, wherein such board or official is authorized to take testimony. 
(b)  It shall constitute false swearing whenever any person, having made a statement under sanction of an oath, or an equivalent affirmation, required by law, shall thereafter swear or affirm in a manner materially contradictory of or inconsistent with such person's former sworn or affirmed statement. It shall not be necessary for the prosecution, in such case, to show which of the contradictory or inconsistent statements was false; but it shall be an affirmative defense that at the time such person made them, the accused honestly believed both statements to be true. 
(c)  No person shall commit the crime of false swearing. 
(Code 1966, § 10-163; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:126.  
Sec. 8-141. - Interference with educational process. 
(a)  No person shall, on the campus or lands of any university, college, junior college, trade or vocational-technical school, special school, elementary or secondary school in this city, hereinafter referred to as "institutions of learning" or at or in any building or other facility thereof owned, operated or controlled by the state or any of its agencies or political subdivisions, wilfully deny to students, school officials, faculty, employees, invitees and guests thereof: 
(1)  Lawful freedom of movement on the campus or lands; or 
(2)  Lawful use of the property, facilities or parts of any institution of learning; or 
(3)  The right of lawful ingress and egress to and from the institution's physical facilities. 
(b)  No person shall, on the campus of any institution of learning or at or in any building or other facility thereof owned, operated or controlled by the state or any agency or political subdivision thereof, wilfully impede the staff or faculty of such institution in the lawful performance of their duties, or wilfully impede a student of such institution in lawful pursuit of such person's educational activities, through use of restraint, abduction, coercion or intimidation, or when force and violence are present or threatened. 
(c)  No person shall wilfully refuse or fail to leave the property of, or any building or other facility owned, operated or controlled by the state, or any agency or political subdivision thereof, upon being requested to do so by the chief administrative officer thereof, or by such officer's designee charged with maintaining order on the campus or grounds and in its facilities, or a dean of such institution of learning, if such person is committing, threatens to commit, or incites others to commit any act which would or is likely to disrupt, impair, interfere with or obstruct the lawful missions, processes, procedures or functions of such institution of learning. 
(d)  Nothing contained in this section shall apply to a bona fide legitimate labor organization or to any of its legal activities such as lawful picketing, lawful assembly or concerted activity in the interest of its members for the purpose of accomplishing or securing more favorable wage standards, hours of employment or working conditions. 
(Code 1966, § 10-164; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:329.5.  
Sec. 8-142. - Demonstrations in or near buildings housing a court or occupied as residence by judge, juror, witness or court officer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, with the intent of interfering with, obstructing or impeding the administration of justice, or with the intent of influencing any judge, juror, witness or court officer, in the discharge of such person's duty, to picket or parade in or near a building housing a court of the state, or city, or in or near a building or residence occupied or used by such judge, juror, witness or court officer or with such intent use any sound-truck or similar device or resort to any other demonstration in or near any such building or residence. 
(Code 1966, § 10-165; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:401.  
Sec. 8-143. - Conduct within courtroom and designated areas. 
(a)  These rules and regulations apply to all courtroom designated areas under the charge and control of the city, and to all persons entering or upon such property. 
(b)  Packages, briefcases and other containers brought into, while on or being removed from the designated areas, are subject to inspection. A full search of a person may accompany an arrest. 
(c)  No person entering or while in the designated area shall carry or possess firearms, other deadly or dangerous weapons, explosives, or items intended to be used to fabricate an explosive or incendiary device, either openly or concealed, except for official and authorized purposes. 
(d)  Whoever is found guilty of a violation of this section shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisoned in the jail for not more than six (6) months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 90-3480, § 4, 4-12-90)  
Sec. 8-144. - Interference with marshal or police officer, or emergency medical technician. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with the marshal, deputy marshal or any member of the police officer or the sheriff's office or any emergency medical technician in the discharge of his duties by abuse, force or threatening language, or in screening from him the object of his search. 
(b)  Whoever violates the provisions of subsection (a) above shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisoned for not more than six (6) months or both in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. No. 90-3517, § 1, 12-13-90; Ord. No. 91-3555, § 1, 9-12-91)  
Sec. 8-145. - Jumping bail. 
(a)  Jumping bail is the intentional failure to appear at such time and place as designated by the judge who has fixed the amount of the bail bond. The fact that no loss shall result to any surety or bondsman is immaterial. 
(b)  Whoever violates the provisions of subsection (a) above shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than six (6) months or both in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. No. 90-3517, § 2, 12-13-90)  
Sec. 8-146. - Misrepresentation during booking. 
(a)  Misrepresentation during booking is the misrepresentation of, or refusal by, a person being booked to provide his name, age, sex, residence or social security number to any law enforcement officer, or official who is booking him pursuant to a lawful arrest, or the refusal of such person to submit to fingerprinting or photographing. 
(b)  Whoever violates the provisions of subsection (a) above shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisoned for not more than six (6) months or both in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. No. 90-3517, § 3, 12-13-90)  
Sec. 8-147. - Teasing, striking, tormenting or injuring of police dog. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully tease, taunt, torment, strike, kick, or otherwise injure, or interfere or meddle with any police dog. 
(b)  For purposes of this section "police dog" means any dog which is owned, or the service of which is employed, by the city or local law enforcement agency for the principle purpose of aiding in the detection of criminal activity, enforcement of laws, or apprehension of offenders. 
(c)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than six (6) months for each such offense or both. 
(Ord. No. 95-3691, § 1, 2-9-95)  
Sec. 8-148. - Unlawful posting of criminal activity for notoriety and publicity. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a person who is either a principal or accessory to a crime to obtain an image of the commission of the crime using any camera, videotape, photo-optical, photo-electric, or any other image recording device and to transfer that image obtained during the commission of the crime by the use of a computer online service, Internet service, or any other means of electronic communication, including but not limited to a local bulletin board service, Internet chat room, electronic mail, or online messaging service for the purpose of gaining notoriety, publicity, or the attention of the public. 
(b)  Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than six (6) months, or both. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any of the following: 
(1)  The obtaining, use, or transference of such images by a telephone company, cable television company, or any of its affiliates, an Internet provider, or commercial online service provider, or to the carrying, broadcasting, or performing of related activities in providing telephone, cable television, Internet, or commercial online services or in the production, exhibition, or presentation of an audiovisual work in any medium, including but not limited to a motion picture or television program. 
(2)  The obtaining, use, or transference of images by a law enforcement officer pursuant to investigation of criminal activity. 
(3)  The obtaining, use, or transference of images by any bona fide member of the news media broadcasting a news report through television, cable television, or other telecommunication. 
(4)  The obtaining, use, or transference of images for use in a feature-length film, short subject film, video, television series, television program, public service announcement, or commercial. 
(d)  After the institution of prosecution, access to, and the disposition of any material seized as evidence of this offense shall be in a manner consonant to the methods provided for in state statute R.S. 46:1845. 
(e)  Any evidence resulting from the commission of unlawful filming or recording criminal activity shall be contraband. 
(Ord. No. 09-4194, 12-10-09)  
Sec. 8-149. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - WEAPONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Selling firearm to minors, § 8-118. 
 
Sec. 8-150. - Illegal carrying. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to illegally carry a weapon. Illegal carrying of weapon is: 
(1)  The intentional concealment of any firearm, or other instrumentality customarily used or intended for probable use as a dangerous weapon, on one's person; or 
(2)  The ownership, possession, custody or use of any firearm, or other instrumentality customarily used as a dangerous weapon, at any time by an enemy alien; or 
(3)  The ownership, possession, custody or use of any tools, or dynamite or nitroglycerine, or explosives, or other instrumentality customarily used by thieves or burglars at any time by any person with the intent to commit a crime; or 
(4)  The manufacture, ownership, possession, custody or use of any switchblade knife, spring knife or other knife or similar instrument having a blade which may be automatically unfolded or extended from a handle by the manipulation of a button, switch latch or similar contrivance. 
(b)  The provisions of this section except subsection (4) shall not apply to sheriffs and their deputies, state and city police, constables and town marshals, or persons vested with police power when in the actual discharge of official duties. 
(Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:95.  
Sec. 8-151. - Discharging firearms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge, either in the daytime or nighttime, any firearm within the corporate limits of this municipality; except law enforcement officers in the discharge of their duties, and except other persons acting in the necessary defense of life or property, provided that the discharge of firearms on a range approved as to safety by the chief of police or by the chief's designated representative; by persons authorized to use such range under the supervision and control of the owner thereof shall not be unlawful. 
(Code 1966, § 10-187; Ord. No. 3277, 7-9-85)  
Sec. 8-152. - Illegal display. 
It shall be unlawful to draw, display, present or exhibit, with the intention of committing any crime or of intimidating any person, any pistol, bowie knife, gun or any other dangerous weapon, within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 10-188; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82)  
Sec. 8-153. - Air guns. 
(a)  The use, firing, shooting and explosion of "air guns" or "air rifles" and "blow guns" within the corporate limits of the city, is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful for any person to use, fire, shoot or explode "air guns," "air rifles" or "blow guns" within the city limits. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision recited in the Code of Ordinances that is to the contrary, the terms "air guns," "air rifles" and "blow guns," when used in this section, do not include devices or instrumentalities that exclusively use paint balls or like projectiles that are incapable of inflicting death or bodily injury when discharged, and are used for recreational purposes within a fenced and/or a walled barrier of sufficient height and density to prevent projectiles or the contents thereof from traveling over or through the barrier into areas owned or occupied by adjacent landowners or occupants. 
(Code 1966, § 10-189; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82; Ord. No. 04-4028, 5-13-04)  
Sec. 8-154. - Possession of weapons where alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed on the premises. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have in such person's possession a firearm, or other instrumentality customarily used or intended for probable use as a dangerous weapon in any premises where alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed on the premises except the owner or lessee of the premises, or their employees, sheriffs, deputy sheriffs, state police, city police, constables, town marshals, or persons vested with police power when in the actual discharge of any such officer's duties. 
(b)  Any sheriff, deputy sheriff, state police, city police, constable, town marshal, or person vested with police power, may search any person found in any place where alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed on the premises and may confiscate any firearm or other instrumentality customarily used or intended for probable use as a dangerous weapon which such peace officer may find; this search shall be limited to only weapons unless probable cause for a wider search is authorized. 
(c)  Any person who enters a place where alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed on the premises does by the mere fact of entering, consent to the search of such person for any firearm or other instrumentality customarily used or intended for probable use as a dangerous weapon while on such premises, by any sheriff, deputy sheriff, state police, city police, constable, town marshal, or person vested with police power, without a warrant. 
(d)  Premises where alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed on the premises shall include all of the licensed premises including the parking lot. 
(e)  Any gun or other instrumentality customarily used or intended for probable use as a dangerous weapon found on any person while on the premises of a place where alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed may be used as evidence in court. 
(f)  Any guns or other dangerous instrumentalities, seized under the provisions of this section, shall be held by the police until the disposition of the charges against the defendant; in the event of a conviction, the weapon shall be destroyed unless otherwise ordered by the judge, who shall have the authority to order the weapon either destroyed or otherwise disposed of. 
(Code 1966, § 10-190; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions as to firearms, R.S. 14:95.5.  
Sec. 8-155. - Urinating in public places. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate on the streets, in the gutters, on the sidewalks, or in the alleys, driveways, or other places near the streets, alleys, sidewalks, or other places of public resort. 
(b)  Whoever commits the crime of urinating in public places shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisoned for not more than six (6) months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 90-3480, § 3, 4-12-90)  
Sec. 8-156. - Truants. 
(a)  Any child between the ages of seven (7) and fifteen (15) years found in or on any public street or public place, or in or on any private commercial establishment during regular hours on regular school days is hereby declared to be a truant and shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Any police officer, sheriff's deputy, constable, or state police officer discovering, finding or becoming aware of, any truant child, as defined in subsection (a), shall deliver the child in one of the following manners: 
(1)  To the custody of the principal of the school to which the truant child is assigned and/or required to attend; or 
(2)  To the custody of the parent or guardian of the child, in which case the law enforcement officer making the delivery shall notify the principal of the school as soon as possible. 
(Ord. No. 90-3480, § 5, 4-12-90)  
Secs. 8-157—8-159. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - DRIVING OFFENSES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic, Ch. 19. 
 
Sec. 8-160. - Operating a vehicle while intoxicated. 
(a)  The crime of operating a vehicle while intoxicated is the operating of any motor vehicle, aircraft, watercraft, vessel, or other means of conveyance when: 
(1)  The operator is under the influence of alcoholic beverages; or 
(2)  The operator's blood alcohol concentration is eight one hundredths (0.08) percent or more by weight based on grams of alcohol per one hundred (100) cubic centimeters of blood; or 
(3)  The operator is under the influence of any controlled dangerous substance listed in Schedule I, II, III, IV, or V as set forth in R.S. 40:964. 
(4)  a.  The operator is under the influence of a combination of alcohol and one (1) or more drugs which are not controlled dangerous substances and which are legally obtainable with or without a prescription. 
b.  It shall be an affirmative defense to any charge under this subparagraph pursuant to this section that the label on the container of the prescription drug or the manufacturer's package of the drug does not contain a warning against combining the medication with alcohol. 
(5)  The operator is under the influence of one (1) or more drugs which are not controlled dangerous substances and which are legally obtainable with or without a prescription and the influence is caused by the operator knowingly consuming quantities of the drug or drugs which substantially exceed the dosage prescribed by the physician or the dosage recommended by the manufacturer of the drug. 
(b)  (1)  A valid drivers' license shall not be an element of the offense and the lack thereof shall not be a defense to a prosecution for operating a vehicle while intoxicated. 
(2)  a.  On a first conviction, notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the offender shall be fined not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00), nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and shall be imprisoned for not less than ten (10) days nor more than six (6) months. Imposition of execution of sentence shall not be suspended unless: 
1.  The offender is placed on probation with a minimum condition that he serve two (2) days in jail and participate in a court-approved substance abuse program and participate in a court approved driver improvement program; or 
2.  The offender is placed on probation with a minimum condition that he perform four (4) eight-hour days of court-approved community service activities, at least half of which shall consist of participation in a litter abatement or collection program, participate in a court-approved substance abuse program, and participate in a court-approved driver improvement program. An offender, who participates in a litter abatement or collection program pursuant to this subparagraph, shall have no cause of action for damages against the entity conducting the program or supervising his participation therein, including a municipality, parish, sheriff, or other entity, nor against any official, employee, or agent of such entity, for any injury or loss suffered by him during or arising out of his participation in the program, if such injury or loss is direct result of the lack of supervision or act or omission of the supervisor, unless the injury or loss was caused by the intentional or grossly negligent act or omission of the entity or its official, employee, or agent. 
b.  If the offender had a blood alcohol concentration of 0.15 percent or more by weight based on grams of alcohol per one hundred (100) cubic centimeters of blood, at least forty-eight (48) hours of the sentence imposed pursuant to paragraph (2)a.1. of this section shall be served without the benefit of parole, probation, or suspension of sentence. Imposition or execution of the remainder of the sentence shall not be suspended unless the offender complies with paragraph (2)a.1. or 2. of this section. 
c.  If the offender had a blood alcohol concentration of 0.20 percent or more by weight based on grams of alcohol per one hundred (100) cubic centimeters of blood, the offender shall be fined not less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) nor more than one thousand ($1,000.00) and at least forty-eight (48) hours of the sentence imposed pursuant to paragraph (2)a.1. of this subsection shall be served without the benefit of parole, probation, or suspension of sentence. Imposition or execution of the remainder of the sentence shall not be suspended unless the offender complies with subparagraph (2)a.1. or 2. of this subsection. 
(3)  a.  On a conviction of a second offense, notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, regardless of whether the second offense occurred before or after the first conviction, the offender shall be fined not less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and shall be imprisoned for not less than thirty (30) days nor more than six (6) months. At least forty-eight (48) hours of the sentence imposed shall be served without benefit of parole, probation, or suspension of sentence. Nothing herein shall prohibit a court from sentencing a defendant to home incarceration, if otherwise allowed under the provisions of the Code of Ordinances. [4] Imposition or execution of the remainder of the sentence shall not be suspended unless: 
1.  The offender is placed on probation with a minimum condition that he serve fifteen (15) days in jail and participate in a court-approved substance abuse program and participate in a court-approved driver improvement program; or 
2.  The offender is placed on probation with a minimum condition that he perform thirty (30) eight-hour (8) days of court-approved community service activities, at least half of which shall consist of participation in a litter abatement or collection program, and participate in a court-approved substance abuse program, and participate in a court-approved driver improvement program. An offender, who participates in a litter abatement or collection program pursuant to this, shall have no cause of action for damages against the entity conducting the program or supervising his participation therein, including a municipality, parish, sheriff, or other entity, nor against any official, employee, or agent of such entity, for any injury or loss suffered by him during or arising out of his participation therein, if such injury or loss is a direct result of the lack of supervision or act or omission of the supervisor, unless the injury or loss was caused by the intentional or grossly negligent act or omission of the entity or its official, employee, or agent. 
b.  If the offender had a blood alcohol concentration of 0.15 percent or more by weight based on grams of alcohol per one hundred (100) cubic centimeters of blood, at least ninety-six (96) hours of the sentence imposed pursuant to paragraph (3)a. of this section shall be served with the benefit of parole, probation, or suspension of sentence. Imposition or execution of the remainder of the sentence shall not be suspended unless the offender complies with paragraph (3)a.1. or 2. of this section. 
c.  If the offender had a blood alcohol concentration of 0.20 percent or more by weight based on grams of alcohol per one hundred (100) cubic centimeters of blood, the offender shall be fined one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and at least ninety-six (96) hours of the sentence imposed pursuant to paragraph (3)a. of this subsection shall be served without the benefit of parole, probation, or suspension of sentence. Imposition or execution of the remainder of the sentence shall not be suspended unless the offender complies with subparagraph (3)a.1. or 2. of this subsection. 
(4)  Provided that any offense under this statute committed more than ten (10) years prior to the commission of the crime for which the defendant is being tried shall not be considered in the assessment of penalties hereunder. 
(5)  Court-approved substance abuse programs provided for in subsections (b)(2) and (3) shall include a screening procedure to determine the portions of the program which may be applicable and appropriate for individual offenders. 
(6)  "Community service activities" as used in this section may include duty in any morgue, coroner's office, or emergency treatment room of a state-operated hospital or other state-operated emergency treatment facility, with the consent of the administrator of the morgue, coroner's office, hospital, or facility. 
(7)  An offender ordered to participate in a substance abuse program shall pay the cost incurred in participating in the program. Failure to make such payment shall subject the offender to revocation of probation, unless the court determines that the offender is unable to pay. 
(Code 1966, § 10-201; Ord. No. 3353, § 1, 5-12-87; Ord. No. 88-3420, § 1, 10-11-88; Ord. No. 91-3555, § 1, 9-12-91; Ord. No. 92-3590, § 1, 8-18-92; Ord. No. 97-3815, § 1, 10-9-97; Ord. No. 99-3895, 11-11-99; Ord. No. 04-4021, 3-11-2004) 
Editor's note— Section 1, in part, of Ord. No. 95-3725, adopted Sep. 14, 1995, provided for the addition of subsection (d) to § 8-160. Said subsection has been included herein as subsection (h) at the editor's discretion. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:98; prosecution, R.S. 13:1894.1. 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Note— Consistent with article 894.2 of the Louisiana Code of Criminal Procedure. 
 
Sec. 8-160.1. - Same—Underage. 
(a)  The crime of underage operating a vehicle while intoxicated is the operating of any motor vehicle, aircraft, watercraft, vessel, or other means of conveyance when the operator's blood alcohol concentration is 0.02 percent or more by weight if the operator is under the age of twenty-one (21) based on grams of alcohol per one hundred cubic centimeters of blood. 
(b)  Any underage person whose blood alcohol concentration is found to be in violation of section 8-160(a)(2) shall be charged under its provisions rather than under this section. 
(c)  On a first conviction, the offender shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), and participate in a court-approved substance abuse and driver improvement program. 
(d)  On a second or subsequent conviction, regardless of whether the second offense occurred before or after the first conviction, the offender shall be fined not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and imprisoned for not less than ten (10) days nor more than three (3) months. Imposition or execution of sentence shall not be suspended unless: 
(1)  The offender is placed on probation with a minimum condition that he serve forty-eight (48) hours in jail and participate in a court-approved substance abuse and driver improvement program; or 
(2)  The offender is placed on probation with a minimum condition that he perform ten (10) eight-hour days of court-approved community service activities, at least half of which shall consist of participation in a litter abatement or collection program and participate in a court-approved substance and driver improvement program. 
(e)  Court programs regarding substance abuse provided for in subsections (c) and (d) shall include a screening procedure to determine the portions of the program which may be applicable and appropriate for individual offenders. 
(f)  An offender ordered to participate in a substance abuse program shall pay the cost incurred in participating in the program. Failure to make such payment shall subject the offender to revocation of probation, unless the court determines that the offender is unable to pay. 
(Ord. No. 97-3815, § 2, 10-9-97)  
Sec. 8-161. - Reckless operation of a vehicle. 
(a)  Reckless operation of a vehicle is the operation of any motor vehicle, aircraft, vessel, or other means of conveyance in a criminally negligent or reckless manner. 
(b)  Whoever commits the crime of reckless operation of a vehicle shall be fined not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(c)  On a second or subsequent conviction the offender shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisoned for not less than ten (10) days nor more than six (6) months, or both. 
(Code 1966, § 10-203; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:99.  
Sec. 8-162. - Hit and run driving. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to commit an act of hit and run driving. 
(b)  The crime of hit and run driving is the intentional failure of the driver of a vehicle, involved in or causing any accident, to stop such vehicle at the scene of the accident, to give such driver's identity and to render reasonable aid. 
(c)  To give such driver's identity, for the purpose of this section, shall mean that the driver of any vehicle involved in any accident shall give such driver's name, address and the license number of such driver's vehicle, or shall report the accident to the police. 
(Code 1966, § 10-204; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
Cross reference— Leaving the scene of an accident, § 19-8. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:100.  
Sec. 8-163. - Payment of fines for traffic offenses by mail. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsections (c) and (d), any person charged with a violation of a traffic offense may promise in writing on a form prepared or otherwise used by the municipality, to appear to answer the charge. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsections (c) and (d), any person charged with a violation of a traffic offense may plead guilty to the alleged offense and pay the fine prior to the date of adjudication in the city clerk's office in the municipal building during business hours or by mail. Payment by mail must be postmarked on or before the date of adjudication and may be made by certified check or money order. No temporary checks or cash shall be accepted by mail. 
(c)  Subsections (a) and (b) shall not apply to citations alleging that the operator of the motor vehicle was: 
(1)  Under the influence of alcohol or controlled substances. 
(2)  Driving with a suspended license. 
(3)  Drag racing. 
(4)  Cited for failure to maintain compulsory security. 
(d)  Subsections (a) and (b) shall not apply when the operator was involved in an accident in which a person was injured, or is alleged to have committed the same offense twice within a period of one (1) hour. 
(Ord. No. 96-3739, § 1, 3-21-96) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 96-3739, adopted March 21, 1996, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of § 1 of said ordinance as § 8-163 herein was at the editor's discretion.  
Secs. 8-164—6-169. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - BICYCLE REGISTRATION 
 
Sec. 8-170. - Definitions. 
In the construction of this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Bicycle: Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having two (2) tandem wheels either of which is more than twenty (20) inches in diameter. 
Owner: Any person holding legal title to a bicycle kept within the city, and, if such person is a minor, the father, tutor or other person charged with legal responsibility for such minor, provided that this word shall not include a manufacturer, wholesaler, or retailer with respect to any bicycle held by any of them for sale at wholesale or retail. 
(Ord. No. 2715, § 2, 5-14-74)  
Sec. 8-171. - Compulsory registration. 
The owner of any bicycle kept within the city shall cause such bicycle to be registered annually with the city as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 2715, § 3, 5-14-74)  
Sec. 8-172. - Time for registration. 
(a)  Each bicycle owner shall register such person's bicycle with the city, through its police department, between June first, and July thirty-first. At the time any owner initially acquires the bicycle, it shall be registered as soon thereafter as practicable, and in no event later than ten (10) days after the owner has acquired it. 
(b)  If the bicycle is acquired by the owner from a merchant outside the city, or from any other person except a merchant within the city, the owner shall be liable for its initial registration within the ten-day period. If the bicycle is already registered with the city, it shall be reregistered in the name of the new owner upon such new owner's application within the period specified without cost to such owner. 
(Ord. No. 2715, §§ 3, 4, 5-14-74; Ord. No. 2756, 5-13-75)  
Sec. 8-173. - Procedure for registration. 
(a)  At the time a bicycle is registered the owner shall provide such owner's correct name, address and telephone number, and a description of the bicycle, including its manufacturer, color, serial number and such other identifying information as the police department may require, which information shall be entered on the registration certificate. The owner shall be furnished a copy of such certificate and a copy shall be retained by the police department. 
(b)  In the event any bicycle does not have a serial number, the police department shall assign a serial number to it and affix each number to the bicycle. 
(Ord. No. 2715, § 5, 5-14-74)  
Sec. 8-174. - License tag. 
(a)  When a bicycle is registered, the police department shall issue a numbered license tag, which shall be securely attached to the bicycle on the rear bumper or behind the seat so as to be clearly visible to a passerby. All licenses shall expire on July thirty-first of each year and shall be renewed within the time stipulated in this article. 
(b)  In the event any owner's license tag is lost or becomes illegible, it shall be such owner's responsibility to immediately apply for and secure a duplicate license tag. 
(Ord. No. 2715, § 6, 5-14-74)  
Sec. 8-175. - Fees. 
The following fees shall be collected by the police department: 
(1)  For registration and issuance of license tag ..... $1.00 
(2)  For issuance of duplicate license tag ..... 1.00 
(Ord. No. 2715, § 7, 5-14-74)  
Sec. 8-176. - Violations. 
Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision of this article, or committing any of the following acts, which acts are hereby declared unlawful: 
(1)  Riding a bicycle which does not have a current license tag; 
(2)  Failing to register a bicycle as required herein; or 
(3)  Operating a bicycle with an obliterated serial number, 
shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five dollars ($5.00), together with court cost and expenses. 
(Ord. No. 2715, § 8, 5-14-74)  
Secs. 8-177—8-179. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES 
 
Sec. 8-180. - Fire-raising on lands of another—By criminal negligence. 
(a)  Fire-raising on lands of another by criminal negligence is the performance of any of the following acts: 
(1)  The setting fire to any grass, leaves, brush or debris on lands by the owner, or by the owner's agent or lessee, and allowing the fire to spread or pass to lands of another. 
(2)  The starting of fire with wood or other fuel on lands of another, without malice, for camping or other purposes, with failure to exercise sufficient precautions so as to prevent the fire from spreading to grass, leaves, brush or other debris on the lands. 
(3)  The setting fire to grass, leaves, brush or other debris on lands of another by means of casting aside a lighted match or lighted cigar or cigarette stub. 
(b)  Whoever commits the crime of fire-raising on lands of another by criminal negligence shall be fined not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days, or both. 
(Code 1966, § 10-221; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:204.  
Sec. 8-181. - Same—With malice. 
(a)  Fire-raising on lands of another with malice is the malicious setting fire to any grass, leaves, brush or debris on lands of another, or the procuring same to be done. 
(b)  No person shall commit the crime of fire-raising on lands of another with malice. 
(Code 1966, § 10-222; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:205.  
Sec. 8-182. - False personation. 
(a)  False personation is the performance of any of the following acts with the intent to injure or defraud, or to obtain or secure any special privilege or advantage: 
(1)  Impersonating any public officer, or private individual having special authority by law to perform an act affecting the rights or interests of another, or the assuming, without authority, of any uniform or badge by which such officer or person is lawfully distinguished; or 
(2)  Performing any act purporting to be official in such assumed character. 
(b)  Whoever commits the crime of false personation shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(Code 1966, § 10-223; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:112.  
Sec. 8-183. - Abandoning or discarding iceboxes or other airtight containers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator, or any other container of any kind which has an airtight door or doors, or which may not be released for opening from the inside of such icebox, refrigerator or container. It shall further be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator, or any other container of any kind which is airtight and has a snap lock or other device thereon. 
(Code 1966, § 14-324; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:324.  
Sec. 8-184. - Interference with medical treatment. 
(a)  Interference with medical treatment is the intentional and willful interference with a physician, physician's trained assistant, nurse, nurse's aide, or other medical or hospital personnel in the performance of their duties relating to the care and treatment of patients in any hospital, clinic or other medical facility. 
(b)  Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) upon conviction of a first offense, and not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or ten (10) days in jail or both upon conviction of a subsequent offense. 
(Code 1966, § 10-225; Ord. No. 3133, § 12-14-82) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:332.  
Sec. 8-185. - Fortunetelling. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to practice or engage in "fortunetelling," "palmistry," "reading futures," and the like for anything of value. 
(Code 1966, § 10-228; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82)  
Sec. 8-186. - False alarms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally make, turn in, or report a need for police or ambulance assistance. 
(Code 1966, § 10-229; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
Cross reference— Fees for false alarms, § 6-204.  
Sec. 8-187. - Soliciting upon private residences. 
(a)  The practice of going in and upon private residences in this city by solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants and transient vendors of merchandise not having been requested or invited to do so by the owner or owners, occupant or occupants, of such private residences, for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, and/or disposing of and/or peddling or hawking the same, is declared to be a nuisance, and punishable as such nuisance as a misdemeanor. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) shall not apply to the sale or soliciting of orders for the sale of milk, dairy products, vegetables, poultry, eggs, and other farm and garden produce so far as the sale of the commodities named herein is now authorized by law. 
(Code 1966, § 10-230; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
Cross reference— Peddler and solicitor regulations, § 13-20 et seq.  
Sec. 8-188. - Contraband at city jail. 
(a)  For the purpose of inmate and institutional security at the city jail, "contraband" shall be defined as any article, substance, or thing which is not issued by the authorities operating the facility, specifically permitted by applicable regulations, or otherwise specially authorized by the chief of police or the chief's designee. Contraband includes but is not limited to any substance or device defined in the Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Law except where prescribed by a physician, provided the drugs are contained in a container from the drugstore bearing the full identification of the doctor who issued the drugs, the druggist who dispensed same and the number of the prescription, and that such drugs are not concealed upon the body of the person; and weapons or devices designed to kill or wound or any plans for the making or manufacturing of such weapons or devices; explosives or combustibles; any plans for escape from the jail; intoxicating beverages; stolen property, and money which is legal tender, except where specifically authorized by applicable regulations. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to possess or introduce contraband into or upon the grounds of the city jail. It shall be unlawful to possess contraband at the facility or to send contraband from any such facility. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to possess or to introduce or attempt to introduce into or upon the premises of the city jail or to take or attempt to take or send therefrom any of the following articles which are hereby declared to be contraband for the purpose of this section: any currency or coin which is legal tender; any stolen property; any article of food or clothing; any intoxicating beverage or beverages which causes or may cause any intoxicating effects; any narcotic or hypnotic or excitive drug or any drugs of whatever kind or nature, including nasal inhalators of any variety, sleeping pills or barbiturates of any variety that create or may create a hypnotic effect if taken internally, or any other controlled dangerous substance as defined in R.S. 40:961, et seq.; and any firearm or any instrumentality customarily used as a dangerous weapon, including explosives or combustibles, except through regular channels as authorized by the officer in charge of any institution herein, or any plans for the making or manufacturing of such weapons or devices; however, the definition of contraband is not restricted to those articles set forth hereinabove. 
(d)  Any contraband which is seized may be destroyed, donated to a charitable organization or put to lawful use within the facility unless it is needed as evidence in a criminal prosecution. However, any money seized which is legal tender shall be placed in a fund for the benefit of all inmates. A record of the disposition of all contraband shall be maintained. 
(Code 1966, §§ 10-67, 10-231; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82)  
Sec. 8-189. - Unauthorized use of the enhanced 911 emergency telephone system. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use the Morehouse Parish Communications District Number 1 Enhanced 911 Emergency Telephone System, by dialing 911, except when there is a legitimate and justified need for immediate or expedited assistance of law enforcement, fire or medical personnel. 
(b)  Determinations of the automatic location identifier and automatic number identifier features of the enhanced 911 emergency telephone system shall constitute prima facie evidence of the location and telephone line from which a call is made. 
(c)  The trier of fact may infer that there has been unlawful use of the enhanced 911 emergency telephone system by the person charged when: 
(1)  Emergency personnel responding to the location from which a 911 emergency call originated, as determined by the E-911 automatic identifier systems, find that there exists at that location no legitimate and justified need for immediate or expedited assistance of law enforcement, fire or medical personnel; 
(2)  The telephone line from which the call originated is listed in the name of the person charged by the local telephone company; and 
(3)  The person charged had custody or control over the room, structure or place from which the call originated. 
(d)  A person violating a provision of this section shall, upon conviction be punished by fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than six (6) months or both. Each dialing of 911 when there is no legitimate and justified need for immediate or expedited assistance of law enforcement, fire or medical personnel shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 93-3621, § 1, 4-8-93)  
Sec. 8-190. - Proof of insurance; criminal penalties. 
(a)  The following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
(1)  Motor vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled. 
(2)  Motorcycle means every motorcycle having a seat or saddle for use of the rider and designated to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor and excluding a motorized bicycle. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle within the city limits of Bastrop without proof of insurance as required by the provisions of Title 32 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes, present in the motor vehicle or motorcycle at the time of operation. 
(c)  Any person who violates the section shall be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or imprisonment of up to six (6) months. 
(Ord. No. 95-3723, § 1, 9-14-95)  
Sec. 8-191. - Prohibition on the sale or other transfer of animals in certain restricted areas. 
(a)  Prohibition. No person shall sell, exchange, barter, trade, lease, rent, give away, transfer or display any live animal on any roadside public right-of-way, parkway, median, park, playground, or other recreational area, flea market, commercial or retail parking lot, or any property adjacent to such locations that is generally accessible to the public, regardless of whether or not such access is authorized by the owner of that property. 
(b)  Exception. This section shall not apply to humane societies, animal welfare groups, animal control agencies or similar non-profit organizations if qualified under IRC 501(C)(3) and who are sponsoring animal adoption events and which have obtained a permit from the city for such event. Such permits shall be obtained through the office of the City Clerk for the City of Bastrop at no cost to the requestor. 
(c)  Penalties. Whoever commits a violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six (6) months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 11-4205, 11-10-11)  
Secs. 8-192—8-199. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-200. - Prohibition against cyberbullying. 
(a)  Cyberbullying is the transmission of any electronic textual, visual, written, or oral communication with the malicious and willful intent to coerce, abuse, torment, or intimidate a person under the age of eighteen (18). 
(b)  For purposes of this section: 
(1)  "Cable operator" means any person or group of persons who provides cable service over a cable system and directly, or through one (1) or more affiliates, owns a significant interest in such cable system, or who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable system. 
(2)  "Electronic textual, visual, written, or oral communication" means any communication of any kind made through the use of a computer online service, Internet service, or any other means of electronic communication, including but not limited to a local bulletin board service, Internet chat room, electronic mail, or online messaging service. 
(3)  "Interactive computer service" means any information service, system, or access software provider that provides or enables computer access by multiple users to a computer server, including a service or system that provides access to the Internet and such systems operated or services offered by libraries or educational institutions. 
(4)  "Telecommunications service" means the offering of telecommunications for a fee directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used. 
(c)  An offense committed pursuant to the provisions of this section may be deemed to have been committed where the communication was originally sent, originally received, or originally viewed by any person. 
(d)  (1)  Except as provided in subsection (2), whoever commits the crime of cyberbullying shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), imprisoned for not more than six (6) months, or both. 
(2)  When the offender is under the age of seventeen, the disposition of the matter shall be governed exclusively by provisions of the law applicable to the handling of juvenile offender before the City Court of Bastrop that are not inconsistent with Title VII of the Louisiana Children's Code. 
(e)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to a provider of an interactive computer service, provider of a telecommunications service, or a cable operator as defined by the provisions of this section. 
(f)  The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit or restrict religious free speech pursuant to Article I, Section 8 of the Constitution of Louisiana. 
(Ord. No. 12-4207, 3-8-12)  
Secs. 8-201—8-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - CURFEW FOR MINORS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 90-3493, adopted June 18, 1990, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1—8 as Art. XIII, §§ 8-301—8-308, was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 8-301. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "curfew ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 90-3493, § 1, 6-18-90)  
Sec. 8-302. - Purposes. 
This article prescribes, in accordance with prevailing community standards, regulations for the conduct of minors on streets at night, effectively enforced, taught in homes, all for the good of minors, for the furtherance of family responsibility, and for the public good, safety, and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 90-3493, § 2, 6-18-90)  
Sec. 8-303. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular and words in the singular number include the plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory: 
City is the City of Bastrop. 
Minor is any person under the age of seventeen (17). 
Parent is any person having legal custody of a minor: 
(1)  As a natural or adoptive parent; 
(2)  As a legal guardian; 
(3)  As a person who stands in loco parentis; or 
(4)  As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of court. 
Public place shall mean any park, playground, or place to which the general public has access and a right to resort for business, entertainment, or other lawful purpose, and shall include street or thoroughfare. A public place shall include, but not be limited to, any store, shop, restaurant, tavern, bowling alley, cafe, theater, drug store, pool room, shopping center and any other place devoted to amusement or entertainment of the general public. It shall also include the front or immediate area of the above, including the yard or parking area. 
Street or thoroughfare is a way or place, or whatever nature, open to the use of the public as a matter of right for purposes of vehicular travel or, in the case of a sidewalk thereof, for pedestrian travel. The term street includes the legal right-of-way, including, but not limited to, the cartway or traffic lanes, the curb, the sidewalks whether paved or unpaved, and any grass plots or other grounds found within the legal right-of-way of a street. The term street applies irrespective of what it be called or formally named, whether alley, avenue, court, road or otherwise. 
Time of night referred to herein is based upon the prevailing standard of time, whether Central Standard Time or Central Daylight Savings Time, generally observed at that hour by the public in the city, prima facie the time then observed in the city police station. 
(Ord. No. 90-3493, § 3, 6-18-90)  
Sec. 8-304. - Curfew for minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of seventeen (17) years to be or remain in or upon any public street or thoroughfare or in any public place, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 4 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and 12:00 midnight and 4:00 a.m. Friday and Saturday in the city, unless one (1) of the exceptions under section 8-305 applies. 
(Ord. No. 90-3493, § 4, 6-18-90)  
Sec. 8-305. - Exceptions. 
In the following exceptional cases a minor on a city street or thoroughfare or in a public place during the nocturnal hours for which section 8-304 is intended to provide the maximum limits of regulation (and a clear general guide for minors, their parents, and their fellow citizens) shall not, however, be considered in violation of this article, to wit: 
(1)  When accompanied by a parent or guardian of such minor. 
(2)  When accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent of such minor to take the parent's place in accompanying the minor for a designated period of time and purpose within a specified area. 
(3)  When exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly, provided the minor first has given notice to the mayor of the city by delivering to the city hall a written communication signed by the minor and countersigned, if practicable, by a parent of the minor which specifies when, where, in what manner, and for what first amendment purpose the minor will be on the streets at night during the curfew time period. 
(4)  In a case of emergency which can be verified by a law enforcement officer. 
(5)  The minor is returning home by a direct route from and within thirty (30) minutes of the termination of any lawfully organized activity, the attendance of which has been approved in writing by the parent. The approval of the parent identified in this subsection must be in writing; must specify the event or activity that the minor is permitted to be at, and must contain the parent's residence address and the telephone number at which the parent can be reached. 
(6)  The minor has been authorized, by special permit obtained from the mayor, or his designated representative, to be on the streets during the curfew hours for normal or necessary nighttime activities inadequately provided for by other exceptions in this article. 
(7)  The minor is a member of a group of minors permitted by a "regulation" issued by the mayor or his designated representative to be on the streets during the curfew hours for normal or necessary nighttime activities inadequately provided for by other exceptions in this article. 
(8)  The minor is employed during the curfew hours and such employment is verifiable. 
(9)  The minor is in a motor vehicle with parental consent for normal travel, with interstate travel through the city. 
(Ord. No. 90-3493, § 5, 6-18-90)  
Sec. 8-306. - Parental responsibility. 
It shall be unlawful for a parent having legal custody of a minor knowingly to permit or by inefficient control to allow such minor to be or remain upon a city street or thoroughfare or in a public place under circumstances not constituting an exception to, or otherwise beyond the scope of, this article. The term "knowingly" includes knowledge which a parent should reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor in that parent's legal custody. It is intended to continue to keep neglectful or careless parents up to a reasonable community standard of parental responsibility through an objective test. It shall be no defense that a parent was completely indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of such minor. 
(Ord. No. 90-3493, § 6, 6-18-90)  
Sec. 8-307. - Police procedures. 
A law enforcement officer, upon finding or having attention called to any minor on the public streets or thoroughfares or in a public place in prima facie violation of this article shall follow the following procedure: 
(1)  Take the minor to the police station, where a parent shall immediately be notified to come for such minor. 
(2)  In case of a minor age twelve (12) or under near home whose identity and address may readily be ascertained or are known, the law enforcement officer may use his judgement and deliver the minor to a parent. 
(3)  In any event such law enforcement officer shall within twenty-four (24) hours file a written report with the chief of police. 
(4)  When a parent, immediately called, has come to take charge of the minor, and the appropriate information has been recorded, the minor shall be released to the custody of the parent. If the parent cannot be located, or fails to take charge of the minor, then the minor shall be released to the juvenile authorities, except to the extent that in accordance with police regulations, approved in advance by juvenile authorities, the minor may temporarily be entrusted to a relative, neighbor or other person who will on behalf of a parent assume the responsibility of caring for the minor pending the availability or arrival of a parent. 
(5)  In the case of a first violation by a minor, the chief of police shall, by certified mail, send to a parent written notice of the violation with a warning that any subsequent violation will result in full enforcement of this article including enforcement of parental responsibility and of applicable penalties. 
(6)  For purposes of enforcing this article, in the absence of a convincing evidence such as a birth certificate, a policeman on the street shall, in the first instance, use his best judgment in determining age. 
(Ord. No. 90-3493, § 7, 6-18-90)  
Sec. 8-308. - Penalties. 
Prevailing community standards which support the restriction against minors being on the streets at late hours, reflected in this article, are hereby undergirded with the following legal sanctions: 
(1)  If, after the warning notice pursuant to section 8-307(5) of a first violation by a minor, a parent violates section 8-306 (in connection with a second violation by the minor), this shall be treated as a first offense by the parent. For such first parental offense a parent shall be fined twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and for each subsequent offense by a parent the fine shall be increased by an additional twenty-five dollars ($25.00), e.g. fifty dollars ($50.00) for the second, seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for the third offense and so on. The city judge, upon finding the parent guilty, shall sentence the parent to pay such fine and the costs of prosecution, and upon refusal to pay such fine and costs to be imprisoned for a period not exceeding ten (10) days, or at his discretion, a similar period of community service. 
(2)  Any minor who shall violate any of the provisions of this article more than three (3) times shall be reported by the chief of police to the appropriate state juvenile authorities whose purpose it is to take charge of incorrigibles and delinquents and proceedings shall be taken under the appropriate state law, before the juvenile court for the treatment, supervision and rehabilitation of such minor. 
(Ord. No. 90-3493, § 8, 6-18-90)  
Secs. 8-309—8-400. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - TRUANCY 
 
Sec. 8-401. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this section, the word "child" is defined as any person between the ages of seven (7) and sixteen (16) years of age, inclusive. 
(Ord. No. 01-3951, 3-14-02)  
Sec. 8-402. - Children of compulsory school age to be in attendance at school; parental duty imposed. 
(a)  No child between the ages of seven (7) and sixteen (16), inclusive, other than a child that has been suspended or expelled from school, shall be at any place within the city limits except in attendance at school between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. during any school day as defined by the school board or qualified educational institution in which the child is enrolled, unless the child has written proof from the school authorities excusing him or her from attending school at that particular time, or, unless the child is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian or a responsible adult selected by the parent or legal guardian to supervise the child, or is otherwise lawfully excused from being present in school. 
(b)  Each parent or legal guardian of a child between the ages of seven (7) and sixteen (16), inclusive, shall have a duty to prohibit the child from behaving contrary to subsection (a) of this section. No person shall negligently fail to fulfill the duty imposed by this division. 
(c)  It shall be an affirmative defense to subsections (a) and (b) of this section that the child, at the time he or she was found at a place other than in school, was not required by law to be in attendance at school. 
(d)  It shall be an affirmative defense to subsection (b) of this section that the parent or legal guardian initiated an action under the jurisdiction of the juvenile court against the child prior to the time that the child was found violating subsection (a) of this section. 
(e)  Any police officer or school attendance officer may transport any child found violating this section to the child's residence and may release the child into the care of a parent or court appointed tutor or legal guardian, to the school the child usually attends, or to any location designated by the authorities of the school which the child usually attends as a receiving center for such children, the choice of destination to be made at the discretion of the police officer or school attendance officer based on proximity of the destination and other relevant factors, and subject to the need to respond to emergency or priority calls. 
(f)  Any child who violates subsection (a) of this section shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the juvenile court. 
(g)  If a child found to be in violation of this section refuses to follow the direction of the police officer or provide a school attendance officer his/her correct name and address and the correct name and address of his/her school or if the child has on a previous occasion been informed of a violation of this section, he/she shall be taken into custody and the parent, tutor or other adult person having the care and custody of the child shall be notified to come and take charge of the child. If the parent, tutor or other adult person cannot be located or fails to come and take charge of the child, the child shall be released to the juvenile authorities. If the juvenile authorities fail to take charge of the child, the child shall be returned to his home or usual place of abode. The child shall be issued a citation directing the child and the parent or tutor or court appointed legal guardian to appear in the youth services bureau of the police department. 
(h)  Any child violating the provisions of this article shall be dealt with in accordance with all appropriate provisions of the Children's Code of the State of Louisiana. 
(Ord. No. 01-3951, 3-14-02)  
Sec. 8-403. - Penalties. 
If a child is found in violation of this section on three (3) or more occasions, within a 365-day period, the parent, tutor or other court-appointed legal guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the child, after having previously been notified of the previous violations, shall be guilty of negligently failing to supervise a child of compulsory school age, a misdemeanor, subject to the jurisdiction of the city court and be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense or sentenced to not more than sixty (60) days in jail, or both. 
(Ord. No. 01-3951, 3-14-02)  
Sec. 8-404. - Children suspended or expelled from school. 
(a)  If a child is suspended or expelled from school in the city, then each parent, tutor, person with the guardianship of the person of the child as defined by the Louisiana Children's Code, Art. 116, or other applicable law, or other responsible adult of the child shall have the following duties for the duration of the suspension or expulsion: 
(1)  The duty to personally supervise the child, or to arrange for a responsible adult to supervise the child, at the time that the child would otherwise have been required to be in attendance in school had he or she not been suspended or expelled; and 
(2)  The duty to prohibit the child from being at any public place at the times that the child would have been required to be in attendance at school had he or she not been suspended or expelled except in the following circumstances: 
a.  When the child is accompanied by the parent or legal guardian, or a responsible adult selected by the parent or legal guardian to supervise the child; or 
b.  When the child is employed pursuant to an age and schooling certificate issued by the school authorities during the times that the child is on the job or traveling directly to or from a job site; or 
c.  When the child is on an emergency errand. "Emergency errand" is defined for the purposes of this section as an errand which requires seeking medical attention, attending a funeral or any other activity which involves the health care or safety of the child or of his or her immediate family; or 
d.  When the child has been directed by the parent or legal guardian to engage in a specific activity or to carry out expressed instructions during the times that the child is actually engaged in fulfilling those directions or instructions. 
No person shall fail to fulfill the duties imposed by subsection (a) of this section. 
(b)  No child that has been suspended or expelled from school shall fail to comply with supervision provided or arranged by a parent or legal guardian pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  No child that has been suspended or expelled from school shall be in any public place at the times that he or she would have been required to be in attendance at school had he or she not been suspended or expelled except in the circumstances described in subsection (a) above. 
(d)  As used in this section, "public place" includes any street, recreational center, sidewalk, park, cemetery, schoolyard, body of water or water course, public conveyance, parking lot or any other place engaging in the sale of merchandise, public accommodation or amusement. 
(e)  A police office or school designated attendance office may transport any child found violating this section to the child's residence and may release the child into the care of the parent, tutor or court-appointed legal guardian, to the school the child usually attends, or to any location designation by the school authorities as a receiving center for such children. The choice of destination can be made at the discretion of the police officer or school attendance officer based on proximity of the destination and other relevant factors and subject to the need to respond to emergency or priority calls. If the child found to be in violation of this section refuses to give the police officer or school attendance enforcement office his correct name and address or the correct name and address of his school or, if the child has on a previous occasion violated the provisions of this section, he shall be taken into custody and the parent, tutor or other adult person having the care and custody of the child shall be notified to come and take charge of the child. If the parent, tutor or other responsible adult cannot be located or fails to come take charge of the child, and if the juvenile authorities fail to take custody of the child, the child shall be returned to his home or usual place of abode. The child shall be issued a citation directing the child and the parent, tutor or other responsible adult to appear in the youth services bureau of the police department. 
(f)  Any child that violates this section is subject to the jurisdiction of the juvenile court. 
(Ord. No. 01-3951, 3-14-02)  
Sec. 8-405. - Penalties. 
If a child is found to be in violation of this section, on the second or subsequent occasion within a 365-day period, the parent, tutor, responsible adult, court appointed adult guardian, or other responsible adult person having the care and custody of the child, after having previously been notified of these violations, shall be guilty of failing to supervise a suspended or expelled child, a misdemeanor, subject to the jurisdiction of the city court, punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense or a sentence of not more than sixty (60) days or both. 
(Ord. No. 01-3951, 3-14-02)  
Chapter 9 - FIRE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority, § 5(32) et seq. 
Cross reference— Obstruction of firemen, § 8-133; obstruction of fire prevention, § 8-134; trash accumulations, § 10-20 et seq.; fire-raising on lands of another, § 8-180. 
State Law reference— Fire prevention authority as to buildings, R.S. 33:4741 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 9-1. - Bureau of fire prevention. 
(a)  The fire prevention code shall be enforced by the bureau of fire prevention in the fire department of the city, which is hereby established, and which shall be operated under the supervision of the chief of the fire department. 
(b)  The chief in charge of the bureau of fire prevention shall be appointed on the basis of examination to determine the candidate's qualifications. The appointment shall continue during good behavior and satisfactory service. The appointee shall not be removed from office except for cause after public trial. 
(c)  The chief of the fire department is permitted to detail such members of the fire department as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. The chief of the fire department shall recommend to the Bastrop Fire and Police Civil Service Board the employment of technical inspectors, who, when such authorization is made, shall be selected through an examination to determine their fitness for the position. The examination shall be open to members and nonmembers of the fire department and appointments made after examination shall be for an indefinite term with removal only for cause. Bureau will be staffed by qualified individuals whose credentials have been reviewed and accepted by the state fire marshal. 
(d)  A report of the bureau of fire prevention shall be made annually and transmitted to the mayor; it shall contain all proceedings under the fire prevention code, with such statistics as the chief of the fire department decides to include therein. The chief of the fire department shall also recommend any amendments to the code, which, in such chief's judgment, shall be desirable. 
(e)  The chief of the fire department may request and shall receive, so far as may be necessary, in the discharge of official duties, the assistance and cooperation of other officials of the municipality. 
(f)  The bureau will conduct maintenance inspections on behalf of the fire marshal. The fire marshal shall have the authority to monitor the performance of the fire prevention bureau in the performance of those functions which would otherwise be performed by the fire marshal. 
(Ord. No. 2807, § 2, 6-8-76; Ord. No. 18-4248 , 5-10-18)  
Sec. 9-2. - Fire prevention code—Adopted. 
There is hereby adopted by the city, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire and explosion, that certain code known as National Fire Protection Agency Life Safety Code. One (1) copy should be filed in the office of City Clerk and Fire Prevention Office. The term "The Code" in General Provisions make reference to those technical codes adopted by City of Bastrop, Louisiana to establish a reasonable level of fire safety and property protection from the hazards created by fire and explosion, including, but not limited to, the most recent State of Louisiana adopted version of the National Fire Protection Agency Life Safety Code (NFPA 101) and, as a maintenance code, the National Protection Agency Fire Code (NFPA 1). 
(Ord. No. 2807, § 1, 6-8-76; Ord. No. 3344, § 1, 1-13-87; Ord. No. 18-4248 , 5-10-18)  
Sec. 9-3. - Same—Modifications. 
The chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall have the power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or the owner's or lessee's duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the intent of the code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the chief of the bureau of fire prevention thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2807, § 12, 6-8-76)  
Sec. 9-4. - Same—New materials, processes or occupancies which require permits. 
The mayor, the chief of the fire department and the chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies, which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in the fire prevention code. The chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall post such lists in a conspicuous place in such chief's office, and distribute copies thereof to interested persons. 
(Ord. No. 2807, § 14, 6-8-76)  
Sec. 9-5. - Same—Appeals. 
Whenever the chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for or when it is claimed that the provisions of the fire prevention code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant is permitted to appeal from the decision of the chief of the bureau of fire prevention to the governing body within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision appealed. 
(Ord. No. 2807, § 13, 6-8-76)  
Sec. 9-6. - Same—Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the fire prevention code hereby adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified on appeal, within the time fixed therein, shall severally for each violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00), nor more than the limit prescribed in section 1-8, or imprisoned for not less than ten (10) days within the limit prescribed in section 1-8, or by both such fine and imprisonment. The imposition of one (1) penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2807, § 15, 6-8-76)  
Sec. 9-7. - District in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited. 
The limits referred to in the fire prevention code, in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, are established to be the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2807, § 4, 6-8-76)  
Sec. 9-8. - District in which manufacture and storage of fireworks is prohibited. 
The limits referred to in the fire prevention code in which the manufacture of fireworks is prohibited are established to be the corporate limits of the city. The storage of fireworks on a yearly basis is prohibited in the corporate limits of the city. Fireworks may be stored in stands, buildings or other structures of brick, metal, or wood construction. 
(Ord. No. 2807, § 5, 6-8-76) 
Cross reference— Fireworks, § 9-20 et seq.  
Sec. 9-9. - District in which storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited. 
(a)  The limits referred to in the fire prevention code in which storage of flammable liquids in outside, aboveground tanks is prohibited are hereby established to be the corporate limits of the city for any new storage facilities and all existing facilities shall comply with the state law. 
(b)  The limits referred to in the fire prevention code in which new bulk plants for flammable or combustible liquids are prohibited are hereby established as the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2807, § 6, 6-8-76)  
Sec. 9-10. - District in which bulk storage of liquified petroleum gases is restricted. 
The limits referred to in the fire prevention code in which bulk storage of liquified petroleum gas is restricted, are hereby established as the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2807, § 7, 6-8-76)  
Sec. 9-11. - Motor vehicle routes for vehicles transporting explosives and blasting agents. 
The routes referred to in the fire prevention code for vehicles transporting explosives and blasting agents are hereby established to be all state and federal highways and such designated routes to industrial plants as set forth in regulations to be promulgated by the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 2807, § 8, 6-8-76)  
Sec. 9-12. - Motor vehicle routes for vehicles transporting hazardous chemicals or other dangerous articles. 
The routes referred to in the fire prevention code for vehicles transporting chemicals and other dangerous articles are hereby established as state and federal highways and such designated routes to industrial plants as set forth in regulations to be promulgated by the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 2807, § 9, 6-8-76)  
Sec. 9-13. - Fire lanes on private property devoted to public use. 
The fire lanes referred to in the fire prevention code are hereby established to be at the building fronts at shopping centers, bowling lanes, theaters, hospitals, churches, nursing homes, schools, auditoriums, and other places of public assemblage. 
(Ord. No. 2807, § 10, 6-8-76)  
Sec. 9-14. - Definitions. 
Yard. An open space of existing ground level between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward. For the purpose of determining yard measurements, the least horizontal distance between lot line and the maximum permissible main building shall be used. 
Yard, front. A yard extending across the front of a lot between the side yard and being the minimum horizontal difference between the street line and the building or any projection thereof, other than steps, unenclosed balconies, and uncovered porches. On a corner lot the front yard shall be provided facing the street upon which the lot has its lesser dimension. 
Yard, rear. A yard extending across the rear of a lot and between the side lot lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot lines and the building or any projection thereof, other than steps, unenclosed balconies, unenclosed and uncovered porches. 
Yard, side. A yard between the building and the side line of the lot and being the minimum horizontal distance between the side lot line and the side of the building or any projections thereof, other than steps, unenclosed balconies, and unenclosed and uncovered porches. 
(Ord. No. 92-3575, § 1, 3-12-92)  
Sec. 9-15. - Projections into yards. 
(a)  Steps or stoops not exceeding twenty-four (24) square feet in area, eaves, cornices, window sills, and enclosed and uncovered porches may project into any required yard, provided such construction does not project nearer than three (3) feet to the lot lines except on the street side of the corner lot, unenclosed car ports, and port-cocheres may project into a side or rear yard, provided such construction does not project nearer than three (3) feet from the lot lines. 
(b)  The following exceptions shall be permitted from operation of subsection (a); all structures which are erected prior to the effective date of Ordinance No. 92-3575, from which this section derives, are excepted. 
(Ord. No. 92-3575, § 1, 3-12-92)  
Sec. 9-16. - Side, rear yards. 
(a)  Unless there is a party wall, one story buildings shall be provided with side and rear yards of not less than three (3) feet. Provided that on corner lots buildings of accessory use shall be provided with side yards of not less than seven (7) feet. 
(b)  Exceptions: The following exceptions shall be permitted from operation of subsection (a); all structures which are erected prior to the effective date of Ordinance No. 92-3575, from which this section derives, are excepted. 
(Ord. No. 92-3575, § 1, 3-12-92)  
Sec. 9-17. - Outdoor burning prohibited; exceptions. 
No person, firm or corporation shall cause or allow the outdoor burning of waste material or other combustible material on any property owned by him or under his control except as provided below: 
Exceptions to prohibition against outdoor burning: 
Outdoor burning of waste material or other combustible material may be conducted in situations enumerated below if no public nuisance is or will be created and if the burning is conducted in compliance with other applicable laws. The authority to conduct outdoor burning does not exempt or excuse the person responsible from the consequences of or the damages or injuries resulting from the burning. 
(1)  Outdoor burning in connection with the preparation of food. 
(2)  The operation of contrivances using open flames, such as welding torches, blow torches, portable heaters, and other flame making devices. 
(3)  Camp fires and fires used solely for recreational purposes or ceremonial occasions. 
(4)  Outdoor burning of trees, brush, grass, and other vegetable material from such area in land clearing and right-of-way maintenance operations if the following conditions are met: 
a.  Prevailing winds at the time of the burning must be away from housing developments. 
b.  The location of the burning must be at least one thousand (1,000) feet three hundred five (305) meters from any dwelling other than a dwelling or structure located on the property on which the burning is conducted. 
c.  Care must be used to minimize the amount of dirt on the material being burned. 
d.  Heavy oils, asphaltic materials, items containing natural or synthetic rubber or any materials other than plant growth which produce unreasonable amounts of smoke may not be burned; nor may these substances be used to start a fire. 
e.  The burning may be conducted only between the hours of daylight and 5:00 p.m. 
f.  Piles of combustible materials should be of such size to allow complete reduction in this time interval. 
g.  Fire burning must be controlled so that a traffic hazard is not created. 
(5)  Fire purposely set as a part of an organized program of drills for the training of fire fighting personnel or for testing firefighting materials or equipment if the following conditions are met: 
a.  The duration of the burning held to the minimum required for such purposes. 
b.  The burning is conducted only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
c.  The burning is controlled so that a traffic hazard is not created. 
(Ord. No. 95-3706, § 1, 6-26-95)  
Secs. 9-18—9-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIREWORKS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— District in which manufacture or storage is prohibited, § 9-7. 
 
Sec. 9-20. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Fireworks: Any combustible or explosive composition, or any substance or combination of substances, or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation and shall include blank cartridges, toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes or toy guns in which explosives are used, the type of balloons which require fire underneath to propel the same, firecrackers, torpedoes, sky rockets (to which a wood or other type shaft or stick of greater than two inches in length is not attached), Roman candles, dago bombs, sparklers or other fireworks of like construction or any fireworks containing explosive or flammable compound, or any tablets or other device containing any explosive substance, except that the term "fireworks" shall not include (a) paper caps containing not in excess of an average of twenty-five one-hundredths (25/100) of a grain of explosive content per cap, and toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices for the use of such caps, and (b) "bottle rockets" or any type of rocket to which is attached a wood or other type of shaft of greater than two (2) inches in length that may be used to launch or discharge the rocket. 
Pyrotechnics: Any sparkler, squib, rocket (but excluding "bottle rockets" or any type of rocket to which is attached a wood or other type of shaft of greater than two (2) inches in length that may be used to launch or discharge the rocket), firecracker, Roman candle, signal light, railroad track torpedo, flashlight composition fireworks or other devices or composition used of a type which have a burning material of any kind attached thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2807, § 11, 6-8-76; Ord. No. 07-4152, 3-13-08)  
Sec. 9-21. - Manufacture prohibited. 
The manufacture of fireworks and/or pyrotechnics is prohibited within the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 2807, § 11(a), 6-8-76) 
Cross reference— District in which manufacture and storage of fireworks is prohibited, § 9-8.  
Sec. 9-22. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided for in this article, no person shall have, keep, store, use, manufacture, sell, handle, or transport any pyrotechnics; provided, however, that nothing in this article shall be held to apply to the possession or use of signaling devices for current daily consumption by railroads, vessels, and others requiring them for operative purposes. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be held to apply to the possession, sale, or use of normal stocks, as determined by the chief of the bureau of fire prevention, of flashlight compositions or photographers, or dealers in photographic supplies. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit any resident wholesaler dealer, or jobber to sell at wholesale such fireworks as are not herein prohibited, or the sale of any kind of fireworks provided the same are to be shipped directly out of state; or the use of fireworks by railroads, or other transportation agencies, for signal purpose or illumination, or the sale or use of blank cartridges for a show or theater, or for signal or ceremonial purposes in athletics or sports, or for use by military organizations. 
(Ord. No. 2807, § 11(b), 6-8-76)  
Sec. 9-23. - Displays—Permits. 
(a)  The bureau of fire prevention may, upon due application, issue a permit to a properly qualified person for giving a pyrotechnic display of fireworks in the public parks or other open places. Such permits shall impose such restrictions as the opinion of the chief of the bureau of fire prevention may be necessary to properly safeguard property and life in each case. 
(b)  Application for permits shall be made in writing at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the date of the display. After such privilege shall have been granted, sale, possession, use and distribution of fireworks for such display shall be lawful for that purpose only. No permit granted hereunder shall be transferable. 
(Ord. No. 2807, § 11(c), 6-8-76)  
Sec. 9-24. - Same—Bond of permittee. 
The permittee shall furnish a bond in an amount deemed adequate by the chief of the fire department, but not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00), conditioned for the payment of all damages which may be caused either to persons or to property by reason of the permitted display, and arising from any acts of the permittee, permittee's agent, employees or subcontractors. 
(Ord. No. 2807, § 11, 6-8-76)  
Sec. 9-25. - Same—Disposal of unfired fireworks. 
Any fireworks that remain unfired after the display is concluded shall be immediately disposed of in a way safe for the particular type of fireworks remaining. 
(Ord. No. 2807, § 11, 6-8-76)  
Sec. 9-26. - Discharge near courthouse square, church, school, etc. 
No fireworks shall be discharged, ignited, or exploded within two (2) blocks of the courthouse square, within one thousand (1,000) feet of any church, hospital, asylum, nursing home, public or private school, or within seventy-five (75) feet of any place, building, or structure where fireworks are sold, stored or offered for sale. 
(Ord. No. 2807, § 11, 6-8-76)  
Sec. 9-27. - Authorized sale; permit. 
Between December fifteenth and January first and between June twenty-fifth and July fifth, of each year, it shall be lawful to sell at retail any articles of pyrotechnics in the city. Permissible fireworks shall include, but not be limited to, the following class "c" pyrotechnics subject to the approval of the chief of the bureau of fire prevention: a. sparklers, b. flower pots, c. fountains, d. colored fire cone and box, e. color parade torches, f. nonpoisonous snakes, g. cap pistols, h. firecrackers, not over one and one-half (1½) inches containing not more than two (2) grains of powder, i. serpent mines, j. picollo pete, k. triangle or pinwheel. Each retail store or person desiring to sell fireworks shall secure each year a permit from the bureau of fire prevention and a permit from the city clerk. The permit to be issued by the bureau of fire prevention shall issue only after approval of the site location, the structure or building in which the fireworks are to be sold and upon presentation of invoices of the kind of fireworks so purchased, or contracted for. The permit to be issued by the bureau of fire prevention shall be at no cost to the person applying therefor. Permits shall be secured for each sale location. 
(Ord. No. 2807, § 11, 6-8-76)  
Sec. 9-28. - Building specifications for display or sale; proximity to paint, etc. 
(a)  All display and sale shall be made from buildings constructed of brick, metal, wood or pressed board enclosed on three (3) sides, it being expressly prohibited to sell or store fireworks in cardboard-, cloth- or paper-constructed buildings or structures. 
(b)  No fireworks are to be sold or stored at any location where paints, oils, or varnishes shall be kept for use or sale, unless such paints, oils or varnishes are kept in the original containers or where any rosin, turpentine, gasoline, or other inflammable substances which may generate inflammable vapor are used, stored or sold. 
(Ord. No. 2807, § 11, 6-8-76)  
Sec. 9-29. - Proximity to other structures of display or sale; signs. 
All locations at which the display and sale of fireworks is made shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet from any other structure and at least sixty (60) feet from any structure where inflammable substances which may generate inflammable vapor are used, stored, or sold, and there must be posted signs with the words "Fireworks - No Smoking" in letters not less than four (4) inches high and plainly visible to persons traveling or walking on the streets or sidewalks of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2807, § 11, 6-8-76)  
Sec. 9-30. - Sales from vehicles; protection from sun. 
(a)  All sales from vehicles are prohibited, whether retail or wholesale. 
(b)  No fireworks may be stored, located or displayed in any window where the sun may shine through glass into the fireworks so displayed. 
(Ord. No. 2807, § 11, 6-8-76)  
Sec. 9-31. - Sale to children, etc.; throwing from vehicles or into vehicles or into gathering. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale fireworks to children under the age of ten (10) years or to intoxicated or irresponsible persons. 
(b)  The igniting, shooting, setting off, discharging, or throwing of any fireworks from motor vehicles, or the throwing of any fireworks into or at a motor vehicle is expressly prohibited. 
(c)  No fireworks shall be thrown or placed in any gathering of persons. 
(Ord. No. 2807, § 11, 6-8-76)  
Sec. 9-32. - Days and times of discharge. 
It shall be unlawful to discharge, ignite, set off or explode any fireworks within the corporate limits of the city except during the following periods: Between December fifteenth and January first, on Veterans Day and between June twenty-fifth and July fifth, and only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. of such days. 
(Ord. No. 2807, § 11, 6-8-76)  
Sec. 9-33. - Seizure of fireworks. 
The chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall seize, take, remove, or cause to be removed at the expense of the owner all stocks of fireworks offered or exposed for sale, stored or held in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2807, § 11, 6-8-76)  
Sec. 9-34. - Bottle rockets prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale devices commonly referred to as "bottle rockets," which include any type of rocket to which is attached a wood or other type of shaft of greater than two (2) inches in length that may be used to launch or discharge the rocket. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to ignite, discharge, set off or explode a device commonly referred to as a "bottle rocket," which includes any type of rocket to which is attached a wood or other type of shaft of greater than two (2) inches in length that may be used to launch or discharge the rocket. 
(Ord. No. 07-4152, 3-13-08)  
Chapter 10 - GARBAGE, TRASH, WEEDS AND JUNK[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority, § 5(17). 
State Law reference— Solid waste management and resource recovery, R.S. 30:1121 et seq.; littering prohibited, R.S. 48:361 et seq.; littering of highways and adjacent lands, R.S. 32:289. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 10-1—10-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LITTER 
 
Sec. 10-20. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Aircraft: Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or designed for navigation or for flight in the air. The word "aircraft" shall include helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons. 
Authorized private receptacle: A litter storage and collection container constructed so to reasonably confine and retain litter and trash. 
Commercial handbill: Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original copies of any matter of literature: 
(1)  Which advertises for sale any merchandise, commodity or thing; 
(2)  Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly, promoting the interest thereof by sales; 
(3)  Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit, but the terms of this clause shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, when either of the same is held, given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good order; provided nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place at any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind without a license, where such license is or may be required by any law of this state, or under any ordinance of this city; or 
(4)  Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purpose, or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor. 
Garbage: Animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
Litter: Garbage, refuse, trash and rubbish, as defined herein, and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare. 
Newspaper: Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the United States Postal Service, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and, in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four (4) issues per year, and sold to the public. 
Noncommercial handbill: Any printed or written matter, or sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced or original or copies of any matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of commercial handbill or newspaper. 
Park: A park, reservation, playground, recreation center, or any other public area in the city, owned or used by the city and its inhabitants and devoted to active or passive recreation. 
Private premises: Any dwelling, house, building or other structure designated or used wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure. 
Public place: Any street, sidewalk, boulevard, alley or other public way and any public park, square, space, grounds or building. 
Refuse: All solid waste (except body waste) including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned motor vehicles and solid market industrial wastes. 
Rubbish: Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, plastic and similar materials. 
Vehicle: Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Ord. No. 2792, Part C, § 1, 1-13-76; Ord. No. 2897, 7-11-78)  
Sec. 10-21. - Placing in receptacles. 
(a)  Required. No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within the city except in public receptacles or in authorized receptacles for collection. 
(b)  So as to prevent scattering. Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
(Code 1966, § 16-05(a); Ord. No. 2792, Part C, §§ 2, 3, 1-13-76)  
Sec. 10-22. - Sweeping litter into gutters; cleanliness of sidewalk. 
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any private or public sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. 
(Ord. No. 2792, Part C, § 4, 1-13-76)  
Sec. 10-23. - Merchants' duty to keep sidewalks free of litter. 
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city, the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public place or private or public sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business within the city shall keep all premises, including sidewalks, service alleys, and parking areas of their business, free of litter. 
(Ord. No. 2792, Part C, § 5, 1-13-76)  
Sec. 10-24. - Litter thrown from vehicles. 
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the city, or upon private property. 
(Ord. No. 2792, Part C, § 6, 1-13-76) 
Cross reference— Throwing fireworks from vehicles, § 9-31(b).  
Sec. 10-25. - Truck loads causing litter; tracking mud. 
(a)  No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the city unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public place. 
(b)  No person shall drive or move any vehicle or truck within the city, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 2792, Part C, § 7, 1-13-76)  
Sec. 10-26. - Littering from aircraft. 
No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the city any litter, handbill or any other object without obtaining a permit from the city. 
(Ord. No. 2792, Part C, § 10, 1-13-76) 
Cross reference— Airport, Ch. 3.  
Sec. 10-27. - Litter in parks. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the city except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2792, Part C, § 8, 1-13-76)  
Sec. 10-28. - Bodies of water. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, stream, ditch, canal or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2792, Part C, § 9, 1-13-76)  
Sec. 10-29. - Litter on occupied private property. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied or unoccupied private property within the city whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place or upon any private property. 
(Ord. No. 2792, Part C, § 11, 1-13-76)  
Sec. 10-30. - Owner to maintain premises free of litter. 
(a)  The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter. However, this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection. 
(b)  No person shall permit garbage containers to remain alongside a public roadway for more than twenty-four (24) hours after garbage has been collected. 
(Ord. No. 2792, Part C, § 12, 1-13-76; Ord. No. 04-4024, 5-13-04)  
Sec. 10-31. - Litter on vacant lots. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property within the city, whether or not owned by such person. 
(Ord. No. 2792, Part C, § 13, 1-13-76)  
Sec. 10-32. - Handbills—Throwing or distributing in public places. 
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city; nor shall any person hand out or distribute or sell any commercial handbill in any public place. 
(Ord. No. 2792, Part C, § 14, 1-13-76)  
Sec. 10-33. - Same—Throwing on vacant private premises. 
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. 
(Ord. No. 2792, Part C, § 15, 1-13-76)  
Sec. 10-34. - Same—Distributing on private premises. 
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill upon any private premises. 
(Ord. No. 2792, Part C, § 16, 1-13-76)  
Sec. 10-35. - Same—Distributing at inhabited private premises. 
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except by handling or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or upon such private premises; provided, however, unless requested by anyone upon such inhabited private premises not to do so, such person may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places, and except that mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal law or regulations. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
(Ord. No. 2792, Part C, § 17, 1-13-76)  
Sec. 10-36. - Same—Political; handing handbills to drivers. 
The provisions of this article notwithstanding, political handbills or printed matter may be handed out or distributed in public places to individuals who are willing to accept same; provided, however, no handbills of a commercial, political or noncommercial nature may be handed out or distributed to any occupant of a vehicle upon the public streets, whether such vehicle is moving or stopped. Nothing herein contained, shall be construed in any way to deprive any bona fide organization or its members of enjoying and exercising any rights or privileges which they have or may hereafter have, under the provisions of the laws of the state or the laws or constitution of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 2792, Part C, § 18, 1-13-76)  
Sec. 10-37. - Sentence to pick up refuse. 
Any person violating any provision of this article may be penalized as provided in section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances or, in lieu of the fine or imprisonment for violation thereof, the court may sentence the violator to pick up trash or debris along the city streets or alleys or upon publicly owned property in the city for such time as designated by the court and the same shall be performed under the supervision of persons employed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 3350, § 1, 4-14-87; Ord. No. 91-3543, § 1, 8-15-91)  
Secs. 10-38, 10-39. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - JUNK[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Junk dealer records, § 8-189. 
State Law reference— Authority as to junk, R.S. 33:4876; motor vehicles abandoned on public property, R.S. 32:471 et seq. 
 
Sec. 10-40. - Junked, abandoned and nuisance motor vehicles—Definitions. 
Abandoned motor vehicles: A motor vehicle shall be deemed to be abandoned if: 
(1)  It has been left upon a street or highway in violation of a code provision, law or ordinance of the city prohibiting parking; 
(2)  It is left on property owned or operated by the city for longer than twenty-four (24) hours; 
(3)  It is left on private property without the consent of the owner, occupant or lessee thereof for longer than two (2) hours; or 
(4)  It is left on any public street or highway in the city for longer than seven (7) days. 
Junked motor vehicles: A motor vehicle shall be deemed a junked motor vehicle if it does not display a current license plate lawfully upon that vehicle and that: 
(1)  Is partially dismantled or wrecked; 
(2)  Cannot be self-propelled or moved in the manner in which it was originally intended to be moved; or 
(3)  Is more than five (5) years old and appears to be worth less than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
Nuisance motor vehicles: A motor vehicle shall be deemed a nuisance motor vehicle if it is on public or private property, determined and declared to be a health or safety hazard, a public nuisance, including; 
(1)  A breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes, other insects, rats or other pests; 
(2)  A point of heavy growth or weeds or other noxious vegetation over eight (8) inches in height; 
(3)  A point of collection of pools or ponds of water; 
(4)  A point of concentration of quantities of gasoline, oil or other flammable or explosive materials as evidenced by odor; 
(5)  One which has areas of confinement which cannot be operated from the inside, such as trunks, hoods and the like; 
(6)  So situated or located that there is danger of it falling or turning over; 
(7)  One which is a point of collection of garbage, food waste, animal waste or other rotten or putrescible matter of any kind; 
(8)  One which has sharp parts thereof which are jagged or contain sharp edges or metal or glass; 
(9)  Any vehicle specifically declared a health and safety hazard and a public nuisance by the City of Bastrop Alderpersons. 
(Ord. No. 2792, Part D, § 1, 1-13-76; Ord. No. 07-4132, 6-14-07)  
Sec. 10-41. - Storage of junked motor vehicles. 
One junked motor vehicle can be located in the rear yard (behind a structure that is in use as a residence or in use as a place or business if it is entirely concealed from public view from a public street and from abutting premises by acceptable covering. The covering must remain in good repair and must not be allowed deteriorate. Any other junked motor vehicle(s) must be kept in a garage or building structure that provides a complete enclosure so that the junked motor vehicle(s) cannot be seen from a public street or abutting property. 
(Ord. No. 07-4132, 6-14-07) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-4132, adopted June 14, 2007, amended § 10-41 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 10-41, pertained to junk and junked vehicles prohibited; exception, and derived from Ord. No. 2792, Part D, § 2, 1-13-76; Ord. No. 2897, 7-11-78.  
Sec. 10-42. - Deposit of junk or junked vehicles on private or public premises. 
No person shall place, cause to be placed, deposit, leave or dump any junk or junked vehicles on any premises in the city, whether public or private premises, without the consent of the owner or tenant in possession thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2792, Part D, § 4, 1-13-76)  
Sec. 10-43. - Notice to remove junk or junked vehicles. 
The chief of police or the chief's designated representative shall give to the owner of property as determined from the latest assessment rolls, a written notice requiring such person to remove, or cause to be removed, any junk or junked vehicle, which notice shall be posted by registered or certified mail. Such notice shall require the removal to be completed within fifteen (15) days from the date of the letter. 
(Ord. No. 2792, Part D, § 5, 1-13-76) 
State Law reference— Abatement of nuisances, R.S. 13:4711 et seq.  
Sec. 10-44. - Junkyard entrances and exits; wall or fence. 
(a)  Any premises, area or piece or parcel of land licensed and used as a junkyard, shall have not more than two (2) entrances and two (2) exits, each of which shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in width at the perimeter of the premises. 
(b)  Such premises shall be enclosed with a solid nontransparent wall or fence with a minimum height of seven (7) feet from the ground level, excepting for entrances and exits. 
(Ord. No. 2792, Part D, § 3, 1-13-76; Ord. No. 2897, 7-11-78)  
Sec. 10-45. - Judicial determination of violation. 
If the owner or occupant of premises so desires, such owner or occupant may, within such ten-day period after service of notice to abate the nuisance, request of the city clerk, either in person or in writing and without the requirement of bond, that a date and time be set when such owner or occupant may appear before the city court for a trial to determine whether such owner or occupant may appear before the city court for a trial to determine whether such owner or occupant is in violation of this article, and whether or not the location and continued existence of the junk or junked vehicle on such person's property constitutes a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2792, Part D, § 6, 1-13-76)  
Sec. 10-46. - Penalty. 
The owner of the property (premises or motor vehicle) or occupant shall satisfy or abate the conditions associated with junked, abandoned or nuisance motor vehicles, as defined in this chapter, that are cited in written notice issued to the owner or occupant by the city's code enforcement officer or by any law enforcement officer having enforcement duties with the City of Bastrop within fifteen (15) days of receipt or alternatively, appear and show cause if he or she can, at the City Court of Bastrop, Louisiana, 102 East Jefferson Avenue; Bastrop, Louisiana, on a date and at a time provided to the owner or occupant on the face of the notice, why a judgment should not issue, determining that the owner or occupant cited is in violation of this section of the Code of Ordinances and adjudging said owner or occupant financially liable to the City of Bastrop for the cost of removal of junked or abandoned motor vehicles on the premises, and why an order should not be issued to authorize the city to remove junked or abandoned motor vehicles that are situated on the premises, in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2792, Part D, § 7, 1-13-76; Ord. No. 07-4132, 6-14-07)  
Sec. 10-47. - Unsanitary premises generally. 
(a)  The owner or tenant of any property or premises in the city, who shall permit the accumulation of garbage, litter, rubbish, refuse, junk, filthy or offensive matter thereon, shall be deemed guilty of maintaining a nuisance. 
(b)  When such a condition exists in the city, the owner, and/or tenant shall be notified by certified mail advising him of the condition of the premises and giving him five (5) days within which to remove the accumulation of garbage, litter, rubbish, refuse, junk, filthy or offense matter. 
(c)  If the owner, or tenant fails to comply with the notice within five (5) days, the city through the office of the city attorney shall be authorized to file a civil action in the Bastrop City Court ordering the owner, and/or tenant to appear and show cause, if any he can, why he should not be ordered to remove the accumulation of garbage, litter, rubbish, refuse, junk, filthy or offensive matter from the premises. 
(d)  In the event the court orders the owner, and/or tenant to remove the garbage, litter, rubbish, refuse, junk, filthy or offensive matter from the premises and the owner and/or tenant fails to comply with the orders of the court, upon application of the city, the court shall find the owner and/or tenant in contempt of court and in addition to any other penalties prescribed by the court shall grant to the city a judgment sufficient to defray the actual costs to the city for the removal of the accumulated garbage, litter, rubbish, refuse, junk, filthy or offensive mater. 
(Ord. No. 97-3782, § 1, 5-8-97; Ord. No. 07-4123, 2-27-07)  
Secs. 10-48, 10-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - WEEDS AND OBNOXIOUS GROWTH[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Authority as to weeds, § 5(43). 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, Ch. 11. 
 
Sec. 10-50. - Removal required. 
All owners of immovable property situated within the City of Bastrop, Louisiana, shall cut and destroy all weeds or grass or deleterious or unhealthful growth or other obnoxious matter growing, lying or accumulating on said property and/or on any sidewalk abutting the same. Such cutting and removal shall be done as often as necessary throughout the year in order to insure that such property does not constitute a hazard to the health of the citizens of the community. During the period of April 1 through October 1, of each year, cutting and removal shall occur at least twice each month, and as often as may be required throughout the remaining months of the year. 
(Code 1966, § 14-05; Ord. No. 2792, Part B, § 1, 1-13-76; Ord. No. 06-4112, 11-9-06)  
Sec. 10-51. - Notice to owner; failure to comply. 
In the event any owner of any lot, place or area within the limits of the city fails to cut, destroy and remove such weeds, grass or other unhealthful growth or obnoxious matter in the manner required by this article, the city shall, after giving proper notice, charge the owner or owners the actual charge, cost or expense for the cutting, destruction or removal of such noxious weeds or grass or other deleterious, unhealthful or noxious growths. No such work shall be undertaken by the city until the owner of the lot, place or area, where the weeds or growths are to be removed, as shown on the last assessment roll of the city, has an opportunity of doing the work himself within at least five (5) days after notice has been given him by advertisement in the official journal of the city for two (2) consecutive days or after notice has been given him by registered mail, addressed in accordance with the tax rolls of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 14-05; Ord. No. 2792, Part B, § 2, 1-13-76; Ord. No. 90-3492, 6-14-90; Ord. No. 07-4124, 2-27-07)  
Sec. 10-52. - Mailing statement showing expenses incurred; addition to tax liability. 
If after cutting, destruction or removal of such weeds, grass, growth or matter, by the city, after due notice as provided for in section 10-51, the tax collector of the city shall furnish the owner, as shown on the last assessment roll of the city, by certified mail, a written statement showing the cost or expense incurred for the work and the location of the property on which such work was performed. If the statement is not paid within thirty (30) days thereafter, the amount thereof shall be included in and form part of the taxes due by the owner of such property, to the city, and when collected, shall be credited to the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 14-06; Ord. No. 2792, Part B, § 3, 1-13-76) 
State Law reference— Authority, R.S. 33:362(A)(2)(c).  
Chapter 11 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority, § 5(41). 
Cross reference— Interference with medical treatment, § 8-184; litter, § 10-20 et seq.; weeds and other obnoxious growth, § 10-50 et seq.; sewage disposal, § 12-20 et seq. 
State Law reference— Food, R.S. 40:601 et seq.; milk, R.S. 3:4001 et seq.; meat, R.S. 3:4101 et seq.; slaughtering, R.S. 3:4201 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 11-1. - City health officer—Appointment; sanitary code. 
The mayor, with the approval of the governing body, shall appoint a city health officer, who shall be charged with enforcing the sanitary provisions of this chapter, of existing ordinances of the city and of the sanitary code of the state in accordance with R.S. 40:4, as amended, which is hereby adopted insofar as the same is applicable and does not conflict with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 16-01)  
Sec. 11-2. - Same—Duties as to communicable diseases. 
The city health officer shall take all necessary steps to prevent and control communicable diseases. 
(Code 1966, § 16-02)  
Sec. 11-3. - Nuisances generally. 
Whenever any declared nuisance, source of filth, or cause, or probable cause, of sickness shall be found by the city to exist on any private or public property and which affects or may affect the health of the residents in the area, the city shall have the power and authority to order in writing the owner or occupant or user thereof, by appropriate action, at the expense of such owner or occupant or user, to correct and remove such nuisance, source of filth, or cause or probable cause of sickness within twenty-four (24) hours, or within such reasonable time as the city may order. 
(Code 1966, § 16-07) 
Charter reference— Authority, § 7. 
State Law reference— Abatement of nuisances, R.S. 13:4711 et seq.  
Sec. 11-4. - Unnecessary noise—Prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  Unnecessary noise prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others within the corporate limits. 
(b)  Nonexclusive enumeration of unnecessary noise: The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises and noises in violation of this section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
(1)  Horns or signal devices: The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus, streetcar or other vehicle while not in motion, except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control, or if in motion only as a danger signal after or as brakes are being applied and deceleration of the vehicle is intended; the creation by means of any such signal device of any noise for any unreasonable period of time. 
(2)  Radios, phonographs or any musical instrument. The playing of any radio, phonograph, electronic device, or any musical instrument in such manner or with such a volume, particularly between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, hospital, or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or workplace. 
(3)  Yelling, shouting, etc.: Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public street, particularly between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any hospital, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or workplace. 
(4)  Animals, birds, etc.: The keeping of any animal, bird or fowl which by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any person in a dwelling or workplace. 
(5)  Defects in vehicle or load: The use of any automobile, motorcycle, streetcar or vehicle so out of repair or loaded in such a manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise. 
(6)  Steam whistles: The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work, or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon the request of proper authorities. 
(7)  Exhausts: The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle or motorboat engine except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(8)  Construction and repairing of buildings: The erection (including excavating), demolition, alteration or repair of any building in any residential district or section, the excavation of streets or highways in any residential district or section other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, except in case of urgent necessity, in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the chief of police, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days while the emergency continues. If the chief of police should determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and if he shall further determine that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest, he may grant permission for such work to be done within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. upon application being made at the time the permit for the work is awarded or during the progress of the work. 
(9)  Schools, courts, churches, hospitals: The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while the same are in use or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the working of the institution or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in a hospital. 
(10)  Loading, unloading: The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers. 
(11)  Drums, loudspeakers: The use of any drum, loudspeakers or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show or sale or display of merchandise. 
(12)  Loudspeakers on trucks: The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving or standing vehicles for advertising or other purposes. 
(13)  Loudspeakers for advertising: The use or operation, or the causing to be used or operated, in front of or outside of any building, place or premises, or through any window, doorway or opening of a building abutting upon the public street, or upon any public street any device or apparatus for tapping windows, or for amplifying sound from any radio or phonograph, or any sound-producing device. 
(14)  Hawkers, peddlers and vendors: The shouting or crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(15)  Playing of musical instruments: The playing or permitting the playing (by the manager or operator of any establishment in which such playing occurs) of any music or musical instruments, including bands or band instruments, or operating or permitting to be operated (by manager or operator of any establishment in which such operating occurs) any phonograph, radio amplifier, loudspeaker or other device or contrivance producing music or sounds in, on or about any structure, including but not limited to restaurants, drive-ins, cabarets, lounges, bars and residences, which produce sound levels beyond the property line on which such structures are located, at a volume or in a manner so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any person in any office, hospital or in any dwelling, motel, hotel or other type of residence, or workplace. 
(16)  Playing or operating radios, tapeplayers, etc., in or around motor vehicles: The playing or operating of any radio, tapeplayer, CD player, amplifier, loudspeaker or other device or contrivance producing music or other sounds in, on, or about any motor vehicle which produce sound levels beyond that motor vehicle at a volume or in any manner so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any person in another vehicle, or any person in any office, hospital or in any dwelling, motel, hotel or other type of residence, or of any person in a dwelling or workplace. 
(c)  Exceptions: None of the terms or prohibitions hereof shall apply to or be enforced against: 
(1)  Any publicly owned vehicle while engaged upon necessary public business. 
(2)  Excavations or repairs of bridges, streets or highways by or on behalf of any public agency during the night, when the public welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during the day. 
(3)  The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of public addresses which are noncommercial in character, and for which a permit is first obtained from the chief of police. 
(4)  Organized athletic and other events and gatherings conducted on public property, such as school yards and athletic fields, and city recreation fields and areas. 
(5)  Events for which the city has issued a special permit or approval, such as a parade, festival or fair. 
(Code 1966, § 10-154; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82; Ord. No. 99-3870, 4-8-99)  
Sec. 11-5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 99-3870, adopted April 8, 1999, repealed § 11-5 in its entirety. Formerly, § 11-5 pertained to terms and standards for noise levels and derived from the 1989 Code.  
Secs. 11-6—11-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MOSQUITO CONTROL 
 
Sec. 11-20. - Prohibited water collections. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to have, keep, maintain, cause or permit, within the limits of the city, any collection of standing or flowing water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, unless such collection of water is treated so as effectually to prevent such breeding. 
(b)  Any collection of water covered by subsection (a) of this section shall be held to be those contained in ditches, pools, ponds, excavations, holes, depressions, open cesspools, privy vaults, fountains, cisterns, tanks, shallow wells, barrels, troughs (except horse troughs in frequent use), urns, cans, boxes, bottles, tubs, buckets, defective house roof gutters, tanks of flush closets or other similar water containers. 
(Code 1966, § 16-20)  
Sec. 11-21. - Method of treatment of water. 
The methods of treatment of any collection of water directed toward the prevention of breeding of mosquitoes, shall be approved by the parish health officer, and may be any one (1) or more of the following: 
(1)  Screening with wire netting of at least sixteen (16) meshes to the inch each way or with any other material which will effectually prevent the ingress or egress of mosquitoes. 
(2)  Complete emptying every seven (7) days of unscreened containers, together with their thorough drying or cleaning. 
(3)  Using a larvacide approved and applied under the direction of the parish health officer. 
(4)  Cleaning and keeping sufficiently free of vegetable growth and other obstructions, and stocking with mosquito-destroying fish. 
(5)  Filling or draining to the satisfaction of the parish health officer. 
(6)  Proper disposal, by removal or destruction, of tin cans, tin boxes, broken or empty bottles and similar articles likely to hold water. 
(Code 1966, § 16-21)  
Sec. 11-22. - Failure to prevent mosquito breeding. 
(a)  The natural presence of mosquito larvae in standing or running water shall be evidence that mosquitoes are breeding there, and failure to prevent such breeding within three (3) days after notice by the parish health officer shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(b)  Should the person responsible for conditions giving rise to the breeding of mosquitoes fail or refuse to take necessary measures to prevent the same, within three (3) days after the due notice has been given to such person, the parish health officer is hereby authorized to do so, and all necessary costs incurred for this purpose shall be a charge against the property owner or other person offending as the case may be. 
(Code 1966, § 16-22)  
Sec. 11-23. - Duties of health officer. 
For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, the parish health officer, or duly accredited agent, acting under such officer's authority, may at all reasonable times enter in and upon any premises within the city; and any person charged with any of the duties imposed by this article failing, with the time designated by this article, or within the time stated in the notice of the health officer, as the case may be, to perform such duties, or to carry out the necessary measures to the satisfaction of the health officer, shall be deemed guilty of a separate violation of this article. 
(Code 1966, § 16-23)  
Secs. 11-24—11-29. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SMOKEFREE AIR LAW OF BASTROP, LOUISIANA  
DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 11-30. - Purpose. 
(a)  The City of Monroe, Louisiana hereby finds and declares that: 
(1)  The U.S. Surgeon General, National Research Council, and National Academy of Sciences, report that environmental tobacco smoke causes lung cancer in healthy adult nonsmokers, and can cause lung function and structure alteration to the fetus of pregnant nonsmoking women. Additionally, in utero exposure is known to predispose children to long-term pulmonary risks. Further, these agencies found, separating smokers and nonsmokers within the same air space may reduce but does not eliminate a nonsmoker's exposure to environmental tobacco smoke. 
(2)  The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) finds that environmental tobacco smoke is a Group A Carcinogen - a category reserved for known cancer-causing agents in humans. 
(3)  The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH): 
a.  Finds that secondhand smoke poses an increased risk of lung cancer and, possibly, heart disease to people exposed in the worksite, 
b.  Recommends that nonsmokers should not be exposed to secondhand smoke, and 
c.  Indicates the simple separation of smokers and nonsmokers within the same air space may reduce, but does not eliminate, the exposure of nonsmokers to secondhand smoke. 
(b)  These studies find that tobacco smoke is a major contributor to indoor air pollution, and that breathing secondhand smoke is a cause of disease, including cancer, heart disease and stroke in nonsmokers. At special risk are infants, children, teens, pregnant women, elderly people, nonsmokers with long-term exposure to secondhand smoke, individuals with cardiovascular disease, and individuals with impaired respiratory function, including the young, asthmatics and those with obstructive airway disease. Also harmed are those with health conditions induced by breathing secondhand smoke including asthma, lung cancer, heart disease, respiratory infection, decreased respiratory function, including bronchoconstriction and broncho-spasm. 
(c)  Accordingly, the City of Bastrop finds and declares that the purpose of this regulation is to protect the public health and welfare by regulating smoking in public places and places of employment and recreation. It is further determined that it is in the best interest of the people of this city to protect nonsmokers from involuntary exposure to secondhand smoke in most indoor areas open to the public, public meetings, restaurants and places of employment. 
The city council further adopts the Louisiana Legislature's finding that a balance should be struck between the health concerns of nonconsumers of tobacco products and the need to minimize unwarranted governmental intrusion into and the regulation of private spheres of conduct and choice with respect to the use or nonuse of tobacco products in certain designated public areas and in private places. Thus, the city council hereby declares that the purpose of this law is to preserve and improve the health, comfort and environment of the people of this city by limiting exposure to tobacco smoke. 
(Ord. No. 07-4122, 6-14-07)  
Sec. 11-31. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this regulation, shall be construed as defined in this section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Bar means a business that holds a state-issued class A-general retail permit and/or the primary purpose of such business is to serve alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of those beverages, including but not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges, and cabarets. 
Business means any corporation, sole proprietorship, partnership, limited partnership, professional corporation, enterprise, franchise, association, trust, joint venture, or other entity. 
Department means the department of health and hospitals. 
Employer means an individual or a business that employs one or more individuals. 
Enclosed area means all space between a floor and ceiling that is enclosed on all sides by solid walls or windows, exclusive of doorways, which extends from the floor to the ceiling. 
Local governing authority means a municipal or parish governing authority. 
Place of employment means an area under the control of an employer that employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, meeting rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias, hallways, and vehicles. A private residence is not a place of employment unless it is used as a licensed child care, adult day care, or health care facility. 
Public building means any building owned or operated by any of the following: 
(a)  The state, including the legislative, executive, and judicial branches of state government. 
(b)  Any parish, city, or town, or instrumentality thereof, or any other political subdivision of the state, special district, authority, commission, or agency. 
(c)  Any other separate corporate instrumentality or entity of state or local government. 
Public place means an enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted which is not a public building, including but not limited to banks, educational facilities, healthcare facilities, hotel and motel lobbies, laundromats, public transportation facilities, reception areas, restaurants, retail food production and marketing establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores, shopping malls, sports arenas, theaters, waiting rooms and those portions of public parks that include seating, stadium seating, bleachers, dug-outs, locker rooms and any building or structure situated thereon that is used for assembly or seating. 
Restaurant means an eating establishment, including but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and school cafeterias, which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, as well as kitchens and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. The term "restaurant" shall include a bar located within a restaurant. 
Retail tobacco business means a business utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is incidental. 
School means any elementary or secondary school building, the campus of any school, any buildings on the campus, and all school buses. 
Secondhand smoke means smoke emitted from lighted, smoldering, or burning tobacco when the smoker is not inhaling, smoke emitted at the mouthpiece during puff drawing, and smoke exhaled by the smoker. 
Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning, carrying, or possessing any lighted tobacco product, including cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, and any other lighted combustible plant material. 
(Ord. No. 07-4122, 6-14-07)  
Sec. 11-32. - Effectiveness. 
This chapter shall become effective on March 14, 2007. 
(Ord. No. 07-4122, 6-14-07)  
Sec. 11-33. - Severability. 
If any provision of this article or application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid by any court, other provisions or applications of the article which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application shall not be affected, and to this end the provisions of this article are declared to be severable. 
(Ord. No. 07-4122, 6-14-07)  
Secs. 11-34—11-38. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PROHIBITIONS AND EXEMPTIONS 
 
Sec. 11-39. - General smoking prohibitions; exemptions. 
(a)  Except as permitted by subsection (b) of this section, no person shall: 
(1)  Smoke in any public building. 
(2)  Smoke in any school. 
(3)  Smoke in any public place and in any enclosed area within a place of employment. 
(4)  As an employer, knowingly permit smoking in any enclosed area within a place of employment. 
(5)  Use tobacco products in public parks. 
(b)  Nothing in this part shall prohibit smoking in any of the following places: 
(1)  Private homes, private residences, and private automobiles; except that this subsection shall not apply if any such home, residence, or vehicle is being used for child care or day care or if a private vehicle is being used for the public transportation of children or as part of health care or day care transportation in which case smoking is prohibited. 
(2)  Limousines under private hire. 
(3)  A hotel or motel room designated as a smoking room and rented to a guest; provided that a maximum of fifty percent of the hotel rooms, at the discretion of the hotel owner or general manager, available for rent to guests in a hotel or motel may be designated as smoking rooms. 
(4)  Any retail tobacco business. 
(5)  Any bar. 
(6)  The outdoor area of places of employment; except that the owner or manager of such business may post signs prohibiting smoking in any such outdoor area, which shall have the effect of making that outdoor area an area in which smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this division. 
(7)  Private and semiprivate rooms or apartments in assisted living residences, and other long-term care facilities that are occupied by one (1) or more persons, who are all smokers and who have requested in writing to be placed in a room where smoking is permitted; provided that smoke from such rooms or apartments does not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this division. 
(8)  Designated smoking areas in which gaming operations are permitted to occur upon a riverboat, at the official gaming establishment, at a facility licensed for the operation of electronic video draw poker devices, at an eligible facility licensed for the operation of slot machines, by a licensed charitable organization, or at a pari-mutuel wagering facility or off-track wagering facility which is licensed for operation and regulated under the provisions of R.S. Tit. 4, Chs. 4 and 11 and R.S. Tit. 27, Chs. 4, 5, 6, and 7, or any other gaming operations authorized by law, except that smoking shall be prohibited in all restaurants, including snack bars and any other type of eating area whether or not such area is separated from the gaming area, that are located within the facilities where gaming operations are conducted regardless of any type of license issued relevant to the operation of the restaurant. 
(9)  All workplaces of any manufacturer, importer, wholesaler or distributor of tobacco products, of any tobacco leaf dealer or processor, and all tobacco storage facilities. 
(10)  Convention facilities during the time such facilities are being used for professional meetings and tradeshows which are not open to the public that are produced or organized by tobacco businesses or convenience store associations where tobacco products are displayed and limited to the location of such meetings or shows and during the time such facilities are used by a carnival organization, traditionally known as a krewe or a courir de Mardi Gras for the purpose of the conduct of a Mardi Grass ball and limited to the location of such ball. 
(11)  Designated and well ventilated smoking rooms in nursing homes which permit smoking. 
(12)  A hotel or motel room operated by a casino or gaming operation which is rented to a guest. 
(13)  An outdoor patio, whether or not food is served. 
(14)  Any state, local, or private correctional facility prior to August 15, 2009. After August 15, 2009, smoking shall be prohibited in any state, local, or private correctional facility. 
(c)  An individual, person, entity, or business subject to the smoking prohibitions of this section shall not discriminate or retaliate in any manner against a person for making a complaint regarding a violation of this section or for furnishing information concerning a violation to an enforcement authority. 
(Ord. No. 07-4122, 6-14-07; Ord. No. 11-4202, 8-11-11)  
Sec. 11-40. - Prohibition of smoking near entrances, windows and ventilation systems. 
(a)  Smoking shall be prohibited near entrances, windows and ventilation systems of all worksites and public places where smoking is prohibited by this regulation. Any individual who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls the use of any premises subject to jurisdiction under this regulation shall establish a no-smoking area which extends at least fifteen (15) feet from any entrances, windows and ventilation systems to any enclosed areas where smoking is prohibited to insure that persons entering or leaving the building or facility shall not be subjected to breathing tobacco smoke and to insure that tobacco smoke does not enter the building of facility through entrances, windows, ventilation systems or any other means. 
(b)  All smoking trash receptacles shall be placed outside the no-smoking area in order to discourage smoking in these areas. 
(Ord. No. 07-4122, 6-14-07)  
Secs. 11-41—11-43. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PENALTIES AND RULES AND REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 11-44. - Notice of prohibition of smoking. 
(a)  "No smoking" signs or the international "No smoking" symbol consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it shall be clearly and conspicuously posted by the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control in every public building, public place, and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this division. 
(b)  The owner, operator, manager, or other person in control shall remove all ashtrays from any area where smoking is prohibited by this division. 
(c)  The department of health and hospitals may treat a violation of this section as a deficiency to be assessed against any licensee or facility over which it has statutory jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 07-4122, 6-14-07)  
Sec. 11-45. - Enforcement; penalties. 
(a)  Enforcement of this regulation shall be implemented by the Bastrop Police Department, with the prosecution by the city prosecutor's office in the jurisdiction of the Monroe City Court or other court of competent jurisdiction. The police officers are empowered to issue citations and to arrest persons violating any provisions of this chapter, if arrest is warranted. 
All enforcement officers shall serve and execute all warrants, citations and other process issued by the courts in enforcing the provisions of this chapter. In addition, mailing by certified mail of such process to an alleged violator's last place of residence shall be deemed as personal service upon the person charged. 
(b)  Notice of the provisions set forth in this regulation shall be given to all applicants for an occupational license in the City of Bastrop. 
(c)  Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this chapter may initiate enforcement through the Bastrop Police Department. 
(d)  The Bastrop Police Department shall require, while an establishment is undergoing otherwise mandated inspections, a "self-certification" from the owner, manager, operator or other person having control of such establishment that all requirements of this regulation have been satisfied. 
(e)  Any owner, manager, operator or employee of any establishment regulated by this regulation shall inform persons who are violating this regulation of the appropriate provisions thereof. 
(f)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this regulation, a private citizen may bring legal action to enforce this regulation. 
(g)  (1)  Any violation of any prohibition in section 11-30 et seq. may be cited by any law enforcement officer by the issuance of a citation and summons to appear before a court of proper jurisdiction. 
(2)  Such citations shall be in a form such that there shall be retained in each book of citations a receipt and each shall have a copy to be deposited by the law enforcement officer with a court having jurisdiction over the alleged offense. 
(3)  Upon the deposit of the copy, the court shall notify the alleged violator of the time and place of his hearing or of his opportunity to plead guilty by the payment of his specified fine. Failure to appear, unless the fine is paid, may be punished within the discretion of the court as contempt of court. 
(h)(1)  a.  Any person who is guilty of a violation of the prohibition in section 11-39 (a)(1), (2) or (3) shall, upon a first offense, be fined twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
b.  Any person who is guilty of violating such prohibition a second time shall be fined fifty dollars ($50.00). 
c.  Any person who is guilty of violating such prohibition a third or subsequent time shall be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(2)  a.  Any employer who is guilty of a violation of the prohibition in section 11-39(a)(4) or 11-39(c) shall, upon a first offense, be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
b.  Any employer who is guilty of violating such prohibition a second time shall be fined two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
c.  Any employer who is guilty of violating such prohibition a third or subsequent time shall be fined five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(d)  Each day on which a violation of this section occurs shall be considered a separate and distinct violation. 
(Ord. No. 07-4122, 6-14-07)  
Sec. 11-46. - Citation. 
The person shall be cited for the offense by means of a citation, summons, or other means provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 07-4122, 6-14-07)  
Sec. 11-47. - Service of citation. 
(a)  A citation shall be served personally upon the alleged violator. The original citation shall be signed by the issuing official who shall affirm the truth of the facts set forth therein. 
(b)  The original and all copies of a citation shall constitute a business record of the city and shall constitute prima facie evidence that the citation was issued and that an attempt at service thereof was made in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 07-4122, 6-14-07)  
Sec. 11-48. - Guilt. 
A person may be found guilty and fined under this chapter although the commission of the offense did not occur in the presence of a law enforcement officer if the evidence presented to the court establishes that the defendant has committed the offense. 
(Ord. No. 07-4122, 6-14-07)  
Sec. 11-49. - Occurrence. 
For the purposes of this chapter, each occurrence shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 07-4122, 6-14-07)  
Sec. 11-50. - Burden of proof. 
In the criminal trial of a person charged with violating this chapter, the alleged violator has the burden of proving that he did not violate any portion of this chapter at the time he was cited. 
(Ord. No. 07-4122, 6-14-07)  
Sec. 11-51. - Disposition of citation. 
(a)  The original citation shall be signed by the issuing official, and shall be processed in accordance with this division and such other procedures as may be established and promulgated by the City of Monroe. 
(b)  A citation may be dismissed by the city attorney, or his designee, only upon his written statement for good cause shown, which statement shall be made a part of the disposition record thereof. 
(Ord. No. 07-4122, 6-14-07)  
Sec. 11-52. - Citation as legal demand and prima facie evidence. 
The original citation or any true copy thereof shall constitute an ordinary business record of the city and prima facie evidence of the facts contained therein. 
(Ord. No. 07-4122, 6-14-07)  
Sec. 11-53. - Other enforcement. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this regulation, an employee or a private citizen may bring legal action to enforce this regulation. 
(Ord. No. 07-4122, 6-14-07)  
Sec. 11-54. - Other applicable laws. 
This regulation shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 07-4122, 6-14-07)  
Secs. 11-55—11-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - EDUCATION AND FUND DISTRIBUTION 
 
Sec. 11-61. - Public education. 
The City of Bastrop may engage in a continuing program to explain and clarify the purposes and requirements of this regulation to citizens affected by it, and to guide owners, operators and managers in their compliance with it. Such program may include publication of a brochure for affected businesses and individuals explaining the provisions of this regulation. 
(Ord. No. 07-4122, 6-14-07)  
Sec. 11-62. - Governmental agency cooperation. 
The Mayor of the City of Bastrop shall annually request other governmental and educational agencies having facilities within the City of Bastrop to establish local operating procedures in cooperation and compliance with this chapter. This includes urging all federal, state, city and school district agencies to update their existing smoking control regulations to be consistent with the current health findings regarding secondhand smoke. 
(Ord. No. 07-4122, 6-14-07)  
Sec. 11-63. - Voluntary restrictions. 
Although not required by this chapter, the City of Bastrop may encourage facilities that may be exempt herefrom, to consider imposing voluntary restrictions on smoking at their respective facilities, as allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 07-4122, 6-14-07)  
Sec. 11-64. - Tobacco control program fund. 
(a)  One-half of all fines imposed and collected pursuant to this part shall be transmitted to the office of public health in the department of health and hospitals and shall be deposited by such office in a special fund established in the state treasury known as the tobacco control program fund, hereinafter referred to as "the fund" as provided in this section. 
(b)  The total amount of monies in the fund shall annually be appropriated to the office of public health to be used by such office solely for the purpose of funding the efforts of the office of public health in the tobacco control program. 
(Ord. No. 07-4122, 6-14-07)  
Chapter 11.5 - HISTORICAL PRESERVATION  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 11.5-1—11.5-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 11.5-21. - Commission established. 
There is hereby created a commission to be known as the Historic District Commission of the City of Bastrop, Louisiana. 
(Ord. No. 99-3872, § 1, 6-10-99)  
Sec. 11.5-22. - Recommendations and appointment of members. 
The commission shall consist of seven (7) members, a majority of whom shall reside in the city, and shall be appointed by the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 99-3872, § 1, 6-10-99; Ord. No. 99-3897, § I, 10-25-99)  
Sec. 11.5-23. - Term; vacancies. 
Each of the members of the commission shall be appointed for a term of four (4) years. The chairman shall be elected by the members of the commission. Whenever the term of a member of the commission expires, the mayor shall appoint his successor. The members may serve consecutive terms. The first commission shall have staggered terms: one (1) with one-year term, two (2) with two-year terms, two (2) with three-year terms, and two (2) with four-year terms. All commission members shall have a demonstrated knowledge of or interest, competence, or expertise in historic preservation. The commission shall seek the advice, as needed, of professionals in the related disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, or archaeology, etc. 
(Ord. No. 99-3872, § 1, 6-10-99)  
Sec. 11.5-24. - Administration and committees. 
The building inspector of the City of Bastrop, Louisiana, will serve as advisor to the commission and will act as liaison between the commission and the office of the mayor. Nominal expenses necessary to carry out the duties of the commission will be budgeted through the general fund of the City of Bastrop, Louisiana. The recording secretary for the commission will be designated by the city clerk and all files, records, and minutes of the commission will be maintained by the city clerk's office. The city civil attorney shall be the ex officio attorney for the commission. The commission may designate and appoint, from among its members, various committees with such powers and duties as the commission may have and prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 99-3872, § 1, 6-10-99)  
Sec. 11.5-25. - Rules, regulations and guidelines; meetings; reports and recommendations. 
The commission shall make such rules and regulations as it may deem advisable and necessary for the conduct of its affairs that are not inconsistent with the laws of the city and state. The commission shall meet at least four (4) times per calendar year, on a quarterly basis. The commission may schedule such additional meetings as may be necessary, on the written request of any of the seven (7) members, on the call of the chairman of the commission, or on the request of the mayor. The commission shall make quarterly reports to the mayor and the board of alderpersons containing a statement of its activities. Copies of the rules, regulations and guidelines are available at the Bastrop Historic District Commission office. 
(Ord. No. 99-3872, § 1, 6-10-99; Ord. No. 08-4164, 4-10-08)  
Sec. 11.5-26. - Purpose. 
The Bastrop Historic District Commission shall have for its purpose the preservation and stewardship of all structures in the designated historic district of the city. The commission shall have for its further purpose the guardianship of those structures which have architectural and historical value and which should be preserved for the benefit of the people of the city and state. 
(Ord. No. 99-3872, § 1, 6-10-99)  
Sec. 11.5-27. - Definition of historic district. 
The following area of the City of Bastrop, Louisiana, is hereby designated as the "Bastrop Historic District," to wit: 
The eight-block downtown area of Bastrop, Louisiana, containing the Morehouse Parish Courthouse (the "courthouse square"), and the one-block areas immediately adjacent and to the northwest, north, northeast, west, east, southwest, and south of said courthouse square. 
(Ord. No. 99-3872, § 1, 6-10-99)  
Sec. 11.5-28. - Submission of plans to commission for exterior changes. 
(a)  The owner of any property within the historic district shall apply for a permit or certificate of appropriateness from the commission before the commencement of any work in: 
(1)  The erection of any new building or other construction in the Bastrop Historic District; or 
(2)  The alteration or addition to any existing structure in the Bastrop Historic District; or 
(3)  The painting, repairing or demolishing of any existing building situated within the Bastrop Historic District; or 
(4)  The relocation of any building into or out of the Bastrop Historic District. 
(b)  The application therefore shall be made to the commission, accompanied by the full plans and specifications thereof so far as they relate to the proposed appearance, color, texture or materials and architectural design of the exterior, including the front, sides, rear and roof of such buildings, alterations, or addition of any building or outbuilding, party wall, courtyard, sidewalk, driveway, parking area, fence or other dependency thereof. 
(c)  Where, by reason of topographical conditions, irregularly shaped lots, or because of unusual circumstance applicable solely to the particular applicant, strict enforcement of the provisions of this article would result in serious undue hardship peculiarly affecting said applicant, then the commission, in passing upon his applications, shall have the power to vary or modify adherence to this article provided always that its requirements insure harmony with the general purposes hereof, and will not adversely affect the historic district as a whole. 
(Ord. No. 99-3872, § 1, 6-10-99)  
Sec. 11.5-29. - Commission recommendations and action thereon. 
The Bastrop Historic District Commission shall, upon due consideration, render its decision concerning the approval or disapproval of the issuance of the permit, which may include such changes, if any, as in its judgement are reasonably necessary to comply with the requirements of this article, and send its decision, in writing, to the applicant and the building inspector. If the permit is approved, the building inspector shall promptly issue a permit for such work in conformance with the commission's decision. 
(Ord. No. 99-3872, § 1, 6-10-99)  
Sec. 11.5-30. - Appeals. 
Any person or persons aggrieved by any decision, act or proceedings of the Bastrop Historical District Commission shall have a right to apply in writing to the board of aldermen for reversal or modification thereof; and the mayor, or presiding officer of the board of aldermen, shall have the right to stay all further action until the board of aldermen shall have had an opportunity to rule thereon, any such appeal shall be taken in ten (10) days from date of the written decision, and the board of aldermen may consider said appeal at its next general or special meeting, but, in any event, not more than forty-five (45) days thereafter. The board of aldermen may affirm a decision of the Bastrop Historic District Commission by majority vote of all its members. The board of aldermen shall have the right to reverse, change or modify any decision of the Bastrop Historic District Commission by majority vote of all its members. 
Any person or person aggrieved by any decision of the board of aldermen affecting such historic district shall have the right to file a civil suit within thirty (30) days from date of decision in a court of competent jurisdiction under the usual rules governing same, with the right to stay order and injunctive relief provided the situation warrants it. 
(Ord. No. 99-3872, § 1, 6-10-99)  
Sec. 11.5-31. - Injunctions. 
Whenever any person has engaged in or is about to engage in any act or practice which constitutes or will constitute a violation of this article, the commission may make application to the appropriate court for an order enjoining such act or practice, or requiring such person to refrain from such prospective violation or to remedy such violation by restoring the affected property to its previous condition. Upon a showing by the commission or the city that such person has engaged or is about to engage in such act or practice, a permanent or temporary injunction, temporary restraining order, or other appropriate order shall he granted without bond. 
(Ord. No. 99-3872, § 1, 6-10-99)  
Sec. 11.5-32. - Penalties. 
Any owner, agent, lessee or other person acting for or in conjunction with him, who shall violate the Bastrop Historic District Ordinance or low or rules, regulations or decisions of the commission, shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each infraction. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate infraction. 
(Ord. No. 99-3872, § 1, 6-10-99)  
Sec. 11.5-33. - Stopping work commenced without permit. 
The building inspector shall promptly stop any work attempted to be done without or contrary to a permit issued under this article or engaged in such violation. Any officer or authorized agent of the commission shall exercise concurrent or independent powers with the building inspector in prosecuting violations of this article and stopping work attempted to be done without or contrary to the permits reported by the ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 99-3872, § 1, 6-10-99)  
Sec. 11.5-34. - Provisions of ordinance prevail in case of conflict. 
The provisions for new construction in the Bastrop Historic District shall govern and take precedence over any ordinance or codes of the City of Bastrop, Louisiana. 
(Ord. No. 99-3872, § 1, 6-10-99)  
Sec. 11.5-35. - New construction. 
Proposals for new construction in the Bastrop Historic District should seek compatibility with existing structures through the appropriate use of site planning, materials, decorative details, architectural elements, and scale. A proposal should not draw unnecessary attention to itself in any one of these characteristics. However, a proposal should not duplicate or copy historic styles and periods. The architectural context is of primary concern. 
(1)  Scale: The relationship of the building and its elements (including doors and windows) to other structures in the district. It is important in considering scale, that a careful study be made of the height, width, and mass of buildings in the immediate neighborhood and district as a whole. This study should serve to confirm or deny the appropriateness of the height, width, and mass of the proposed building. Maximum height of any new structure shall conform to "The Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties with Guidelines for Preserving, Rehabilitating, Restoring & Reconstructing Historic Buildings." In no case shall a new structure exceed a height of seventy-five (75) feet above the street. 
(2)  Siting: The positioning of a building on a lot. This process includes determining the setback of a building, the spacing of this building from adjacent buildings, and the location of the walls, fences, walks, drives, and landscaping, if any of these are used in the overall design. 
(3)  Materials: The surface building fabric which contributes to the exterior character and appearance of a building. 
(4)  Decorative details: Ornamentation or embellishment. These include cornices, lintels, arches, balustrades, chimneys, shutters, columns, and other common details. When used, details should create a unifying effect on a building and should be compatible with the context of the neighborhood. 
(5)  Architectural elements: Parts of a building that are integral to its composition. These include balconies, roofs, porches, chimneys, dormers, parapets, and other parts of a building that contribute to its overall shape and silhouette. The choice and arrangement of elements in a proposed building should reflect those of other buildings in the neighborhood. The building should not draw unnecessary attention to itself buy failing to relate to neighboring styles. But neither should it copy these styles. The object is to compliment the context of the Bastrop Historical District. 
The Bastrop Historic District Commission shall follow "The Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties with Guidelines for Preserving, Rehabilitating, Restoring & Reconstructing Historic Buildings" in considering all proposals for new construction and/or rehabilitation. 
(Ord. No. 99-3872, § 1, 6-10-99)  
Sec. 11.5-36. - Fences. 
Fence design must be in harmony with the nature of the district. 
The following fencing materials are not acceptable: barbed wire, chainlink, concrete block, stockade, plywood, hardboard, or asbestos board. 
(Ord. No. 99-3872, § 1, 6-10-99)  
Sec. 11.5-37. - Floodlights. 
The Bastrop Historic District shall not be illuminated by privately controlled floodlights or other illumination except as approved by the historic district commission or as permitted specifically by this article. 
(Ord. No. 99-3872, § 1, 6-10-99)  
Sec. 11.5-38. - Overhanging balconies. 
No overhanging balconies or galleries may be removed, but new or additional balconies may be erected if they conform to the distinctive architecture of the Bastrop Historic District. The permit for all such new construction or any renovation shall be subject to the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 99-3872, § 1, 6-10-99)  
Sec 11.5-39. - Signs. 
(a)  Definitions: 
Display includes erect, paint, repaint, place, replace, hang, rehang, repair, maintain paint directly upon a building or other structure, inlay, embed in, or otherwise exhibit in public view. 
Sidewalk signs are portable signs upon which messages are placed to catch the attention of customers passing a merchant's place of business by foot or automobile. The signs may be of the "sandwich board type" or "single standard type" with a weighted base. 
Sign shall include any symbol, device, image, poster, flag, banner, billboards, design or directional sign used for advertising purposes, whether painted upon, attached to, erected on, or otherwise maintained on any premises containing any words, letters, or parts of letters, figures, numerals, phrases, sentences, emblems, devices trade names or trade marks by which anything is made known, such as are used to designate an individual, a firm, an association, a corporation, a profession, a business or a commodity or product, which is visible from any public street and is used to attract attention. 
(b)  Signs must conform to character of section. In addition to the prohibitions contained in this section, approval of the display of a sign in the Bastrop Historic District of the city shall be granted by the commission only when such signs and the plans therefor, so far as they relate to the appearance, color, size, position, method of attachment, texture of materials and design, conform to the quaint and distinctive character of the Bastrop Historic District or do not injuriously affect it or impair the value to the community of those buildings having architectural or historical worth. 
(c)  No signs to be displayed in certain places. No sign shall be displayed from the parapet or roofs of any buildings in the historic district. No sign shall be displayed or placed in any manner whatsoever so as to disfigure or conceal any significant architectural feature or detail of any building. 
(d)  What signs may advertise. No sign shall be displayed in the Bastrop Historic District unless such sign advertises a bona fide business conducted in or on the premises and, if it does so, no more than fifty (50) percent of the area of such sign may be used to advertise products or commodities actually sold on the premises. This is exclusive of any preexisting, historic/"ghost" signs. 
(e)  Number of primary signs. In general, one primary sign is allowed to each store, shop, or bona fide place of business, and this sign shall be no larger than the maximum stipulated in this article. 
(1)  In the case of a business operated on a corner lot that faces two streets, one primary sign on each street is allowed and shall be regulated as if each side were a separate storefront. 
(2)  In the case of a single sign being inappropriate, multiple primary signs may be used, the total face area of which may not exceed the maximum size stipulated in this article. 
(f)  Surface area of signs. The surface area of any sign shall be in direct proportion to the amount of front footage of each ownership and shall be as follows: 
(1)  For single faced signs, attached flat against the wall and including painted wall signs there shall be allowed one hundred forty-four (144) square inches of sign surface to each foot of building frontage. 
(2)  For double faced signs, suspended by brackets or arms perpendicularly from the wall of a building, the surface area shall be the sum of the area of each face not to exceed thirty (30) square inches of sign surface area to each foot of lot frontage. 
(3)  In the case of multiple businesses operating at a single location, the total face area of signage may be increased to one and one-half (1½) times the maximum stipulated in this article. 
(g)  Secondary signs. In addition to the primary sign(s) referred to in section 11.5-239(e), small secondary signs may be used to identify the following: 
(1)  Entrance doors 
(2)  Operating hours 
(3)  Temporary signs 
(h)  Temporary signs. Temporary signs of a promotional nature may be placed on the interior of store windows. In no case may they remain longer than sixty days. A permit is not required for the placement of a temporary sign. Temporary signs may be placed on the exterior of a building for the following special situations: 
(1)  For the identity of real estate for sale. 
(2)  For political advertisement. Except for signs larger than two (2) feet by two (2) feet yard sign, no application is required. 
(3)  For promotion by nonprofit organizations. In no case may these signs exceed the size limitations of this article. 
(i)  Portable and changeable letter signs. No portable or changeable letter signs may be erected or allowed to remain within the Bastrop Historic District. 
(j)  Illuminated signs. No illuminated signs may be constructed or erected within the Bastrop Historic District without the express approval of the historic district commission. 
(1)  Concealed lighting is recommended. Bulbs may not be exposed. The light should enhance the sign as well as the building on which it is mounted. 
(2)  Internally illuminated signs are not permitted. 
(3)  Flashing, or intermittent signs (exclusive of historic signs) are not permitted. 
(k)  Signs no longer complying as to advertisement to be taken down. Any sign displayed which no longer advertises a bona fide business (exclusive of historic or "ghost" signs) conducted upon the premises shall, upon notification by the Bastrop Historic District Commission or its agent (who is hereby specifically authorized to so proceed), be taken down, removed or obliterated within five (5) days after such notification and failure to so comply on the part of the owner, occupant, agent or person having the beneficial use of any building or premises upon which sign may be found shall subject such person to the penalty provided in section 11.5-232. 
(l)  Building code applicable to signs. All signs under this section shall be further governed by existing regulations of the building code for the city which are not in conflict with this section. 
(m)  Application for signs to be submitted to commission. All applications for permits to display signs within the historic district of the city shall be submitted to the historic district commission office for approval before a permit therefor may be issued in conformity with section 11.5-229. 
(n)  Form of application to display signs; accompanying drawings. Application for a permit to display signs in the historic district of the city shall be made to the commission upon forms furnished by the commission. Such an application shall also be accompanied by sketches and drawings in triplicate showing details of construction and foundation when required by the building code of the city and shall delineate the size, shape, design, coloring, lighting, and position in relation to the building from or upon which it shall be displayed. 
(o)  [Sidewalk signs.] No more than one (1) sidewalk sign per business is allowed and it must conform to the following: 
(1)  Size: That portion of a sidewalk sign that bears a message shall be no more than one thousand two hundred (1,200) square inches. The height of the sign may not exceed seventy (70) inches. The depth of the sign will not exceed more than twenty-four (24) inches at the base, which will be the maximum depth of the sign. 
(2)  Message area materials: The message portion of a sidewalk sign shall not exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) square inches, and be made of black board or white board for hand written signs. Preprinted signs that are attached to the sign holder must be professionally printed. Printed signs may be on paper, plastic, vinyl or metal. No fluorescent colors are permitted as a sign background or lettering. 
(3)  Sign construction: Sidewalk signs of the standard type or sandwich type may be purchased or constructed and deemed acceptable for use, provided that they are consistent with the requirements of this section. Constructed signs may be fabricated from metals, including aluminum, mill finished or colored, welded iron, or wood frames with the approved message area sign materials. All constructed signs must be well built of sturdy materials, and neatly finished with a weatherproof material, stain, or paint. 
(4)  Safety considerations: Sidewalk signs placed on the sidewalk by merchants are the merchant's responsibility. The City of Bastrop, The Friends of Main Street, The Main Street Committee, or the historic committee assume no liability for any injury caused by trips and falls that may be construed as being caused by the use of, placement of, or construction of any sidewalk sign. Should any lawsuit or claim be asserted against the City of Bastrop as a result of injury, damage or loss that is caused by a sidewalk sign, the merchant who places the sign on the sidewalk shall hold harmless and indemnify the City of Bastrop for any loss or expense that it incurs as a result, and shall defend the City of Bastrop against any and all claims. Any merchants that avail themselves of the right to use sidewalk signs under the authority of this section agree to be bound by the foregoing hold harmless, indemnification and defense obligations owed to the City of Bastrop, as defined herein. 
(Ord. No. 99-3872, § 1, 6-10-99; Ord. No. 08-4182, 8-14-08; Ord. No. 09-4188, 2-12-09; Ord. No. 08-4169, 8-14-08; Ord. No. 09-4193, 11-12-09)  
Sec. 11.5-40. - Aerials, antennas, etc., prohibited. 
The construction of aerials, antennas, or satellite dishes of any type within the Bastrop Historic District is prohibited without the express approval of the Bastrop Historic District Commission. 
(Ord. No. 99-3872, § 1, 6-10-99)  
Sec. 11.5-41. - Minimum maintenance requirements. 
In order to insure the protective maintenance of resources, the exterior features of such properties shall be maintained to meet the requirements o the city's minimum housing code and the city's building code. 
(Ord. No. 99-3872, § 1, 6-10-99)  
Sec. 11.5-42. - Demolition by neglect. 
(a)  Any resource which is a landmark and all resources within a preservation district shall be preserved by the owner or such other person or persons as may have the legal custody or control thereof against decay and deterioration and free from unreasonable structural defects. The owner or other person having legal custody and control thereof shall repair such resource if it is found to have one or more of the following defects: 
(1)  Deterioration to the extent that creates or permits a hazardous or unsafe condition as determined by the city building inspector. 
(2)  Deterioration, as determined by the city building inspector, of a building characterized by one or more of the following: 
a.  Those buildings which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and injure persons or property. 
b.  Deteriorated or inadequate foundations. 
c.  Defective or deteriorated floor supports or floor supports insufficient to carry imposed loads with safety. 
d.  Members of walls or other vertical supports that split, lean, list, or buckle due to defective material, workmanship, or deterioration. 
e.  Members of walls or other vertical supports that are insufficient to carry imposed loads with safety. 
f.  Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports, or other horizontal members which sag, split, or buckle due to defective material, workmanship or deterioration. 
g.  Members of ceilings, roof, ceiling and roof supports, or other horizontal members that are insufficient to carry imposed loads with safety. 
h.  Fireplaces or chimneys which list, bulge, or settle due to defective material, workmanship, or deterioration. 
i.  Any fault, defect, or condition in the building which renders the same structurally unsafe or not properly watertight. 
(b)  If the commission makes a preliminary determination that a resource is being demolished by neglect, it shall direct the city building official to notify the owner(s) of the resource of this preliminary determination, stating the reasons therefore, and shall give the owner of record thirty (30) days from the date of mailing of such notice or the posting thereof on the property, whichever comes later, to commence work to correct the specific defects as determined by the commission. Said notice shall be given as follows: 
(1)  By certified mail, restricted delivery, mailed to the last known address of the record owner(s) as listed on the city and/or parish tax rolls. 
(2)  If the above mailing procedure is not successful, notice shall be posted in a conspicuous, protected place on the resource. 
(c)  If the owner(s) fail(s) to commence work within the time allotted as evidenced by a building permit, the commission shall notify the owner(s) in the manner provided above to appear at a public hearing before the commission at a date, time and place to be specified in said notice, which shall be mailed or posted at least thirty (30) days before said hearing. For the purpose of insuring lawful notice, a hearing may be continued to a new date and time. The commission shall receive evidence on the issue of whether the subject resource should be repaired and the owner(s) may present evidence in rebuttal thereto. If, after such hearing, the commission shall determine that the resource is being demolished by neglect, it may direct the city building official to take appropriate action against the owner(s) if the necessary repairs are not completed within ninety (90) days of the determination by the commission that the subject building or structure is being demolished by neglect. 
(Ord. No. 99-3872, § 1, 6-10-99)  
Chapter 12 - MUNICIPAL UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority, § 5(14), (15). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 12-1—12-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - USE OF SANITARY SEWAGE FACILITIES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 12-20. - Purpose and policy. 
This article is a supplement to Ordinance Nos. 3090 of 1981 and 88-3425 of 1988, and sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works for the City of Bastrop and enables the City of Bastrop to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code (U.S.C.) section 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 403). The objectives of this article are: 
(a)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will interfere with its operation; 
(b)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will pass through the publicly owned treatment works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the publicly owned treatment works; 
(c)  To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public; 
(d)  To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the publicly owned treatment works; 
(e)  To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the publicly owned treatment works; and 
(f)  To enable the City of Bastrop to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the publicly owned treatment works is subject. This article shall apply to all users of the publicly owned treatment works. The ordinance authorizes the issuance of individual wastewater discharge permits or general permit; provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 1.1, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-21. - Administration. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, director of the department of wastewater operations shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the director may be delegated by the director to a duly authorized city employee. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 1.2, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-22. - Abbreviations. 
The following abbreviations, when used in this article, shall have the designated meanings: 
BOD—Biochemical oxygen demand 
BMP—Best management practice 
BMR—Baseline monitoring report 
CFR—Code of Federal Regulations 
CIU—Categorical industrial user 
COD—Chemical oxygen demand 
EPA—U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
gpd—gallons per day 
IU—Industrial user 
mg/l—milligrams per liter 
NPDES—National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
NSCIU—Non-significant categorical industrial user 
POTW—Publicly owned treatment works 
RCRA—Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 
SIU—Significant industrial user 
SNC—Significant noncompliance 
TSS—Total suspended solids 
U.S.C.—United States Code 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 1.3, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-23. - Definitions. 
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated: 
Act or "the Act." The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. section 1251 et seq. 
Approval authority. The administrator of the EPA Region VI. 
Authorized or duly authorized representative of the user. 
(1)  If the user is a corporation: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(4)  The individuals described in paragraphs (1) through (3), above, may designate a duly authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to [the City of Bastrop]. 
Biochemical oxygen demand or BOD. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five (5) days at 20 degrees centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l). 
Best management practices or BMPs means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in section 12-24(a) and (b) [40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b)]. BMPs include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
[Note: BMPs also include alternative means (i.e., management plans) of complying with, or in place of certain established categorical pretreatment standards and effluent limits.] 
Building sewer. A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to the public sewer of other point of disposal. 
Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. section 1317) that apply to a specific category of users and that appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405—471. 
Categorical industrial user. An industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard. 
City. The City of Bastrop or the Mayor and Board of Alderman of the City of Bastrop. 
Chemical oxygen demand or COD. A measure of the oxygen required to oxidize all compounds, both organic and inorganic, in water. 
Control authority. The Director of Wastewater Operations for the City of Bastrop, Bastrop, Louisiana. 
Control manhole. A manhole giving access to a building sewer at some point before the building sewer discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer. 
Control point. A point of access to a course of discharge before the discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer. 
Cooling water. The water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
Daily maximum. The arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a pollutant collected during a calendar day. 
Daily maximum limit. The maximum allowable discharge limit of a pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of the day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day. 
Director. The term "director" shall refer to the Superintendant of Sewer, City of Bastrop, Louisiana, who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this article, or his duly authorized representative. 
Environmental Protection Agency or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the regional water management division director, the regional administrator, or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
Existing source. Any source of discharge that is not a "new source." 
Garbage. Animal and vegetable wastes and residue from preparation, cooking and dispensing of food; and from the handling, processing, storage and sale of food products and produce. 
Grab sample. A sample that is taken from a waste stream without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes. 
Holding tank waste. Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum pump tank trucks. 
Indirect discharge or discharge. The introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source. 
Industrial user. A source of indirect discharge which does not constitute a "discharge of pollutants" under regulations issued pursuant to section 402, of the Act. (33 U.S.C. 1342). 
Industrial waste. Waste resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade or business from the development of any natural resource or any mixture of the waste with water or normal wastewater, or distinct from normal wastewater. 
Industrial waste charge. Means the charge made on those persons who discharge industrial wastes into the city's sewerage system. 
Instantaneous limit. The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
Interference. A discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of City of Bastrop's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations; Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act. 
Local limit. Specific discharge limits developed and enforced by the City of Bastrop upon industrial or commercial facilities to implement the general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b). 
Medical waste. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes. 
Milligrams per liter (mg/l). The same as parts per million and is a weight-to-volume ratio; the milligram-per-liter value multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water. 
Monthly average. The sum of all "daily discharges" measured during a calendar month divided by the number of "daily discharges" measured during that month. 
Monthly average limit. The highest allowable average of "daily discharges" over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all "daily discharges" measured during a calendar month divided by the number of "daily discharges" measured during that month. 
National Categorical Pretreatment Standard or pretreatment standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1347) which applies to a specific category of industrial users. 
National Prohibitive Discharge Standard or prohibitive discharge standard. Any Regulation development under the authority of 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR, Section 403.5. 
Natural outlet. Any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or ground water. 
Normal domestic wastewater. Wastewater excluding industrial wastewater discharged by a person into sanitary sewer and in which the average concentration of total suspended solids is not more than two hundred (200) mg/l and BOD is not more than two hundred (200) mg/l. 
New source. 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act that will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
b.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)b. or c. above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
(4)  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite construction program: 
a.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
(5)  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which is intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
National Pollution Discharge Elimination System or NPDES Permit. A permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1342). 
Noncontact cooling water. Water used for cooling that does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
Overload. The imposition of organic or hydraulic loading on a treatment facility in access of its engineered design capacity. 
Pass through. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the City of Bastrop's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
Person. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities. 
pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units. 
Pollution. The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity of water. 
Pollutant. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor). 
Pretreatment or treatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment standards or standards. Pretreatment standards shall mean prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits. 
Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges. Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in section 12-24 of this article. 
Public sewer. Pipe or conduit carrying wastewater or unpolluted drainage in which owners of abutting properties shall have the use, subject to control by the City of Bastrop, Louisiana. 
Publicly owned treatment works or POTW. A treatment works, as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. section 1292), which is owned by City of Bastrop. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances, which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. 
Sanitary sewer. A public sewer that conveys domestic wastewater or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and into which stormwater, surface water, ground water and other unpolluted wastes are not intentionally passed. 
Septic tank waste. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks. 
Sewage. Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.). 
Shall is mandatory; May is permissive. 
Significant industrial user (SIU). 
(1)  Except as provided in paragraphs (3) and (4) of this section [subsections (3) and (4) of the definition of "authorized or duly authorized representative of the use"], a significant industrial user is: 
a.  An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or 
b.  An industrial user that: 
1.  Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blow down wastewater); 
2.  Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five (5) percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
3.  Is designated as such by City of Bastrop on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
Slug load or slug discharge. Any discharge of water, wastewater, or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
State. State of Louisiana. 
Standard industrial classification (SIC). A classification pursuant to the standard industrial classification manual issued by the executive office of the president, office of management and budget. 
Standard methods. The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" as prepared, approved, and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
Storm sewer. A public sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage into which domestic wastewater or industrial wastes are not intentionally passed. 
Stormwater. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt. 
Superintendent. The person designated by the City of Bastrop to supervise the operation of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this article. The term also means a duly authorized representative of the superintendent. 
To discharge. Includes depositing, conducting, draining, emitting, throwing, running, allowing to seep, or otherwise release or dispose of, or to allow, permit, or suffer any of these acts or omissions. 
Trap. A device designed to skim, settle, or otherwise remove grease, oil, sand, flammable wastes or other harmful substances. 
Toxic pollutant. Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under the provision of CWA 307(a) or other Acts. 
Total suspended solids or suspended solids. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and that is removable by laboratory filtering. 
User or industrial user. A source of indirect discharge. 
Unpolluted wastewater. Water containing: 
(1)  No free or emulsified grease or oil; 
(2)  No acids or alkalis; 
(3)  No phenols or other substances producing taste or odor in receiving water; 
(4)  No toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state, or solution; 
(5)  No noxious or otherwise obnoxious or odorous gases; 
(6)  Not more that an insignificant amount in mg/l each of suspended solids and BOD, as determined by the state regulatory agencies; and 
(7)  Color not exceeding fifty (50) units as measured by the Platinum-Cobalt method of determination as specified in standard methods. 
Waste. Rejected, unutilized or superfluous substances in liquid, gaseous, or solid form resulting from domestic, agricultural or industrial wastes. 
Wastewater. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW. 
Wastewater facilities. Includes all facilities for collection, pumping, treatment, and disposing of wastewater and industrial wastes. 
Wastewater treatment plant or treatment plant. That portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste. 
Wastewater service charge. The charge on all users of the public sewer system whose wastes do not exceed in strength the concentration values established as representative of normal domestic wastewater. 
Waters of the state. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof. 
Watercourse. A natural or man-made channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
Wastewater contribution permit. As set forth in section 12-38 of this article. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 1.4, 6-12-14 )  
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 12-24. - Prohibited discharge standards. 
(a)  General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(b)  Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater: 
(1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees F (60 degrees C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. At no time shall two (2) successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system) be more than five (5) percent nor any single reading over the ten (10) percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides and any other substances which the city, the state or EPA has notified the user is a fire hazard or a hazard to the system; 
(2)  Wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or more than 9.5, or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment; 
(3)  Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities such as, but not limited to: grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch (0.5") or 1.27 centimeters (1.27 cm) in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch, manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone, or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, slops, chemical residues, paint residues, septic tank solids, bulk solids, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes; 
(4)  Any pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which a user knows or has a reason to know will cause interference with the POTW. In no case shall a slug load have a flow rate or contain concentration in qualities of pollutants that exceed for any time period longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration, quantities, or flow during normal operation; 
(5)  Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150 degrees F (65 degrees C), or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104 degrees F (40 degrees C); 
(6)  Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; 
(7)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems; 
(8)  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the superintendent in accordance with section 12-36 of this article; 
(9)  Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair; 
(10)  Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the City of Bastrop's NPDES permit; 
(11)  Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the superintendent in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
(12)  Stormwater, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the superintendent; 
(13)  Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes; 
(14)  Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the superintendent in an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit; 
(15)  Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail toxicity test; 
(16)  Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which that might cause excessive foaming in the POTW; 
(17)  Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations greater than one hundred (100) milligrams per liter; 
Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. 
When the superintendent determines that a user is contributing to the POTW, any of the above enumerated substances in such amounts as to be in violation of this section, the superintendent shall: (1) advise the user of the impact of the contribution on the POTW; and (2) develop effluent limitation for such user to correct the interference with the POTW; and (3) enforce Sections 6 and 8 of Ordinance No. 3090 of 1981, Section 5 of Ordinance No. 88-3425 and division 10 of this article. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 2.1, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-25. - National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. 
Upon the promulgation of the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the Federal Standards, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this article for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under the ordinance. The superintendent shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR, Section 403.12. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 2.2, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-26. - Modifications of Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards. 
Where the city's wastewater treatment system achieves consistent removal of pollutants limited by Federal Pretreatment Standards. "Consistent removal" shall mean reduction in the amount of a pollutant or alteration of the nature of the pollutant by the wastewater treatment system to a less toxic or harmless state in the effluent which is achieved by the system in ninety-five (95) percent of the samples taken when measured according to the procedures set forth in Section 403.7(c)(2) of (Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Part 403)- "General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution" promulgated pursuant to the Act. The city may then modify pollutant discharge limits in the Federal Pretreatment Standards if the requirements contained in 40 CFR, Part 403, Section 403.7, are fulfilled and prior approval from the approval authority is obtained. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 2.3, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-27. - Specific pollutant limitations. 
(a)  The superintendent is authorized to establish local limits pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5(c). 
(b)  The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass through and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following: 
0.05 mg/l arsenic; 
5.0 mg/l barium; 
1.0 mg/l boron; 
0.02 mg/l cadmium; 
250 mg/l chlorides; 
2.0 mg/l chromium; 
1.0 mg/l copper; 
1.0 mg/l cyanide; 
0.1 mg/l lead; 
1.0 mg/l manganese; 
0.005 mg/l mercury; 
1.0 mg/l nickel; 
0.02 mg/l selenium; 
0.1 mg/l silver; 
5.0 mg/l zinc; 
100 mg/l fats, wax, grease or oils; 
250 mg/l inert suspended solids; 
500 mg/l dissolved solids. 
(c)  Prohibited heavy metals and toxic materials include but are not limited to: 
Antimony; 
Beryllium; 
Bismuth; 
Cobalt; 
Molybdenum; 
Uranylion; 
Rhenium; 
Strontium; 
Tellurium; 
Herbicides; 
Fungicides; 
Pesticides; 
Phenol; 
Chlorinated Hydrocarbons. 
The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for total metal unless indicated otherwise. The superintendent may impose mass limitations in addition to the concentration-based limitations above. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 2.4, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-28. - State requirements. 
State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this article. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 2.5, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-29. - City's right of revision. 
The City of Bastrop reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in individual wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW consistent with the purpose of this article. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 2.6, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-30. - Dilution. 
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The superintendent may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 2.7, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-31. - Excessive discharge. 
No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in anyway, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards, or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the city or state. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 2.8, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-32. - Accidental discharges. 
Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this article. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner or user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be approved by the city before construction of the facility. All existing users shall complete such a plan within one hundred eighty (180) days of the date of adoption of this article. No user who commences contribution to the POTW after the effective date of this article shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the city. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article. In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the POTW of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions. 
(a)  Written notice. Within five (5) days following an accidental discharge; the user shall submit to the director a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law. 
(b)  Notice to employee. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall insure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 2.9, 6-12-14 )  
DIVISION 3. - PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER 
 
Sec. 12-33. - Pretreatment facilities. 
Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in section 12-24 of this article within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state, or the superintendent, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the superintendent for review, and shall be acceptable to the superintendent before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of this article. 
Any facility with an existing pretreatment system at the time this article is approved, will have to upgrade that system to meet the requirements of this article. The upgrading of the pretreatment system will have to commence within ninety (90) days of the approval of this article, but in no case shall it take more than six (6) months to be in compliance. Any construction or alteration must meet the requirements of this section. 
The city shall annually publish in its official journal a list of the users which were not in compliance with any pretreatment requirements or standards at least once during the twelve (12) previous months. The notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken against the users during the same twelve (12) months. 
All record relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the approval authority upon request. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 3.1, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-34. - Additional pretreatment measures. 
(a)  Whenever deemed necessary, the superintendent may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The superintendent may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. An individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
(c)  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oils exceeding one hundred (100) mg/l, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of a type and capacity approved by the superintendent, and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. At a minimum, all grease and oil/water separators must hold a minimum volume of twenty-two (22) cubic feet of water. All sand and mud interceptors must hold a minimum volume of eight (8) cubic feet of water. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired in accordance with the city's oil and grease management by the user at their expense. 
(d)  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 3.2, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-35. - Accidental discharge/slug discharge control plans. 
The superintendent shall evaluate whether each SIU needs an accidental discharge/slug discharge control plan or other action to control slug discharges. The superintendent may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan or take such other action that may be necessary to control slug discharges. Alternatively, the superintendent may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug discharge control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(a)  Description of discharge practices, including non routine batch discharges; 
(b)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(c)  Procedures for immediately notifying the superintendent of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by section 12-55 of this article; and 
(d)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 3.3, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-36. - Hauled wastewater. 
(a)  Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations designated by the superintendent, and at such times as are established by the superintendent. Such waste shall not violate division 2 of this article or any other requirements established by the city. The superintendent may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain individual wastewater discharge permits. 
(b)  The superintendent may require haulers of industrial waste to obtain individual wastewater discharge permits. The superintendent may require generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain individual wastewater discharge permits. The superintendent also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of this article. 
(c)  Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated by the superintendent. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the superintendent. The superintendent may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The superintendent may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. 
(d)  Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 3.4, 6-12-14 )  
DIVISION 4. - INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS 
 
Sec. 12-37. - Wastewater analysis. 
When requested by the superintendent, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within sixty (60) days of the request. The superintendent is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 4.1, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-38. - Individual wastewater discharge permit requirement. 
(a)  No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining an individual wastewater discharge permit from the superintendent, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely application pursuant to section 12-39 of this article may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein. 
(b)  The superintendent may require other users to obtain individual wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. 
(c)  Any violation of the terms and conditions of an individual wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in divisions 10 through 12 of this article. Obtaining an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state, and local law. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 4.2, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-39. - Individual wastewater discharge: Existing connections. 
Any user required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this article and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within sixty (60) days after said date, apply to the superintendent for an individual wastewater discharge permit in accordance with section 12-41 of this article, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after nine (9) months of the effective date of this article except in accordance of an individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit issued by the superintendent. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 4.3, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-40. - Individual wastewater discharge: New connections. 
Any user required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this individual wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with section 12-41 of this article, must be filed at least ninety (90) days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or commence. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 4.4, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-41. - Individual wastewater discharge application contents. 
(a)  All users required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application. The superintendent may require users to submit all or some of the following information as part of a permit application: 
(1)  Identifying information. 
a.  The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
b.  Contact information, description of activities, facilities, and plant production processes on the premises; 
(2)  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(3)  Description of operations. 
a.  A brief description of the nature, average rate of production (including each product produced by type, amount, processes, and rate of production), and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram, which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
b.  Types of wastes generated, and a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW: 
c.  Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation; 
d.  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); 
e.  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge; 
(4)  Time and duration of discharges. 
(5)  The location for monitoring all wastes covered by the permit. 
(6)  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in section 12-25 (40 CFR 403.6(e)). 
(7)  Measurement of pollutants. 
a.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process and any new categorically regulated processes for existing sources. 
b.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the superintendent, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. 
c.  Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. 
d.  The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section 12-58 of this article. Where the standard requires compliance with a BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the user shall submit documentation as required by the superintendent or the applicable standards to determine compliance with the standard. 
e.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in section 12-58 of this article. 
(8)  Any requests for a monitoring waiver (or a renewal of an approved monitoring waiver) for a pollutant neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge based on section 12-53(b) [40 CFR 403.12(e)(2)]. 
(9)  Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the superintendent to evaluate the permit application. 
(10)  Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 4.5, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-42. - Application signatories and certifications. 
(a)  All wastewater discharge permit applications, user reports and certification statements must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the certification statement in section 12-61(a). 
(b)  If the designation of an authorized representative is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new written authorization satisfying the requirements of this section must be submitted to the superintendent prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 4.6, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-43. - Individual wastewater discharge permit decisions. 
The superintendent will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within ninety (90) days of receipt of a complete permit application, the superintendent will determine whether to issue an individual wastewater discharge permit. The superintendent may deny any application for an individual wastewater discharge permit. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 4.7, 6-12-14 )  
DIVISION 5. - INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE 
 
Sec. 12-44. - Individual wastewater discharge permit duration. 
An individual wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years from the effective date of the permit. An individual wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five (5) years, at the discretion of the superintendent. Each individual wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 5.1, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-45. - Individual wastewater discharge permit contents. 
An individual wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the superintendent to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW. 
(a)  Individual wastewater discharge permits must contain: 
(1)  A statement that indicates the wastewater discharge permit issuance date, expiration date and effective date; 
(2)  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the city in accordance with section 12-48 of this article, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit; 
(3)  Effluent limits, including best management practices, based on applicable pretreatment standards; 
(4)  Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law; 
(5)  The process for seeking a waiver from monitoring for a pollutant neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge in accordance with section 12-53(b); 
(6)  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law; 
(7)  Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the superintendent to be necessary; 
(8)  Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the superintendent (section 12-53(b)) must be included as a condition in the user's permit or other control mechanism. 
(b)  Individual wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions: 
(1)  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
(2)  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works; 
(3)  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or non-routine discharges; 
(4)  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW; 
(5)  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW; 
(6)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment, including flow measurement devices; 
(7)  A statement that compliance with the individual wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the individual wastewater discharge permit; and 
(8)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the superintendent to ensure compliance with this ordinance, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 5.2, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-46. - Permit modification. 
(a)  The superintendent may modify an individual wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(2)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of the individual wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(3)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(4)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the city's POTW, city personnel, or the receiving waters; 
(5)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the individual wastewater discharge permit; 
(6)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
(7)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
(8)  To correct typographical or other errors in the individual wastewater discharge permit; or 
(9)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator where requested in accordance with section 12-48. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 5.3, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-47. - Individual wastewater discharge permit transfer. 
Individual wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least sixty (60) days advance notice to the superintendent and the superintendent approves the individual wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the superintendent must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which: 
(a)  States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
(b)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and 
(c)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing individual wastewater discharge permit. 
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the individual wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 5.4, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-48. - Individual wastewater discharge permit revocation. 
The superintendent may revoke an individual wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(a)  Failure to notify the superintendent of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
(b)  Failure to provide prior notification to the superintendent of changed conditions pursuant to section 12-54 of this article; 
(c)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(d)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports and certification statements; 
(e)  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
(f)  Refusing to allow the superintendent timely access to the facility premises and records; 
(g)  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
(h)  Failure to pay fines; 
(i)  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
(j)  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
(k)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(l)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or 
(m)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this article. 
Individual wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All individual wastewater discharge permits issued to a user are void upon the issuance of a new individual wastewater discharge permit to that user. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 5.5, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-49. - Individual wastewater discharge permit reissuance. 
A user with an expiring individual wastewater discharge permit shall apply for individual wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with section 12-41 of this article, a minimum of sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing individual wastewater discharge permit. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 5.6, 6-12-14 )  
DIVISION 6. - REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 12-50. - Baseline monitoring reports. 
(a)  Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical industrial users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the superintendent a report which contains the information listed in paragraph (b), below. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the superintendent a report which contains the information listed in paragraph (b), below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(b)  Users described above shall submit the information set forth below. 
(1)  All information required in section 12-41(a)(1)a., section 12-41(a)(2), section 12-41(a)(3)a., and section 12-41(a)(6). [Note: See 40 CFR 403.12(b)(1)—(7)] 
(2)  Measurement of pollutants. 
a.  The user shall provide the information required in section 12-41(a)(7)a. through d; 
b.  The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this paragraph; 
c.  Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment the user should measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e) to evaluate compliance with the pretreatment standards. Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e) this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted to the control authority; 
d.  Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with section 12-58; 
e.  The superintendent may allow the submission of a baseline report which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures; 
f.  The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place of sampling and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW. 
(3)  Compliance certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative as defined in section 12-23 and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(4)  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M must be provided. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in section 12-51 of this article. 
(5)  Signature and report certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be certified in accordance with section 12-61(a) of this article and signed by an Authorized Representative as defined in section 12-23. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 6.1, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-51. - Compliance schedule progress reports. 
The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by section 12-50(b)(4) of this article: 
(a)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation); 
(b)  No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months; 
(c)  The user shall submit a progress report to the superintendent no later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
(d)  In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the superintendent. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 6.2, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-52. - Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. 
Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the superintendent a report containing the information described in sections 12-41(a)(6) and (7) and 12-50(b)(2) of this article. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in section 12-25 [Note: See 40 CFR 403.6(c)], this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 12-61(a) of this article. All sampling will be done in conformance with section 12-58. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 6.3, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-53. - Periodic compliance reports. 
[Note: All SIUs are required to submit periodic compliance reports even if they have been designated a non-significant categorical industrial user under the provisions of section 12-53(c).] 
(a)  Except as specified in section 12-53(c), all significant industrial users must, at a frequency determined by the superintendent submit no less than twice per year June and December unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the superintendent, reports indicating the nature, concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best management practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation required by the superintendent or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user. 
(b)  All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 12-61(a) of this article. 
(c)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(d)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any regulated pollutant at the appropriate sampling location more frequently than required by the superintendent, using the procedures prescribed in section 12-60 of this article, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 6.4, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-54. - Reports of changed conditions. 
Each user must notify the superintendent of any significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least thirty (30) days before the change. 
(a)  The superintendent may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section 12-41 of this article. 
(b)  The superintendent may issue an individual wastewater discharge permit under section 12-46 of this article or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under section 12-47 of this article in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 6.5, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-55. - Reports of potential problems. 
(a)  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, a slug discharge or slug load, that might cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the superintendent of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(b)  Within five (5) days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the superintendent, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which might be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this article. 
(c)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of a discharge described in paragraph (a), above. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who could cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(d)  Significant industrial users are required to notify the superintendent immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 6.6, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-56. - Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. 
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the superintendent within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the superintendent within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. Resampling by the industrial user is not required if the city performs sampling at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the city performs sampling at the user between the time when the initial sampling was conducted and the time when the user or the city receives the results of this sampling, or if the city has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 6.7, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-57. - Analytical requirements. 
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines that the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the superintendent or other parties approved by EPA. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 6.8, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-58. - Sample collection. 
Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements must be based on data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by the report, based on data that is representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period. 
(a)  Except as indicated in subsections (b) and (c) below, the user must collect wastewater samples using twenty-four-hour flow-proportional composite sampling techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the superintendent. Where time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the city, the samples must be representative of the discharge. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a twenty-four-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by the city, as appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous limits. 
(b)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(c)  For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and ninety-day compliance reports required in sections 12-50 and 12-52 [40 CFR 403.12(b) and (d)], a minimum of four (4) grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the superintendent may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by paragraphs section 12-53 (40 CFR 403.12(e) and 403.12(h)), the industrial user is required to collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance by with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 6.9, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-59. - Date of receipt of reports. 
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports, which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 6.10, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-60. - Recordkeeping. 
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this article, any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements, and documentation associated with best management practices established under section 12-27(c). Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the superintendent. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 6.11, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-61. - Certification statements. 
(a)  Certification of permit applications, user reports and initial monitoring waiver—The following certification statement is required to be signed and submitted by users submitting permit applications in accordance with section 12-43; users submitting baseline monitoring reports under section 12-50(b)(5) [Note: See 40 CFR 403.12(1)]; users submitting reports on compliance with the categorical Pretreatment Standard deadlines under section 12-52 [Note: See 40 CFR 403.12(d)]; users submitting periodic compliance reports required by section 12-53(a)—(d) [Note: See 40 CFR 403.12(e) and (h)], and users submitting an initial [Note: See 40 CFR 403.12(e)(2)(iii)]. The following certification statement must be signed by an authorized representative as defined in section 12-23(c): 
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 6.12, 6-12-14 )  
DIVISION 7. - COMPLIANCE MONITORING 
 
Sec. 12-62. - Right of entry: Inspection and sampling. 
The superintendent shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this article and any individual wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the superintendent ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. 
(a)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the superintendent shall be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(b)  The superintendent shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. 
(c)  The superintendent may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated yearly to ensure their accuracy. 
(d)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the superintendent and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be born by the user. 
(e)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the superintendent access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this article. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 7.1, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-63. - Search warrants. 
If the superintendent has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, the superintendent may seek issuance of a search warrant from the City of Bastrop Court of the City of Bastrop. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 7.2, 6-12-14 )  
DIVISION 8. - CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION 
 
Sec. 12-64. - Information and data. 
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, individual wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the superintendent's inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the superintendent, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other effluent data, as defined at 40 CFR 2.302 shall not be recognized as confidential information and shall be available to the public without restriction. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 8, 6-12-14 )  
DIVISION 9. - PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE 
 
Sec. 12-65. - Public notice. 
The superintendent shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions served by the POTW, a list of the users which, at any time during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall be applicable to all significant industrial users (or any other industrial user that violates paragraphs (c), (d) or (h) of this section) and shall mean: 
(a)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six (66) percent or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits as defined in division 2; 
(b)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three (33) percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined by division 2 multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(c)  Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined by division 2 (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the superintendent determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(d)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the superintendent's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(e)  Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in an individual wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(f)  Failure to provide within forty-five (45) days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(g)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(h)  Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of best management practices, which the superintendent determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 9, 6-12-14 )  
DIVISION 10. - ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES 
 
Sec. 12-66. - Harmful contributions. 
The city may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or a wastewater discharge permit when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the city, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, to the environment, causes interference to the POTW or causes the city to violate any condition of its NPDES permit. 
Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city shall take steps as deemed necessary including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any individuals. The city shall reinstate the wastewater discharge permit and/or the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the non-complying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the city within fifteen (15) days of the date of occurrence. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 10.1, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-67. - Revocation of permit. 
Any user who violates the conditions of this article, or applicable state and federal regulations, or commits any to the following offenses, is subject to having his permit revoked: 
(a)  Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of his discharge; 
(b)  Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(c)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or 
(d)  Violation of conditions of the permit. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 10.2, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-68. - Notification of violation. 
When the superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the superintendent may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of such notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the superintendent. Submission of such a plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the superintendent to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 10.3, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-69. - Consent orders. 
The superintendent may enter into consent orders, assurances of compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents shall include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to sections 12-71 and 12-72 of this article and shall be judicially enforceable. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 10.4, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-70. - Show cause hearing. 
The superintendent may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the mayor and board of aldermen and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user as defined in section 12-23 and required by section 12-43(a). A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
The mayor and board of aldermen may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or may designate any of its members or any officer or employee of the assigned department to: 
(a)  Issue in the name of the mayor and board of aldermen notices of hearing requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings; 
(b)  Take the evidence; 
(c)  Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the mayor and board of aldermen for action thereon. 
At any hearing held pursuant to this article, testimony taken must be under oath and recorded steno graphically. The transcript, so recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof. 
After the mayor and board of aldermen have reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order toe the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 10.5, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-71. - Compliance orders. 
When the superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the superintendent may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 10.6, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-72. - Cease and desist orders. 
When the superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the superintendent may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
(a)  Immediately comply with all requirements; and 
(b)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 10.7, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-73. - Administrative fines. 
(a)  When the superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the superintendent may fine such user in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). Such fines shall be assessed on a per-violation, per-day basis. In the case of monthly or other long-term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties provided herein, the city may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, court reporters' fees and other expenses of litigations by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated this article or the orders, rules, regulations, and permits issued hereunder. 
(c)  Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the superintendent to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount within fifteen (15) days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit, the superintendent may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. The superintendent may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine. 
(d)  Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 10.8, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-74. - Emergency suspensions. 
The superintendent may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge, which reasonably appears to present, or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The superintendent may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. 
(a)  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the superintendent may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The superintendent may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the superintendent that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in division 10 of this article are initiated against the user. 
(b)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the superintendent prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under division 10 of this article. 
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 10.9, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-75. - Termination of discharge. 
In addition to the provisions in section 12-49 of this article, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination: 
(a)  Violation of individual wastewater discharge permit conditions; 
(b)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
(c)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge; 
(d)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or 
(e)  Violation of the pretreatment standards in division 2 of this article. 
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under section 12-70 of this article why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the superintendent shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 10.10, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-76. - Appeal procedure. 
Users of the POTW shall have the right to appeal the conditions of their permit, enforcement actions taken against them for non-compliance, and other actions taken by the city which the user questions the reasonableness thereof. 
The mayor and board of aldermen, under the authority of the city charter, has the legal authority to resolve an appeal in this regard, subject to state and federal regulations. 
Appeals filed hereunder shall be resolved in accordance with procedures established for conducting show cause hearings, section 12-70 of this article. 
The burden of proof shall rest with the user. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 10.11, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-77. - Legal action. 
If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the city's wastewater disposal system contrary to the provisions of this article, federal or state pretreatment requirements, or any order of the city, the city attorney may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the courts. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 10.12, 6-12-14 )  
DIVISION 11. - JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES 
 
Sec. 12-78. - Injunctive relief. 
When the superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the superintendent may petition the City of Bastrop Court through the city's attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the individual wastewater discharge permit, or other requirement imposed by this ordinance on activities of the user. The superintendent may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 11.1, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-79. - Civil penalties. 
(a)  A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the city for a maximum civil penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. 
(b)  The superintendent may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city. 
(c)  In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(d)  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 11.2, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-80. - Criminal prosecution. 
(a)  A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or both. 
(b)  A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of at least five hundred dollars ($500.00), or be subject to imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or both. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state law. 
(c)  A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this ordinance, individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this ordinance shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or both. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 11.3, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-81. - Remedies nonexclusive. 
The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The superintendent may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city's enforcement response plan. However, the superintendent may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the superintendent is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 11.4, 6-12-14 )  
DIVISION 12. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 12-82. - Pretreatment charges and fees. 
The city may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's pretreatment program, which may include: 
(a)  Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of processing such applications; a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) fee per permit; 
(b)  Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports and certification statements submitted by users; users will be charged for all sampling and handling; A twenty dollar ($20.00) annual fee for inspections; 
(c)  Fees for sampling and handling: A fee of ninety-three dollars ($93.00) for each sample pulled which will pay for the analysis of CBOD, oil and grease, TSS, and ammonia plus handling charges; 
(d)  Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction; a ten dollar ($10.00) fee will be charged for each accidental discharge inspection; 
(e)  Fees for filing appeals; 
(f)  Fees to recover administrative and legal costs (not included in section 12-82(b)) associated with the enforcement activity taken by the superintendent to address IU noncompliance; and 
(g)  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the city. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 12.1, 6-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-83. - Severability. 
If any provision, paragraph, word, section or article of this article is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions, paragraphs, words, sections and chapters shall not be affected and shall continue in full force and effect. 
( Ord. No. 14-4225, § 12.2, 6-12-14 )  
Secs. 12-84—12-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PRETREATMENT PROGRAM[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 88-3425, adopted Dec. 8, 1988, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1—6 and 9 as Art. III, Divs. 1—6, was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 12-141. - Purpose and policy. 
(a)  This article is a supplement to Ordinance Number 3090 of 1981 [Article II of this chapter], and sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system for the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act of 1977 and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR, Part 403). 
(b)  The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal wastewater system which will interfere with the operations of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal wastewater system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system; 
(3)  To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and sludges from the system; and 
(4)  To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the municipal wastewater system. 
(c)  This article provides for the regulation of direct and indirect contributors to the municipal wastewater system through the issuance of permits to certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of general requirements for the other users, authorized monitoring and enforcement activities, requires user reporting, assumes that existing customer's capacity will not be preempted, and provides for funding of costs resulting from the program established herein, and establishes fines and penalties for noncompliance. 
(d)  This article shall apply to the city and to persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city POTW. Except as otherwise provided herein, the director of public works shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 88-3425, § 1.1, 12-8-88)  
Sec. 12-142. - Definitions. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated: 
Act or "the Act". The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq. 
Approval authority. The administrator of the EPA Region VI. 
Authorized representative of industrial user. An authorized representative of an industrial user may be: 
(1)  A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-president, if the industrial user is a corporation. 
(2)  A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively: 
(3)  A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge originates. 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees centigrade expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l)). 
Building sewer. A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to the public sewer or other point of disposal. 
Categorical standards. National categorical pretreatment standards or pretreatment standard. 
Chemical oxygen demand (COD). Measure of the oxygen consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in the water or wastewater expressed in mg/l as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specific test, but not differentiating between stable and unstable organic matter and thus not necessarily correlating with biochemical oxygen demand. 
City. The City of Bastrop, Louisiana, or the mayor and board of aldermen of the city. 
Control authority. The director of public works of the city. 
Control manhole. A manhole giving access to a building sewer at some point before the building sewer discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer. 
Control point. A point of access to a course of discharge before the discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer. 
Cooling water. The water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
Director. The director of public works of the city, who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this article, or his duly authorized representative. 
Direct discharge. The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the state. 
Environmental Protection Agency or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of the agency. 
Garbage. Animal and vegetable wastes and residue from preparation, cooking and dispensing of food; and from the handling, processing, storage and sale of food products and produce. 
Grab sample. A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time. 
Holding tank waste. Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
Indirect discharge. The discharge or the introduction of nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under section 307(b) or (c) of the Act, (33 U.S.C. 1317), into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged into the system). 
Industrial user. A source of indirect discharge which does not constitute a "discharge of pollutants" under regulations issued pursuant to section 402, of the Act. (33 U.S.C. 1342). 
Industrial waste. Waste resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade, or business from the development of any natural resource or any mixture of the waste with water or normal wastewater, or distinct from normal wastewater. 
Industrial waste charge. The charge made on those persons who discharge industrial wastes into the city's sewerage system. 
Interference. The inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment processes or operations which contribute to a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with [section] 405 of the Act. (33 U.S.C. 1345) or any criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or more stringent state criteria applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW. 
Milligrams per liter (mg/l). The same as parts per million and is a weight-to-volume ratio; the milligram-per-liter value multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water. 
National categorical pretreatment standard or pretreatment standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1347) which applies to a specific category of industrial users. 
National pollution discharge elimination system or NPDES permit. A permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1342). 
National prohibitive discharge standard or prohibitive discharge standard. Any regulation development under the authority of [section] 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR, section 403.5. 
Natural outlet. Any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or ground water. 
Normal domestic wastewater. Wastewater excluding industrial wastewater discharged by a person into sanitary sewer and in which the average concentration of total suspended solids is not more than two hundred (200) mg/l and BOD is not more than two hundred (200) mg/l. 
New source. Any source, the construction of which is commenced after the publication of proposed regulations prescribing a section 307(c) (33 U.S.C. 1317) categorical pretreatment standard which will be applicable to such source, if such standard is thereafter promulgated within one hundred twenty (120) days of proposal in the federal register. Where the standard is promulgated later than one hundred twenty (120) days after proposal, a new source means any source, the construction of which is commenced after the date of promulgation of the standard. 
Overload. The imposition of organic or hydraulic loading on a treatment facility in excess of its engineered design capacity. 
Person. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall include the plural where indicated by context. 
pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution. 
Pollutant. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water. 
Pollution. The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity of water. 
POTW treatment plant. That portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to wastewater. 
Pretreatment or treatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes, process changes, or other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR section 403.6(d). 
Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard imposed on an industrial user. 
Public sewer. Pipe or conduit carrying wastewater or unpolluted drainage in which owners of abutting properties shall have the use, subject to control by the city. 
Publicly owned treatment works (POTW). A treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. 1292) which is owned, in this instance, by the city. This definition includes any sewers that [convey wastewater to the treatment plant, but] does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purpose of this article, "POTW" shall include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city's POTW. 
Sanitary sewer. A public sewer that conveys domestic wastewater or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and into which stormwater, surface water, groundwater and other unpolluted wastes are not intentionally passed. 
Shall is mandatory; may is permissive. 
Significant industrial user. Any industrial user of the city's wastewater disposal system who: 
(1)  Has a discharge flow of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons or more per average work day; 
(2)  Has a flow greater than five (5) percent of the flow in the city's wastewater treatment system; 
(3)  Has in his wastes toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to section 307 of the Act, or state statutes and rules; or 
(4)  Is found by the city, state control agency, or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the wastewater treatment system, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality, or air emissions generated by the system. 
Slug. Any discharge of water, wastewater, or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period or duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
Standard industrial classification (SIC). A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget. 
Standard methods. The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," as prepared, approved, and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
State. State of Louisiana. 
Storm sewer. A public sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage and into which domestic wastewater or industrial wastes are not intentionally passed. 
Stormwater. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
Superintendent. The person designated by the city to supervise the operation of the publicly owned treatment works and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this article, his duly authorized representative, and/or the assistant superintendent. 
Suspended solids. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
To discharge. Includes to deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run, allow to seep, or otherwise release or dispose of, or to allow, permit, or suffer any of these acts or omissions. 
Toxic pollutant. Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under the provision of CWA 307(a) or other acts. 
Trap. A device designed to skim, settle, or otherwise remove grease, oil, sand, flammable wastes or other harmful substances. 
Unpolluted wastewater. Water containing: 
(1)  No free or emulsified grease or oil; 
(2)  No acids or alkalis; 
(3)  No phenols or other substances producing taste or odor in receiving water; 
(4)  No toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state, or solution; 
(5)  No noxious or otherwise obnoxious or odorous gases; 
(6)  Not more than an insignificant amount in mg/l each of suspended solids and BOD, as determined by the state regulatory agencies; and 
(7)  Color not exceeding fifty (50) units as measured by the platinum-cobalt method of determination as specified in "standard methods." 
User. Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the city's POTW. 
Waste. Rejected, unutilized or superfluous substances in liquid, gaseous, or solid form resulting from domestic, agricultural or industrial activities. 
Wastewater. The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, together with any ground, surface, and storm water that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW. 
Wastewater contribution permit. As set forth in section 12-182 of this article. 
Wastewater facilities. Includes all facilities for collection, pumping, treatment, and disposing of wastewater and industrial wastes. 
Wastewater service charge. The charge on all users of the public sewer system whose wastes do not exceed in strength the concentration values established of normal domestic wastewater. 
Wastewater treatment plant. Any city-owned facilities, devices and structures used for receiving, processing and treating wastewater, industrial waste, and sludges from the sanitary sewer. 
Waters of the state. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof. 
Watercourse. A natural or man-made channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. No. 88-3425, § 1.2, 12-8-88)  
Sec. 12-143. - Abbreviations. 
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 
BOD 	Biochemical oxygen demand 
CFR 	Code of federal regulations 
COD 	Chemical oxygen demand 
EPA 	Environmental protection agency 
1 	Liter 
mg 	Milligrams 
mg/l 	Milligrams per liter 
NPDES 	National pollutant discharge elimination system 
POTW 	Publicly owned treatment works 
SIC 	Standard industrial classification 
SWDA 	Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. 6901, et. seq. 
USC 	United States Code 
TSS 	Total suspended solids 
 
(Ord. No. 88-3425, § 1.3, 12-8-88)  
Sec. 12-144. - Compliance with state code. 
If any provision, paragraph, word, section or article of this article is inconsistent or conflicts with the sanitary code of the state, the code shall take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 88-3425, § 9, 12-8-88)  
Secs. 12-145—12-150. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DISCHARGE REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 12-151. - General discharge prohibitions. 
(a)  No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the operation or performance of the POTW. These general prohibitions apply to all such users of a POTW whether or not the user is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or requirements. A user may not contribute the following substances to any POTW: 
(1)  Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. At no time shall two (2) successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system) be more than five (5) percent nor any single reading over ten (10) percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides and any other substances which the city, the state or EPA has notified the user is a fire hazard or a hazard to the system. 
(2)  Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities such as, but not limited to: grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half (1/2) inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, slops, chemical residues, paint residues, septic tank solids, bulk solids, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes. 
(3)  Any wastewater having a ph less than 5.5 or higher than 9.5, or wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel of the POTW. 
(4)  Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the POTW or to exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. A toxic pollutant shall include, but not be limited to, any pollutant identified pursuant to section 307(a) of the Act. 
(5)  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which either singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair. 
(6)  Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under section 405 of the Act; any criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used. 
(7)  Any substances which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES and/or state disposal system permit or the receiving water quality standards. 
(8)  Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. 
(9)  Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the POTW which exceeds sixty-five (65) degrees centigrade (one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit), or in such quantities that the temperature at the treatment plant exceeds forty (40) degrees centigrade (one hundred four (104) degrees Fahrenheit). 
(10)  Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which a user knows or has reason to know will cause interference to the POTW. In no case shall a slug load have a flow rate or contain concentration in qualities of pollutants that exceed for any time period longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four-hour concentration, quantities, or flow during normal operation. 
(11)  Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the superintendent in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(12)  Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance. 
(b)  When the superintendent determines that a user is contributing to the POTW, any of the above enumerated substances in such amounts as to be in violation of this section, the superintendent shall: 
(1)  Advise the user of the impact of the contribution on the POTW; 
(2)  Develop effluent limitation for such user to correct the interference with the POTW; and 
(3)  Enforce sections 6 and 8 of Ordinance No. 3090 of 1981 [sections 12-120 through 12-128] and Division 5 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 88-3425, § 2.1, 12-8-88)  
Sec. 12-152. - Federal categorical pretreatment standards—Generally. 
Upon the promulgation of the federal categorical pretreatment standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standards, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this article for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this article. The superintendent shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR, section 403.12. 
(Ord. No. 88-3425, § 2.2, 12-8-88)  
Sec. 12-153. - Same—Modification. 
Where the city's wastewater treatment system achieves consistent removal of pollutants limited by federal pretreatment standards, the city may apply to the approval authority for modification of specific limits in the federal pretreatment standards. "Consistent removal" shall mean reduction in the amount of a pollutant or alteration of the nature of the pollutant by the wastewater treatment system to a less toxic or harmless state in the effluent which is achieved by the system in ninety-five (95) percent of the samples taken when measured according to the procedures set forth in section 403.7(c)(2) of Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Part 403, "General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution," promulgated pursuant to the Act. The city may then modify pollutant discharge limits in the federal pretreatment standards if the requirements contained in 40 CFR, Part 403, section 403.7, are fulfilled and prior approval from the approval authority is obtained. 
(Ord. No. 88-3425, § 2.3, 12-8-88)  
Sec. 12-154. - Specific pollutant limitations. 
(a)  Generally. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of: 
	mg/l 
(1) Arsenic ..... 	.05 
(2) Barium ..... 	5.0 
(3) Boron ..... 	1.0 
(4) Cadmium ..... 	.02 
(5) Chlorides ..... 	250 
(6) Chromium, hexavalent ..... 	2.0 
   Trivalent ..... 	2.0 
(7) Copper ..... 	1.0 
(8) Cyanide as CN ..... 	1.0 
(9) Lead ..... 	.1 
(10) Manganese ..... 	1.0 
(11) Mercury ..... 	.005 
(12) Nickel ..... 	1.0 
(13) Selenium ..... 	.02 
(14) Silver ..... 	.1 
(15) Zinc ..... 	5.0 
(16) Fats, wax, grease or oils ..... 	100 
(17) Inert suspended solids ..... 	250 
(18) Dissolved solids ..... 	500 
 
(b)  Heavy metals; toxic materials. Prohibited heavy metals and toxic materials include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Antimony; 
(2)  Beryllium; 
(3)  Bismuth; 
(4)  Cobalt; 
(5)  Molybdenum; 
(6)  Uranylion; 
(7)  Rhenium; 
(8)  Strontium; 
(9)  Tellurium; 
(10)  Herbicides; 
(11)  Fungicides; and 
(12)  Pesticides. 
(13)  Phenol. 
(14)  Chlorinated hydrocarbons. 
(Ord. No. 88-3425, § 2.4, 12-8-88)  
Sec. 12-155. - State requirements. 
State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this article. 
(Ord. No. 88-3425, § 2.5, 12-8-88)  
Sec. 12-156. - City's right of revision. 
The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance, more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal system if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in section 12-141. 
(Ord. No. 88-3425, § 2.6, 12-8-88)  
Sec. 12-157. - Excessive discharge. 
No user shall ever increase the use of process water or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the federal categorical pretreatment standards, or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the city or state. 
(Ord. No. 88-3425, § 2.7, 12-8-88)  
Sec. 12-158. - Accidental discharges. 
(a)  Generally. Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this article. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner or user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be approved by the city before construction of the facility. All existing users shall complete such a plan within one hundred eighty (180) days of the date of adoption of this article. No user who commences contribution to the POTW after the effective date of this article shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the city. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article. In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the POTW of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions. 
(b)  Written notice. Within five (5) days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the director a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law. 
(c)  Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall insure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Ord. No. 88-3425, § 2.8, 12-8-88)  
Secs. 12-159—12-170. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - FEES 
 
Sec. 12-171. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this division to provide for the recovery of costs from users of the city's wastewater disposal system those costs expended by the city in providing wastewater services. 
(Ord. No. 88-3425, § 3.1, 12-8-88)  
Sec. 12-172. - Charges and fees generally. 
The city may adopt charges and fees which may include: 
(1)  Sewer user charges as established by ordinance number 3090 of 1981. 
(2)  Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures. 
(3)  Actual cost for cleaning up and/or correcting POTW problems caused by violations, and cost incurred by POTW as damage to facilities and/or legal liabilities resulting from such violations. 
(4)  Fees for permit applications, for new sources. 
(5)  Fees for filing appeals. 
(6)  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein, including but not limited to: 
a.  Fees for reimbursement of the cost of setting up and operating the pretreatment program. 
b.  Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction. 
c.  Fees for removal by the city of pollutants subject to federal pretreatment standards. 
(Ord. No. 88-3425, § 3.2, 12-8-88)  
Secs. 12-173—12-180. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 12-181. - Wastewater dischargers. 
It shall be unlawful, unless authorized by the state health and human resources administration, to discharge to any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city. It shall be unlawful to discharge to the POTW any wastewater except as authorized by the director in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 88-3425, § 4.1, 12-8-88)  
Sec. 12-182. - Wastewater discharge permits. 
(a)  Generally. All significant users proposing to connect to or to contribute to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit before connecting to or contributing to the POTW. All existing significant users connected to or contributing to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit within one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of this article. 
(b)  Application. Users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file with the city an application in the form prescribed by the city. Existing users shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within sixty (60) days after the effective date of this article, and proposed new users shall apply at least ninety (90) days prior to connecting to or contributing to the POTW. In support of the application, the user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
(1)  Name address and location (if different from the address.); 
(2)  SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget; 
(3)  Wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but not limited to, those mentioned in Division 2 of this article, as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory; sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136, as amended; 
(4)  Time and duration of contribution; 
(5)  Average daily and three-minute peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any; 
(6)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, and appurtenances by the size, location and elevation; 
(7)  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises including all materials which are or could be discharged; 
(8)  Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any city, state, or federal pretreatment standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O & M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards; 
(9)  If additional pretreatment and/or O & M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards; the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule: 
a.  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.) 
b.  No increment referred to in paragraph a. shall exceed nine (9) months. 
c.  No later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the director including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the director. 
(10)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production; 
(11)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); 
(12)  Number and type of employes, and hours of operation of plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system; 
(13)  Any other information as may be deemed by the city to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. 
The city will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the city may issue a wastewater discharge permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein. 
(c)  Modifications. Within nine (9) months of the promulgation of a national categorical pretreatment standard, the wastewater discharge permit of users subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standard within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user, subject to a national categorical pretreatment standard, has not previously submitted an application for a wastewater discharge permit as required by subsection (b), the user shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within one hundred eighty (180) days after the promulgation of the applicable national categorical pretreatment standard. In addition, the user with an existing wastewater discharge permit shall submit to the director within one hundred eighty (180) days after the promulgation of an applicable federal categorical pretreatment standard the information required by subsections (b)(8) and (9). 
(d)  Conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this article and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the city. Permits may contain the following: 
(1)  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to a sanitary sewer; 
(2)  Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(3)  Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization; 
(4)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities; 
(5)  Specification for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, and standards for tests and reporting schedule; 
(6)  Compliance schedules; 
(7)  Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports (see section 12-183); 
(8)  Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the city, and affording the city access thereto; 
(9)  Requirements for notification of the city of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system; 
(10)  Requirements for notification of slug discharges as per section 12-192; 
(11)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure compliance with this article. 
(e)  Duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the city during the term of the permit as limitations or requirement as identified in Division 2 are modified or other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(f)  Transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without the approval of the city. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing permit. 
(Ord. No. 88-3425, § 4.2, 12-8-88)  
Sec. 12-183. - Reporting requirements for permittee. 
(a)  Compliance date report. Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the director a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment standards and requirements and the average and maximum daily flow for these process units in the user facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards or requirements. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional O & M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user, and certified to be a qualified professional. 
(b)  Periodic compliance reports. 
(1)  Any user subject to a pretreatment standard, after the compliance date of such pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a new source, after commencement of this discharge into the POTW, shall submit to the director during the months of June and December, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the director, a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall include a record of all daily flows which during the reporting period exceeded the average daily flow reported in paragraph 12-182(b). At the discretion of the director and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the director may agree to alter the months during which the above reports are to be submitted. 
(2)  The director may impose mass limitations on users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations are appropriate. In such cases, the report required by subparagraph (1) of this paragraph shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user. These reports shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration, or production and mass where requested by the director, of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standards. The frequency of monitoring shall be prescribed in the applicable pretreatment standard. All analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the administrator pursuant to section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136 and amendments thereto or with any other test procedures approved by the administrator. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by the administrator. 
(Ord. No. 88-3425, § 4.3, 12-8-88)  
Sec. 12-184. - Monitoring facilities. 
(a)  The city may require to be provided and operated at the user's own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user's premises, but the city may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. 
(b)  There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. 
(c)  Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the city's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within ninety (90) days following written notification by the city. 
(Ord. No. 88-3425, § 4.4, 12-8-88)  
Sec. 12-185. - Inspection and sampling. 
The city shall inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this article is being met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the city or their representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination or in the performance of any of their duties. The city, approval authority and the Louisiana Department of Natural Resources shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the users shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city, approval authority and state will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. 
(Ord. No. 88-3425, § 4.5, 12-8-88)  
Sec. 12-186. - Pretreatment. 
(a)  Required generally. Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all federal categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be acceptable to the city before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of this article. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the city prior to the user's initiation of the changes. 
(b)  Publication of list of noncompliant users. The city shall, annually, publish in its official journal a list of the users which were not in compliance with any pretreatment requirements or standards at least once during the twelve (12) previous months. The notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken against the users during the same twelve (12) months. 
(c)  Records. All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the approval authority upon request. 
(Ord. No. 88-3425, § 4.6, 12-8-88)  
Sec. 12-187. - Confidential information. 
(a)  Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. 
(b)  When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available upon written request, to governmental agencies for uses related to this article, the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit, state disposal system permit and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. 
(c)  Information accepted by the city as confidential, shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency or to the general public by the city until and unless a ten-day notification is given to the user. 
(Ord. No. 88-3425, § 4.7, 12-8-88)  
Secs. 12-188—12-190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 12-191. - Harmful contributions. 
(a)  The city may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or a wastewater discharge permit when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the city, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, to the environment, causes interference to the POTW or causes the city to violate any condition of its NPDES permit. 
(b)  Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city shall take such steps as deemed necessary including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any individuals. The city shall reinstate the wastewater discharge permit and/or the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the city within fifteen (15) days of the date of occurrence. 
(Ord. No. 88-3425, § 5.1, 12-8-88)  
Sec. 12-192. - Revocation of permit. 
Any user who violates the conditions of this article, or applicable state and federal regulations, or commits any of the following offenses, is subject to having his permit revoked: 
(1)  Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of his discharge; 
(2)  Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(3)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or 
(4)  Violation of conditions of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 88-3425, § 5.2, 12-8-88)  
Sec. 12-193. - Notification of violation. 
Whenever the city finds that any user has violated or is violating this article, wastewater discharge permit, or any prohibition, limitation or requirements contained herein, the city may serve upon such person a written notice stating the nature of the violation, within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice, a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the city by the user. 
(Ord. No. 88-3425, § 5.3, 12-8-88)  
Sec. 12-194. - Show cause hearing. 
(a)  Notice to user. The city may order any user who causes or allows an unauthorized discharge to enter the POTW to show cause before the mayor and board of aldermen why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the mayor and board of aldermen regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the user to show cause before the mayor and board of aldermen why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation. 
(b)  Conduct of hearing. The mayor and board of aldermen may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or may designate any of its members or any officer or employee of the assigned department to: 
(1)  Issue in the name of the mayor and board of aldermen notices of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings. 
(2)  Take the evidence. 
(3)  Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the mayor and board of aldermen for action thereon. 
(c)  Testimony under oath. At any hearing held pursuant to this article, testimony taken must be under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof. 
(d)  Order to discontinue sewer service. After the mayor and board of aldermen have reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances shall have been installed on existing treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued. 
(Ord. No. 88-3425, § 5.4, 12-8-88)  
Sec. 12-195. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  User's right of appeal. Users of the POTW shall have the right to appeal the conditions of their permit, enforcement actions taken against them for noncompliance, and other actions taken by the city which the user questions the reasonableness thereof. 
(b)  Authority to resolve appeal. The mayor and board of aldermen, under the authority of the city charter, have the legal authority to resolve an appeal in this regard, subject to state and federal regulations. 
(c)  Procedure. Appeals filed hereunder shall be resolved in accordance with procedures established for conducting show cause hearings, section 12-194. 
(d)  Burden of proof. The burden of proof shall rest with the user. 
(Ord. No. 88-3425, § 5.5, 12-8-88)  
Sec. 12-196. - Legal action. 
If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the city's wastewater disposal system contrary to the provisions of this article, federal or state pretreatment requirements, or any order of the city, the city attorney may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the courts. 
(Ord. No. 88-3425, § 5.6, 12-8-88)  
Secs. 12-197—12-200. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - PENALTY; COSTS 
 
Sec. 12-201. - Civil penalties. 
Any user who is found to have violated an order of the mayor and board of aldermen or who willfully or negligently failed to comply with any provision of this article and the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder, shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each day of which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the city may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, court reporters' fees and other expenses of litigations by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated this article or the orders, rules, regulations, and permits issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 88-3425, § 6.1, 12-8-88)  
Sec. 12-202. - Falsifying information. 
Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, or wastewater contribution permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or by both. 
(Ord. No. 88-3425, § 6.2, 12-8-88)  
Secs. 12-203—12-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - GROUND WATER PROTECTION 
 
Sec. 12-301. - Title and purpose. 
This article, titled the ground water protection ordinance, establishes a drinking water protection critical area around each water well serving an active public water system. 
The underlying purpose and intent of this article is to safeguard the health, safety, and lives of the public by protecting ground water from contamination. 
(Ord. No. 11-4203, 10-13-11)  
Sec. 12-302. - Applicability. 
This ground water protection ordinance, and the drinking water protection critical area(s) created hereby, shall apply to and include all new construction, reconstruction, or expansion of existing buildings and new or expanded uses. These activities/facilities/uses must comply with the requirements of both the drinking water protection critical area(s) and any applicable land use regulations or covenants, public or private. 
This article (ground water protection ordinance) is distinct from and not a part of any land use regulations or covenants, public or private, that may exist in the City of Bastrop, Louisiana. 
(Ord. No. 11-4203, 10-13-11)  
Sec. 12-303. - Definitions. 
Abandoned water well. A well that's use has been permanently discontinued; its pumping equipment has been permanently removed; the well is in such a state of disrepair that it cannot be used to supply water and/or has the potential for transmitting surface contaminants into an aquifer; the well poses potential health or safety hazards, or the well is in such a condition that it cannot be placed in the active, standby, or inactive status. 
Above ground storage tank (AST). A vessel, used to store petroleum products chemicals that is fixed permanently in place (stationary) on foundations, racks, cradles or stilts, or on the ground. The term does not include tanks mounted on wheels, trolleys, skids, pallets, or rollers or produced substance storage tanks directly related to oil and gas production and gathering operations. 
Applicant. Person or persons applying for a special permit for a facility within the drinking water protection critical area(s), 
Animal feedlot/dairies. A lot or facility (other than an aquatic animal production facility) where animals have been, are, or will be stabled or confined and fed or maintained for a total of forty-five (45) days or more in any twelve-month period, and crops, vegetation, forage growth, or post-harvest residues are not sustained in the normal growing season over any portion of the lot or facility. 
Aquifer. A water-bearing rock, sand or gravel layer that will yield water in a usable quantity to a well or spring. 
Class I well, Wells used to inject hazardous wastes or dispose of nonhazardous industrial waste and treated municipal sewage below the deepest underground source of drinking water. 
Class II well. Wells used to inject fluids associated with the production of oil and natural gas or fluids and compounds used for enhanced hydrocarbon recovery. These wells normally inject below the deepest underground source of drinking water (USDW) except in cases where the USDW contains producible quantities of oil or gas. 
Class III well. Wells that inject fluids used in subsurface mining of minerals. 
Class V well. Wells not included in the other classes that inject nonhazardous fluid into or above an underground source of drinking water. (The seven (7) major types of class V wells include drainage wells, geothermal reinjection wells, domestic wastewater disposal wells, mineral and fossil fuel recovery related wells, industrial/commercial/utility disposal wells, recharge wells and miscellaneous wells. Class V injection wells also include all large-capacity cesspools and motor vehicle waste disposal wells.) 
Contamination. The presence of a material that may cause or significantly contribute to a present or potential risk to human health, safety, welfare, or that is present in ground water resources or to the natural environment such that it degrades the quality of the resource so as to constitute a hazard and/or impair its use. 
Delineation. Determining the outline or shape of a drinking water protection area. 
Drinking water protection area. The area around a drinking water source, such as a well or surface water intake, such as delineated by the Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality as part of the source water assessment program. This area is shown on source water assessment program maps and contains the drinking water protection critical area. 
Drinking water protection critical area. A one thousand-foot radial boundary from any water well serving an active public water system. 
Ground water. The water contained in the interconnected pores located below the ground in an aquifer. 
Hazardous materials. A material that may cause or significantly contribute to a present or potential risk to human health, safety, welfare, to ground water resources or to the natural environment. 
OR 
That is defined in the following categories: 
Ignitable: A gas, liquid or solid which may cause fires through friction, absorption of moisture, or which has low flash points. Examples: White phosphorous and gasoline. 
Carcinogenic: A gas, liquid, or solid which is normally considered to be cancer causing or mutagenic. Examples: PCB's in some waste oils. 
Explosive: A reactive gas, liquid or solid that will vigorously and energetically react uncontrollably if exposed to heat, shock, pressure or combinations thereof. Examples: Dynamite, organic peroxides and ammonium nitrate. 
Highly toxic: A gas, liquid, or solid so dangerous to man as to afford unusual hazard of life. Example: Chlorine gas. 
Moderately toxic: A gas, liquid or solid that through repeated exposure or in a single large dose can be hazardous to man. 
Corrosive: Any material, whether acid or alkaline, which will cause severe damage to human tissue, or in case of leakage might damage or destroy other containers of hazardous materials and cause the release of their contents. Examples: Battery acid and phosphoric acid. 
OR 
The following items listed below and by-products, reaction products, or waste products generated from the use, handling, storage, or production of these items. Acid and base cleaning solutions, antifreeze and coolants, new or used, arsenic and arsenic compounds, batteries, new and used, brake and transmission fluid, oils/greases/lubricants, brine solution casting and foundry chemicals, caulking agents and sealants, cleaning solvents, cutting fluids, degreasing solvents, disinfectants, electroplating solutions, explosives, fertilizers, food processing wastes fuels and additives, glues, adhesives, and resins, greases, hydraulic fluid industrial and commercial janitorial supplies, industrial sludges and stillbottoms, inks, printing and photocopying chemical, laboratory chemicals, metal finishing solutions, oils (petroleum based), paints, primers, thinners, dyes, stains, wood preservatives, paint solvents, and paint removing compounds, pesticides and herbicides, plastic resins and catalysts, plasticizers, photo development chemicals, pool chemicals, roofing chemicals and sealers, solders and fluxes, tanning industry chemicals, transformer and capacitor oils/fluids. 
Impervious surface. A surface covered by a material that is relatively impermeable to water. 
Inactive water well. A well is considered to be inactive if it is not presently operating but is maintained in such a way that it can be put back in operation, with a minimum of effort, to supply water. 
Normal household use. Storage or use of a hazardous material in quantities less than five (5) gallons if liquid or fifty (50) pounds if solid. 
Person. An individual, corporation, joint venture, incorporated association, public or private corporation, partnership, governmental body or other similar entity, public or private. 
Promiscuous dump. Any collection of solid waste either dumped or caused to be dumped or placed on any property either public or private, whether or not regularly used, and not authorized by the administrative authority (Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality). 
Public water supply. A water supply that provides water through constructed conveyances to the public for at least fifteen (15) service connections or regularly serves an average of at least twenty-five (25) individuals daily for at least sixty (60) days per year. 
Sanitary landfill. A landfill for the disposal of commercial or residential solid waste by deposit in a landfill in layers covered with suitable cover material of a depth and at a frequency adequate to control disease vectors and odors, and in such a manner that minimizes the risk to human health and the environment. 
Secured storage. Natural or created barrier to site ingress or egress around the entire perimeter of the hazardous materials storage area. 
Source water assessment program. Section 1453 of the Safe Drinking Water Act Amendments of 1996 required each state to develop a Source Water Assessment Program that will delineate areas providing drinking water for all public water supplies (ground water and surface water) and inventory drinking water supplies for potential contaminants which may have adverse effects on human health. 
Well. Any excavation that is drilled, cored, bored, washed, driven, dug, jetted, or otherwise constructed for conveying ground water to the surface, monitoring ground water levels or other characteristics, providing cathodic protection, or providing a method of injecting water into the aquifer system from above the earth's surface. 
(Ord. No. 11-4203, 10-13-11)  
Sec. 12-304. - Establishment and delineation of the drinking water protection critical area(s). 
This article hereby establishes within the City of Bastrop, Louisiana certain Drinking Water Protection Critical Areas, each defined as the area within a one thousand-foot radial boundary from any water well serving an active public water system. 
(Ord. No. 11-4203, 10-13-11)  
Sec. 12-305. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses, unless granted a special exception, are prohibited within the drinking water protection critical area(s): Abandoned water wells, above ground storage tanks, agriculture chemical-formulation/distribution facilities, airports, animal feed lots/dairies, asphalt plants, auto/boat/tractor/small engine shops, battery recyclers, body shop/paint shops, car washes, cemeteries, chemical plants, class I injection wells, class II injection wells, class III injection wells, class V injection wells, dry cleaner/laundromats, funeral homes, furniture stripping facilities, golf courses, hospitals, irrigation wells, lumber mills, metal plating/metal working facilities, military facilities, non-functional onsite sewage systems, nuclear plants, oxidation ponds, paper mills, petroleum bulk plants, pipeline compressor stations, plant nurseries, port facilities, power plants, printing shops, promiscuous dumps, railroad yards-switching/loading and offloading/maintenance, salvage yards, sand/gravel pits, sanitary landfills, sewer lift stations, sewer treatment plants, truck terminals, underground storage tanks, wood preserving plants. 
(Ord. No. 11-4203, 10-13-11)  
Sec. 12-306. - Exceptions. 
Any of the land uses, facilities or activities identified in section 12-305 lawfully in existence on the effective date of this article may continue to exist on the parcel upon which it is located. Replacement or repair of said uses is permissible. If any of these land uses, facilities, or activities undergoes a change of ownership it may continue to exist providing the type of use remains the same. If any of these land uses, facilities, or activities ceases to operate for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days, the City of Bastrop, Louisiana may deem it to be abandoned. Then, restarting an abandoned operation is prohibited unless a special permit is granted by the City of Bastrop, Louisiana. 
(a)  Uses and activities requiring special permit. The following uses and activities are permitted only upon the issuance of a special permit by the City of Bastrop, Louisiana under such conditions as there exists an undue hardship and as they may require: 
(1)  Enlargement or alteration of existing uses that do not conform to the drinking water protection critical area(s); 
(2)  Restarting operation of a use the City of Bastrop, Louisiana deemed to be abandoned that was previously in lawful existence on the effective date of this article; 
(3)  Those activities that involve the handling of hazardous materials in quantities greater than those associated with normal household use, permitted in any land use regulation or covenant, public or private (except as prohibited in section 12-305). 
The burden is on the applicant to show undue hardship. 
(b)  Procedures for issuance of special permit. 
(1)  The special permit granting authority (SPGA) for this article shall be the City of Bastrop, Louisiana, Such special permit shall be granted if the SPGA determines, in conjunction with the Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality ("DEQ") that the intent of this bylaw/ordinance, as well as its specific criteria, is met. The SPGA shall not grant a special permit under this section unless the petitioner's application materials include, in the SPGA's opinion, sufficiently detailed, definite, and credible information to support positive findings in relation to the standards given in this section. The SPGA shall document the basis for any departures from the recommendations of the other (town/city) boards or agencies in its decision. 
(2)  Upon receipt of the special permit application, the SPGA shall transmit one copy to the DEQ for their written recommendations, Failure to respond in writing within thirty (30) days of receipt by the DEQ shall indicate approval or no desire to comment by said agency. The applicant shall furnish the necessary number of copies of the application. 
(3)  The SPGA may grant the required special permit only upon finding that the proposed use meets the prohibited uses standards as specified in section 12-305 of this bylaw, all federal, state, and local regulations, and any regulations or guidelines adopted by the SPGA. 
(4)  The applicant shall file three (3) copies of a site plan and attachments. The site plan shall be drawn at a proper scale as determined by the SPGA and be stamped by a professional engineer. All additional submittals shall be prepared by qualified professionals. The site plan and its attachments shall at a minimum include provisions to protect against the discharge of hazardous materials or wastes to the environment due to spillage, accidental damage, corrosion, leakage, or vandalism, including spill containment and clean-up procedures; provisions for indoor, secured storage of hazardous materials and wastes with impervious floor surfaces. 
(5)  Appeals from denial of special permits shall be submitted in writing (letter form) to the City of Bastrop Board of Adjustments within thirty (30) days of receipt of denial. The board of adjustments shall conduct a review and render a decision within thirty (30) days of receipt of appeal request. Adverse decision of the board of adjustments shall be appealed to the state district court. 
(Ord. No. 11-4203, 10-13-11)  
Sec. 12-307. - Saving clause. 
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any other part thereof and shall not invalidate any special permit previously issued thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 11-4203, 10-13-11)  
Sec. 12-308. - Compliance. 
(a)  Based upon the determination that there is a violation of this article, the jurisdiction shall conduct an attempt at informal reconciliation with the violator. As part of such informal reconciliation, the jurisdiction shall: 
(1)  Notify the violator by mail of the violation of this article and desire of the jurisdiction to correct the violation through informal reconciliation. The statement shall also indicate that should the violator refuse to allow the recommended corrective actions within the time set forth by the jurisdiction, action may be taken to correct the violation and the violator will be billed for the cost of taking the corrective action. 
(2)  Make a good faith effort to meet the violator and resolve/correct the violation. 
(b)  If after taking the steps above and after a period of ten (10) days following the mailing of the notice of the violation, the jurisdiction in good faith determines that the violator is unwilling to participate in informal reconciliation and take the corrective actions prescribed, the jurisdiction shall notify the violator by mail of the termination of the informal reconciliation. 
(c)  The jurisdiction may take corrective actions deemed necessary following ten (10) days after notifying the violator by mail of the notice of termination of the informal reconciliation, and bill the violator for the reasonable cost of such action. 
(d)  Citizen complaints. The jurisdiction is not limited to enforcing this article on citizen complaint. The jurisdiction may enforce this article on its own cognizance. However, any person may submit a verbal or written complaint alleging a violation of this article. Upon receipt of such complaint, the jurisdiction shall conduct an investigation of the allegations and present its findings both to the complainant and the property owner involved and follow the procedures set forth herein above. 
(Ord. No. 11-4203, 10-13-11)  
Sec. 12-309. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Civil. This article may be enforced civilly by suit for injunctive relief or by any other appropriate civil remedy. 
(b)  Criminal. In lieu of a civil enforcement proceeding, a person found in violation of this article shall be imprisoned for a period of time not to exceed six (6) months or pay a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or both. 
(Ord. No. 11-4203, 10-13-11)  
Chapter 13 - OCCUPATIONAL LICENSES, TAXES AND REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to levy, § 5(1); authority to regulate, § 5(38). 
Cross reference— Professional animal breeder permit, § 5-17; animal kennel and pet shop permit, § 5-18; electrical contractor's license, § 6-52; creation of noise by peddlers, etc., § 11-4(b)(11)—(14); soliciting upon private residence, § 8-187; permit required for sale of fireworks, § 9-27. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 13-1. - Annual license tax levied. 
There is hereby levied an occupational license tax for each year, upon each person pursuing and conducting any business, trade, calling, profession or vocation, within the corporate limits of the city subject to license under the constitution and laws of this state. 
(Code 1966, § 17-01; Ord. No. 87-3359, § 1, 6-9-87)  
Sec. 13-2. - Adoption of state law. 
The amount of license tax levied in each case is hereby fixed, determined and ordained to be the same as that fixed, levied and collectable by the governing authority under, and shall be granted in accordance with, the provisions of Louisiana Revised Statues, Title 45, sections 341 to 363, both inclusive, as amended, and all other applicable laws, all of which for all purposes of this chapter are made a part hereof by reference as if written herein in extenso. 
(Code 1966, § 17-01; Ord. No. 87-3359, § 2, 6-9-87) 
State Law reference— Peddler's license, R.S. 47:359(C).  
Sec. 13-3. - Insurance business. 
(a)  On any insurer engaged in the business of issuing life or accident or health insurance policies or other forms of contracts or obligations covering such risks, or issuing endowment or annuity policies, or contracts, or other similar forms of contract obligations in consideration of the payment of a premium or other consideration for the issuance of such policies, contracts or obligations whether such insurer by operating in this state or through an agent or other representative or otherwise, ten dollars ($10.00) on gross annual premiums up to two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) and an additional license thereafter of seventy dollars ($70.00) on each ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), or fraction thereof, of gross annual premiums in excess of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). The maximum license on such businesses, payable to this municipality by any one (1) insurer, shall not exceed twenty-one thousand dollars ($21,000.00). 
(b)  On any insurer, engaged in the business of issuing policies, contracts or other forms of obligations covering the risk of fire, marine, transportation, surety, fidelity, indemnity, guaranty, worker's compensation, employers' liability, property damage, live stock, vehicle, automatic sprinkler, burglary, or insurance business of any other kind whatsoever in this state, whether such insurer is operating in this state through agents or other representative or otherwise, shall be as allowed by the aforementioned statutes, as follows: 
1st Class: When the gross receipts are not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), the license shall be forty dollars ($40.00). 
2nd Class: When the gross receipts are more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), and not more than four thousand dollars ($4,000.00), the license shall be sixty dollars ($60.00). 
3rd Class: When the gross receipts are more than four thousand dollars ($4,000.00), and not more than six thousand dollars ($6,000.00), the license shall be eighty dollars ($80.00). 
4th Class: When the gross receipts exceed six thousand dollars ($6,000.00), the additional license thereafter shall be seventy dollars ($70.00) for each ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), or fraction thereof, in excess of six thousand dollars ($6,000.00). 
(c)  The maximum license tax on such businesses, payable to this municipality by any insurer, shall not exceed the maximum limit of nine thousand dollars ($9,000.00), as provided for by R.S. 22:1076, above referred to; provided, that plate glass and steam boiler inspection insurers shall pay one one-third of the above rates provided in subsection (b); and provided further, that the amount of license payable to this municipality as fixed by this section, shall be one-third of the amount so fixed if the payer shall file a sworn statement with the annual report required by R.S. Title 22, Chapter 1, Part XXIII, showing that at least one-sixtieth of the total admitted assets of the payer, less assets in an amount equal to the reserves on its policies issued in foreign countries in which it is authorized to do business and which countries require an investment therein as a condition of doing business, is invested and maintained, either in bonds of the state, or in bonds of municipal, school, road, or levee district, or other political subdivisions of this state or in mortgages on property located in this state, or in real property in this state which shall be requisite for the convenient accommodation of the transaction of its own business, or in policy loans, or other loans to residents of this state, or to corporations organized under the laws of this state and domiciled in this state, or in stock of homestead building or loan associations organized under the laws of this state, to the extent such stock is guaranteed or insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or other federal or state agency. 
(d)  All license taxes levied herein shall be due and payable on March 1 of each year and all unpaid license taxes shall become delinquent on June 1. The collection of delinquent accounts shall be enforced in accordance with R.S. 47:1601 and 47:1602. 
(Code 1966, § 17-02; Ord. No. 89-3434, §§ 1, 2, 5-11-89; Ord. No. 92-3608, § 1, 11-12-92) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 89-3434, §§ 1, 2, adopted May 11, 1989, was included as amending § 13-3. Section 5 of the ordinance provided that the ordinance shall become effective Jan. 1, 1990. 
State Law reference— Authorization, R.S. 22:1076.  
Sec. 13-4. - Collection of license taxes. 
The tax collector of the city is hereby directed to enforce the collection of the license taxes, yearly, as the law provides. 
(Code 1966, § 17-01)  
Sec. 13-5. - Payment of license taxes. 
The full amount of license taxes levied under this article shall be paid to the tax collector of the city on or before the first day of March each year, and the tax collector shall issue to the person making the payments a license certificate showing such payment. 
(Code 1966, § 17-03)  
Sec. 13-6. - Penalty. 
In case of any failure to make payment of license taxes as required by this chapter, ten (10) percent shall be added to the amount of the tax due unless satisfactory evidence is submitted to the tax collector to show that such failure was due to some unforeseen or unavoidable reason other than mere delay. If the delinquency be for more than thirty (30) days after the due date for the payment of license taxes hereunder, negligence will be presumed and ten (10) percent will be added without any discretion on the part of the tax collector, all of which shall be collected according to law. 
(Code 1966, § 17-04)  
Sec. 13-7. - Insufficient funds check-service charge. 
Any person, firm or corporation issuing insufficient funds check to the city in payment of monies due the city shall pay in addition to the check amount a service charge of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each insufficient funds check. 
(Ord. No. 92-3574, § 1, 3-12-92)  
Sec. 13-8. - Occupational license required. 
No person, entity or other party shall engage in any activity defined in chapter 13 of the Code of Ordinances on or for which an occupational license tax may be levied without first obtaining an occupational license from the city. 
(Ord. No. 92-3602, § 1, 10-5-92; Ord. No. 05-4048, 2-10-05)  
Sec. 13-9. - Suspension, revocation, reapplication. 
(a)  The occupational license that is issued to any person may be suspended, revoked or terminated should the city find that the person so licensed has used the rights or privileges afforded by the occupational license to engage in or to otherwise aid, abet or facilitate others to engage in criminal or otherwise improper or illegal acts that are prohibited by local, municipal, state or federal laws and ordinances. When the occupational license of a person is revoked or otherwise terminated, the person shall, without the assent of the mayor and board of alderpersons providing otherwise, be ineligible to reapply for an occupational license for one (1) year thereafter. 
(b)  When a person's occupational license is considered for suspension or revocation as a result of a finding that the person using the privileges granted by the license engaged in or facilitated conduct, or procured, aided or abetted others in engaging in conduct, that is prohibited by the criminal code cited in the Code of Ordinances or other local, state or federal criminal laws, then the person shall, as a matter of due process, be entitled, before the revocation or suspension takes effect, to: 
(1)  Notice of the prohibited conduct that serves as the basis for suspension or revocation. 
(2)  Notice of the date and place when and where the prohibited conduct occurred. 
(3)  Notice of the recommended corrective action or penalty and the date of imposition. 
(4)  An opportunity to appear before the mayor for a due process conference, for the purpose of receiving or reviewing any charge of engaging of prohibited conduct, responding to any charge, refuting any charge, offering facts or information to refute the charge or to mitigate the degree of any penalty, or inquiring about any charge or the suspension and/or revocation process. 
(5)  An opportunity to be heard before the mayor and board of alderpersons, if requested. 
(c)  Suspension or revocation of an occupational license shall occur only upon an affirmative majority vote of the mayor and board of alderpersons. The actions of the city shall not be dependant on any charge or finding of criminal culpability or guilt, or a lack thereof, by a court or prosecuting authority. 
(d)  For a first offense, where it is determined by the city that a person engaged in prohibited conduct within the meaning of this section, the penalty may range from a warning up to revocation of a person's occupational license. For a second offense, the penalty may range from a suspension up to revocation of a person's occupational license. For a third offense or subsequent offense, the penalty may range from a suspension for a minimum period of six (6) months up to revocation of a person's occupational license. 
(Ord. No. 05-4048, 2-10-05)  
Sec. 13-10. - Permit for use of municipal property for business operations. 
No person or entity may enter upon, traverse, either above ground or below, or otherwise utilize any property, servitude, or other property right, owned, leased, possessed, or controlled by the city (herein referred to as "city property") for the conduct of business operations without first been issued a permit to enter city property for business operations as more fully set for the hereafter. 
(1)  Location of any system for business operations within city property without a valid permit from the city pursuant to this section presents a threat to the health, safety and welfare of the city's citizens and their property and is expressly forbidden. 
(2)  The city recognizes and reserves any and all rights available to it to regulate use of any city property. 
(3)  The granting of any city license, permit, or other requirement for doing business within the city shall not be construed as authorizing any such person or entity the right to utilize city property for the conduct of business operations. 
(4)  Any person or entity desiring to operate a system occupying city property ("applicant") shall make a written request to the city for a permit, which shall include the following information: 
a.  Name, address, telephone number, and contact person of the person or entity making the request; 
b.  Necessary corporate information, if applicable; 
c.  Name, address, email address, and home, office and cell telephone numbers of a person within authority to act on behalf of the applicant in case of emergency; 
d.  Description of the proposed activity; 
e.  Identification of the city property which applicant's system will occupy. Said identification shall include the following: 
i.  Map drawn to scale of the location of all applicant's system presently occupying city property; 
ii.  Inventory of all equipment, structures, and facilities comprising applicant's system occupying city property; and 
iii.  Description of all anticipated construction, major maintenance, and major installation activities which shall include the specific locations and the beginning and ending dates of all projects to be commenced during the next calendar year; and the tentative locations and beginning and ending dates for all projects contemplated for the two year period following the next calendar year. 
f.  Proof of comprehensive general liability insurance covering and affecting the applicant's business operations occupying city property. Applicant shall notify the city of cancellation of such policy(ies) at least thirty (30) days in advance of such cancellation; and 
g.  Name of all contractors acting or working on behalf of applicant within city property along with the name and home, office, and cell telephone numbers of a person with authority to act on behalf of the contractor in case of emergency. 
(5)  Upon provision of all of the information required by subsection (4), the city shall issue a permit allowing the applicant/permittee to enter city property to conduct business operations in accordance with the specific information provided to the city by the applicant/permittee. 
(6)  Standard provisions of each permit granted pursuant to this section shall include the following: 
a.  Conditions of occupancy. The system shall be located so as to cause minimum interference with the public uses of city property and with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who own property that adjoins city property. 
b.  Restoration of public ways. If, during the course of the permittee's construction, installation, or maintenance of the system, there occurs a disturbance of any city property by the permittee, the permittee shall replace and restore such city property to a condition reasonably comparable to the condition of the city property existing immediately prior to such disturbance. 
c.  Relocation at request of the city. If the city shall lawfully elect to vacate, relocate, abandon, alter, reconstruct or change any city property, the permittee, upon thirty (30) days written notice by the city via certified mail to the permittee, shall remove, re-lay and relocate its structure, equipment, and facilities at its own expense. Should the permittee refuse or fail to remove system within thirty (30) days after written notification, the city shall have the right to remove the component parts of the system and charge the permittee for the costs of removal. 
d.  Relocation at request of third party. The permittee shall, on the request of any person holding a lawful building moving permit, protect, support, raise, lower, temporarily disconnect, relocate in or remove from any city property, as necessary, any property of the permittee provided: (i) the expense of such is paid by said person benefiting from the relocation, including, if required by the permittee, making such payment in advance; and (ii) the permittee is given reasonable advance written notice to prepare for such changes. For purposes of this section, "reasonable advance written notice" shall be no less than thirty (30) days in the event of a temporary relocation, and no less than one hundred twenty (120) days for a permanent relocation. 
e.  Interference with use of right-of-way. When working within city property, permittee shall not unreasonably interfere with public uses of said city property and the safety, health, and convenience of the public in the public's use thereof for ordinary travel. 
(7)  No less than three (3) business days prior to commencement of construction, installation or maintenance activities within city property, the permittee shall notify the city of the specific locations and beginning and ending dates of said construction, installation, or maintenance project and shall provide current, accurate contact information for both the permittee and the contactor as outlined in subsection (4). Upon receipt of this notification, the city shall determine whether the proposed construction, installation, or maintenance activities shall pose an unreasonable inference with public uses. If the city determines the proposed activity presents no such unreasonable interference, it shall issue the permittee a notice to proceed. If the permittee receives no written notification from the city within twenty-four (24) hours of the proposed commencement of activities, the proposed activities may be deemed approved. This section shall not apply to emergency repair projects or utility service extension projects which the permittee could not have anticipated. 
(8)  The permittee shall keep all of the information required by subsection (4) current at all times by immediately providing the city written notice of changes. 
(9)  Any person or entity (1) whose system occupies city property for business operations without obtaining the permit required in this section; (2) who fails to provide the seventy-two-hour notice prior to commencement of construction, installation, or maintenance activities as required in subsection (6); or who fails to maintain current, accurate information required by subsection (4) concerning any system occupying city property may have any permit granted pursuant to this section revoked and may be denied future authorization for construction, installation, or maintenance activities for a period of two (2) years. 
(10)  Any violation of this section shall afford the city the full range of remedies available under any applicable law or regulation including the levying of fines. The election of one (1) or more remedies shall not be construed as a waiver of any other legal and/or equitable remedy including, but not limited to the city's right to seek injunctive relief, damage, and attorney's fees as the law might allow. 
(Ord. No. 08-4181, 9-11-08) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 08-4181, adopted September 11, 2008, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, such ordinance has been added as § 13-10 at the editor's discretion.  
Secs. 13-11—13-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to regulate, § 5(28). 
Cross reference— Soliciting upon private residence, § 8-187. 
 
Sec. 13-20. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Door-to-door vendor: Any person, and the agent or employee of any person, who engages in the temporary or transient business in the city of selling, or offering for sale, any goods or merchandise, or exhibiting the same for sale, or exhibiting the same for the purpose of taking orders for the sale thereof; and who for the purpose of carrying on such business or conducting such exhibits thereof does not hire, rent, lease, occupy or receive by donation, any room or space in any building, structure or other enclosure, or on any lot in the city in, through or from which any goods or merchandise may be sold, offered for sale, exhibited for sale or exhibited for the purpose of taking orders for the sale thereof. 
Temporary: Any such business transacted or conducted in the city for which definite arrangements have not been made for hire, rental or lease of premises for at least six (6) months, in or upon which such business is to be operated or conducted. 
Transient: Any such business of any such itinerant vendor and/or door-to-door vendor as may be operated or conducted by persons, or by their agents or employees, who reside away from the city, or who move stocks or goods or merchandise or samples thereof into the city with the purpose or intention of removing them or the unsold portion thereof away from the city before the expiration of six (6) months. 
(Code 1966, § 24-12; Ord. No. 3315, 5-13-86)  
Sec. 13-21. - Exemptions. 
This article, other than section 13-28, is not and shall not be applicable to the selling, or offering for sale, of any goods or merchandise, or exhibiting the same for sale, or exhibiting the same for the purpose of taking orders for the sale thereof: 
(1)  By a vendor of farm produce, or agricultural products in their natural state produced by such vendor; proof of such natural state and production by vendor shall be made to the city clerk; or 
(2)  If the proceeds thereof are applied to any charitable or philanthropic purposes; or 
(3)  At any crafts and arts fairs or festivals sponsored by a Louisiana nonprofit organization. 
(Code 1966, § 24-13; Ord. No. 3315, 5-13-86)  
Sec. 13-22. - Itinerant vendor's permit—application; conditions; bond. 
The permit for the itinerant vendor required by this article shall be issued upon the following conditions: 
(1)  Application: The itinerant vendor shall make application to the city clerk, at least ten (10) days prior to the date of contemplated sale or exhibit to be held in the city, which application shall be in the form of an affidavit stating: 
a.  The full name and address of the itinerant vendor; 
b.  The location of the itinerant vendor's principal office and place of business; 
c.  The location within the city from which the itinerant vendor shall sell, exhibit for sale, offer for sale, or exhibit for the purpose of taking orders for the sale of, such vendor's goods or merchandise; 
d.  The name and address of each assistant, associate or employee who shall work for and under the itinerant vendor; and 
e.  The names and address of its officers, if it is a corporation, and the partnership name and names and addresses of all partners, if such itinerant vendor is a firm. 
The itinerant vendor shall make a separate application to the city clerk for each location within the city from which such vendor will sell, exhibit for sale, offer for sale, or exhibit for the purpose of taking orders for the sale of, any goods or merchandise. 
(2)  Supporting information and bond: The application for a permit of an itinerant vendor must be accompanied by: 
a.  A statement showing the kind and character of the goods or merchandise to be sold, offered for sale, or exhibited; 
b.  A certified copy of the charter, if the itinerant vendor is a corporation incorporated under the laws of this state; 
c.  A certified copy of its permit to do business in this state if the itinerant vendor is a corporation incorporated under the laws of some other state; and 
d.  A bond in the sum of not less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), and it shall be executed by the itinerant vendor as principal, with one (1) or more good and sufficient sureties satisfactory to the city clerk, which bond shall be payable to the mayor of the city and the mayor's successors in office for the use and benefit of any persons entitled thereto, and conditioned that the principal and surety will pay all damages to person or persons caused by or arising from or growing out of the wrongful, fraudulent or illegal conduct of the itinerant vendor while conducting the same or exhibit in the city. The bond shall remain in full force and effect for the entire duration of the permit, as provided herein, and two (2) years thereafter. 
(Code 1966, § 24-17(a); Ord. No. 3315, 5-13-86)  
Sec. 13-23. - Same—scope; transferability; additional fee for employees. 
The permit of an itinerant vendor required by this article shall not be transferable from one (1) itinerant vendor to another, nor from one (1) location to another. It shall not give authority for more than one (1) person to sell, exhibit for sale, offer for sale or exhibit for the purpose of taking orders for the sale of, goods or merchandise as an itinerant vendor, but any itinerant vendor obtaining such permit shall be allowed two (2) assistants, associates or employees who shall work for such vendor, and in the event such person receiving such permit employs or has associated with such vendor more than two (2) assistants, associates or employees, then the permit fee hereinabove provided for shall be increased twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each additional assistant, associate or employee. 
(Code 1966, § 24-18; Ord. No. 3315, 5-13-86)  
Sec. 13-24. - Same—During; display required. 
The permit of the itinerant vendor required by this article shall continue so long as such sale or exhibit is held at the permitted location for at least six (6) hours of each day and at least five (5) days of each calendar week, but in no event shall the permit continue for more than six (6) months from the date of its issuance. Such permit shall be prominently displayed in a conspicuous place on the permitted location where such sale or exhibit is being conducted, which conspicuous place shall be easily seen by the public in general, and it shall remain so displayed so long as any goods or merchandise are being sold or exhibited. 
(Code 1966, § 24-19; Ord. No. 3315, 5-13-86)  
Sec. 13-25. - Door-to-door vendor's permit—Application; conditions; bond; fee. 
The permit for the door-to-door vendor required by this article shall be issued upon the following conditions: 
(1)  Application: The door-to-door vendor shall make application to the city clerk at least ten (10) days prior to the date of contemplated sale or exhibit to be held in the city, which application shall be in the form of an affidavit stating: 
a.  The full name and addresses of the door-to-door vendor; 
b.  The location of the vendor's principal office and place of business; 
c.  The fact that the vendor shall not have a location within the city from which the door-to-door vendor shall sell, exhibit for sale, offer for sale, or exhibit for the purpose of taking orders for the sale of such vendor's goods or merchandise, but shall sell from door-to-door; 
d.  The name and address of each assistant, associate or employee who shall work for and under the door-to-door vendor; and 
e.  The names and address of its officers, if it is a corporation, and the partnership name and names and address of all partners, if such door-to-door vendor is a firm. 
(2)  Supporting information and bond: The application for a permit of a door-to-door vendor must be accompanied by: 
a.  A statement showing the kind and character of the goods or merchandise to be sold, offered for sale, or exhibited; 
b.  A certified copy of the charter, if the door-to-door vendor is a corporation incorporated under the laws of this state; 
c.  A certified copy of its permit to do business in this state if the door-to-door vendor is a corporation incorporated under the laws of some other state; and 
d.  A bond in the sum of not less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) and it shall be executed by the door-to-door vendor as principal, with one (1) or more good and sufficient sureties satisfactory to the director of administration, which bond shall be payable to the mayor of the city and the mayor's successors in office for the use and benefit of any persons entitled thereto, and conditioned that the principal and surety will pay all damages to person or persons caused by or arising from or growing out of the wrongful, fraudulent or illegal conduct of the door-to-door vendor while conducting the sale or exhibit in the city. The bond shall remain in full force and effect for the entire duration of the permit, as provided herein, and two (2) years thereafter. 
(3)  Issuance: The city clerk shall issue to any door-to-door vendor a permit authorizing such door-to-door vendor to sell, exhibit for sale, offer for sale, or exhibit for the purpose of taking orders for the sale, within the city limits of the city, of such vendor's goods or merchandise, only after the door-to-door vendor shall have fully complied with the provisions of this article and shall have paid the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the issuance of such permit. 
(Code 1966, §§ 24-13, 24-17(b); Ord. No. 3315, 5-13-86)  
Sec. 13-26. - Same—Transferability; additional fee. 
The permit of a door-to-door vendor required by this article shall not be transferable from one (1) door-to-door vendor to another. It shall not give authority for more than one (1) person to sell, exhibit for sale, offer for sale or exhibit for the purpose of taking orders for the sale of, goods or merchandise as a door-to-door vendor, but any door-to-door vendor obtaining such permit shall be allowed two (2) assistants, associates or employees who shall work for and under such vendor, and in the event such person receiving such permit employs or has associated with such person more than two (2) assistants, associates, or employees, then the permit fee hereinabove provided for shall be increased twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each additional assistant, associate or employee. 
(Code 1966, § 24-18; Ord. No. 3315, 5-13-86)  
Sec. 13-27. - Same—Duration; exhibiting; making appointments. 
The permit of the door-to-door vendor required by this article shall continue for six (6) months from the date of its issuance. Such permit shall be carried on the person of the door-to-door vendor and exhibited to prospective purchasers. The door-to-door vendor shall, prior to calling at the home or place of business of prospective purchasers, make an appointment for such visit by telephone or by letter. 
(Code 1966, § 24-19; Ord. No. 3315, 5-13-86)  
Sec. 13-28. - Invitation required to go onto residential property. 
The practice of going in or upon private residential or other property in the city by solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, photographers, itinerant merchants, and transient vendors of merchandise not having been requested or invited to do so by the owner or occupant of such private property, for the purpose of soliciting orders or for the sale of goods, wares, or merchandise or the taking of pictures or the sale thereof or for the purpose of disposing of, peddling or hawking the same, is prohibited and declared to be a nuisance. 
(Code 1966, § 24-1; Ord. No. 3315, 5-13-86)  
Sec. 13-29. - Peddlers. 
There is hereby imposed and levied an annual license tax on all peddlers, hawkers, itinerant vendors and any person who displays samples, models, goods, wares or merchandise on a temporary basis in any hotel, motel, store, storehouse, house, vehicle, or any other place, provided that such place is outside of and not within the geographic area that forms the Bastrop Historic District, for the purpose of securing orders for the retail sale of goods, wares or the like kind or quality, either for immediate or future delivery shall obtain a license based on a fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00), provided than an itinerant vendor of agricultural products purchased directly from farmers or an itinerant vendor of seafood products who has either harvested the seafood himself or has purchased the seafood directly from commercial fishermen or shrimpers shall obtain a license based on a flat fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). No peddler, hawker, itinerant vendor or other person may engage in the activities described in this section without first obtaining a license or permit as required by this section. 
Notwithstanding any provision of the Code of Ordinances that may provide to the contrary, no peddler, hawker, itinerant vendor or person may, by virtue of the license or permit issued to said party under the authority of this section, display samples, models, goods, wares or merchandise on a temporary basis in any hotel, motel, store, storehouse, house, vehicle, or any other place located within the geographic area that forms the Bastrop Historic District, for the purpose of securing orders for the retail sale of goods, wares or the like kind or quality, either for immediate or future delivery, except by special authorization granted by the mayor and board of alderpersons. 
All license taxes levied herein shall be due and payable on January 1 of each year and all unpaid license taxes shall become delinquent on March 1. The collection of delinquent accounts shall be enforced in accordance with state law, including state statutes R.S. 47:1601 and 47:1602. 
A cash or surety bond in the amount of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) shall be deposited with the City Clerk for the City of Bastrop, Louisiana or with such other party or agency as the city may designate, to insure the proper payment and remittance of all applicable taxes (including sales and use taxes) that are owed by peddlers and all other persons identified in City Code of Ordinance section 13-29 ("hereafter collectively referred to as "peddler" or "peddlers") who are required to be licensed to do business within the City of Bastrop, Louisiana. The terms of the bond contract or agreement shall provide that the cash amount or bond posted shall indemnify the city and any other aggrieved party, including the Morehouse Parish Sales and Use Tax Commission, for the sum of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00), or any lesser sum upon the peddler's presentation of proof that a lesser sum is due, should the peddler fail to remit payment of all applicable taxes that are due. The bond shall be posted at the time that the peddler or such other party makes application for a license that is authorized to be issued under City Code of Ordinance section 13-29. 
(Ord. No. 87-3359, § 3, 6-9-87; Ord. No. 92-3603, §§ 1, 2, 10-5-92; Ord. No. 11-4206, 12-8-11; Ord. No. 12-4210, 6-14-12) 
State Law reference— Definition of peddler, R.S. 47:342(5); licensing authority, R.S. 47:359(C).  
Sec. 13-30. - Bucket brigades for solicitation of donations. 
(a)  Application to chief of police; training; etc. All persons, groups or organizations desiring to operate a "bucket brigade" for the purpose of soliciting donations for worthy causes shall apply to the chief of police or his designated representative sufficiently in advance of the date selected for the holding of the bucket brigade, attend any training session or conference conducted by the police department on the proper procedures therefor and conduct the bucket brigade only during the hours and on the streets approved by the chief of police or his designated representative. 
(b)  Identifying signs; posting; location of solicitors. All persons, groups or organizations conducting bucket brigades must use large easily read identifying signs stating the purpose for which donations are sought, the name of the donee, the name of the person, group or organization requesting donations and such signs must be posted on both sides of each street where solicitations will be made. Collections must be made from the curb sides of the street for the left lane of traffic and near the cross-walk area and centerline for the right lane of traffic. 
(c)  Age of solicitors; use of identifying vest; behavior. No one under the age of eleven (11) years shall be permitted to participate in a bucket brigade as a solicitor of funds, that for each two (2) children between the ages of eleven (11) and eighteen (18) years soliciting, one (1) adult solicitor must be present to supervise the children and no more than two (2) may solicit on any one (1) street at a time. All solicitors must wear an identifying vest or other distinctive clothing approved by the chief of police or his designated representative. All solicitors must be courteous at all times with such courtesy to include, but not be limited to, speech, gestures and other physical acts. 
(d)  Receipt, symbol or tag. Solicitors must give each donor an appropriate receipt, symbol or tag for the donation which can be displayed in the vehicle as a sign that a donation has been made. Receipt, symbol or tag must also be given to any noncontributory requesting the same and no additional request for donations can be made of persons displaying such receipt, symbol or tag. 
(e)  Number per year: No person, group or organization may be entitled to conduct more than two (2) bucket brigades for any one (1) purpose during a calendar year. 
(f)  Penalties for violation. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or imprisoned for not more than five (5) days or both. 
(Ord. No. 89-3643, §§ 1—6, 12-14-89) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 89-3463A, adopted Dec. 14, 1989, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1—6 as § 13-30 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Secs. 13-31—13-39. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CHARITABLE GAMES OF CHANCE 
 
Sec. 13-40. - License—authority; exemptions. 
(a)  The city clerk or the clerk's designee is hereby authorized to license bona fide veterans, charitable, educational, religious, or fraternal organizations, civic and service clubs recognized as such under the laws of the state, and which organizations shall have qualified with the United States Internal Revenue Service for an exemption from federal income tax under section 501(c)(3), (4), (8), or (19) of the Internal Revenue Code, to hold and operate the specific kind of games of chance, commonly known as raffles, played by drawing for prizes or the allotment of prizes by chance, by the selling of shares or tickets or rights to participate in such games and by conducting the games accordingly; and the games of chance, commonly known as bingo or keno, played for prizes with cards bearing numbers or other designations, five (5) or more in one (1) line, the holder covering numbers, as objects, similarly numbered, are drawn from a receptacle and the game being won by the person who first covers a previously designated arrangement of numbers on such a card; by selling shares or tickets or rights to participate in such game or games and by conducting the games accordingly when the entire net proceeds of such games of change are to be devoted to educational, charitable, religious or public-spirited uses; and, when so licensed, to hold, operate and conduct such games of chance exclusively by its active members pursuant to this article, only on or in premises owned and occupied or leased by the licensee, unless a waiver is granted as hereinafter provided; and for such licensee to sell shares or tickets or rights to participate in such game or games of chance and under such conditions and regulations for the supervision and conduct thereof, as shall be promulgated by the city clerk or the clerk's designee, from time to time, and for any person to participate in and play such games of chance conducted under any such license. 
State Law reference— State law reference—Authority, R.S. 33:4861.1 et seq. 
(b)  A bona fide senior citizens' recreation club, upon application to the city clerk or the clerk's designee shall be exempt from the licensing and reporting procedure enumerated in this article. A "senior citizen recreation club" for the purposes of this article shall be defined as an organization, which is sanctioned by the local council on aging, composed of a group of persons sixty (60) years of age or older, whose only function is to provide amusement and diversion for its members. 
(Code 1966, § 26-01; Ord. No. 3338, 10-14-86)  
Sec. 13-40.1. - Electronic video bingo machines. 
(a)  Permitted at licensed locations. It shall be lawful for any bona fide nonprofit board, association, corporation, or other organization domiciled in this state and qualified with the United States Internal Revenue Service for an exemption from federal income tax under § 501(c)(3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (8), (10), or (19) of the Internal Revenue Code, or like organization authorized under the authority of R.S. 4:703, possessing a current, valid city and state bingo permit that authorizes the use of electronic video bingo machines, to use electronic video bingo machine or machines authorized pursuant to R.S. 4:701 et seq. at licensed locations; and the leasing or placement of such machines from state-approved distributors/suppliers. Any state-approved manufacturer or distributor of supplies or equipment for use in the conduct of any game of chance authorized under this section and any private contractor qualified to conduct games of chance as authorized under the provisions of R.S. 4:729 shall submit a permit application to the Office of the City Clerk for the City of Bastrop ("office of the city clerk"). "State-approved" denotes a person or entity specifically licensed or otherwise approved by the State of Louisiana in accordance with R.S. 4:701 et seq. 
(b)  Application for License. (1) Each state-approved manufacturer or distributor of supplies or equipment for use in the conduct of any game of chance authorized under this Ordinance and any private contractor qualified to conduct games of chance as authorized under the provisions of R.S. 4:729 within the City of Bastrop shall apply for and obtain, on an annual basis, an electronic video bingo distributor/manufacturer license from the City of Bastrop. (2) Every bona fide veteran's, charitable, educational, religious, or fraternal organization, civic, service club, and carnival organization ("EVBL") that desires to sponsor or conduct fund raising events using electronic video bingo machine or machines shall apply for and obtain an electronic video bingo organization permit from the City of Bastrop. Every distributor, manufacturer and EVBL seeking a license or permit shall file with the office of the city clerk written application therefore, in the form prescribed by the office of the city clerk, duly executed and verified, in which shall be stated the name and address of the applicant, the places or places where, the date or dates and the time or times when such electronic video bingo machine or machines are intended to be used by the applicant, or operated by the EVBL, under the license applied for. The majority of the organization's charity work shall be done within Morehouse Parish. During any calendar year, not more than one-third ( 1/3 ) of the EVBL permits issued by the city shall be granted to organizations whose domicile or principal place of business operations is outside of the corporate limits of the city, except that the mayor is hereby authorized to waive this limitation for good cause. 
(c)  Term of license or permit. Licenses or permits issued by the city to a distributor, manufacturer and EVBL shall be effective each year from the period of January first through December 31st of the same year. Fees for a partial calendar year shall not be pro-rated. 
(d)  License processing fee. An annual nonrefundable fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) shall be paid to the city to defray the costs of reviewing and processing an application, and for licensing a distributor, manufacturer or operator. EVBLs that seek a charitable organization permit shall pay an annual nonrefundable fee of ten dollars ($10.00). This licensing fee shall be in addition to occupational license fees that may be owed. 
(e)  Machine permit fee. An annual permit fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for each machine to be permitted on the licensee's premises shall be paid to the city and be included with the application or renewal application. 
(f)  Quarterly statement. Not later than twenty days (20) days after January 1, April 1, July 1, and October 1, of each year, each licensee shall furnish the licensing body a sworn (notarized) and verified statement indicating total payment, cash or coins in, credit played, credits won and credits paid. 
(g)  Maximum number of machines permitted. No one site used by a licensee or permittee under the Ordinance shall have more than thirty-five (35) electronic video bingo machines in each licensed location, subject to the exception provided for below in section (j). 
(h)  Louisiana statutory provisions. Where any provisions hereof conflict with the provisions of R.S. 4:701 et seq., the applicable provisions of such state law and applicable provisions contained in the Louisiana Administrative Code promulgated pursuant thereto, shall govern. Each EVBL shall meet all requirements of state law regarding the operation of electronic video bingo games and use of electronic video bingo machines. 
(i)  Licensed locations. The operation of electronic video bingo machines as authorized by this Ordinance shall not be allowed in any property zoned residential or in any location prohibited by city zoning ordinances. Unless otherwise specified by the mayor and board of alderpersons, it shall be unlawful for the operation of any licensed electronic video bingo machines at any location other than at locations bearing municipal addresses located on (and with ingress and egress by public right-of-way to and from) U.S. Highways 165 and 425, and Louisiana Highway 139. In addition, and unless otherwise specified by the mayor and board of alderpersons by adoption of a city ordinance, it shall be unlawful for the operation of any licensed electronic video bingo machines at any location that has less than seventy-five (75) on-site parking spaces for motor vehicles, which must lie completely outside of any public roads or rights-of-way, provided further that said parking is immediately adjacent to an enclosed building or structure that will house the electronic video bingo machines and is not separated by any public roadway. 
(j)  Number of licensed locations. It shall be unlawful a single licensee to have more than two (2) sites located in the City of Bastrop without the specific authorization of the mayor and board of alderpersons. However, two halls under the same authority or ownership that are within the same structure, or that are in not more than two (2) separate structures that are within two hundred (200) feet of each other, can be considered one site. Nevertheless, and subject to the exception provided for below, at no time shall there be more than three (3) licensed locations in the City of Bastrop. For a two-year period commencing on and from the date in 2007 that electronic video bingo machines become operational, only one applicant will be approved for the operation of electronic video bingo machines within the city, and said applicant shall be granted the exclusive right to operate a minimum of thirty-five (35) machines for up to two years. The city may authorize the operation of additional machines during this period. Thereafter, the city may authorize the licensing of additional operators for additional locations within the city in a manner consistent with this section. The mayor is authorized to execute such contracts and to perform such other required acts that are needed to confect and make effective the exclusive agreement referenced herein and any subsequent agreements with licensees. 
(k)  Sessions. A session represents electronic video bingo games played within a time limit not to exceed six (6) hours within a minimum of twelve (12) hours between sessions. Sessions are limited to not more than one (1) session per day per EVBL. No EVBL shall be permitted to operate electronic video bingo games for more than fifteen (15) sessions in any calendar month. Notwithstanding any provision contained in any ordinance to the contrary, all types of bingo sessions may be allowed to the extent and at the times allowed for electronic video bingo. 
(l)  Net proceeds. For purposes of this Ordinance, the term "net win" shall mean the sum obtained by subtracting total coins for funds paid in or earned minus the total amount paid out on ticket vouchers tendered for cash money. Not less than twenty (20) percent of the net win from each electronic video bingo machine shall be paid as an assessment or tax owed to the city; however, during the first two years that electronic video bingo operates in the city pursuant to the exclusive agreement referenced in section (j), the city shall accept an assessment of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per month, in lieu of twenty (20) percent of the net win, during the first 12 months of the exclusive agreement. The tax or assessment owed to the city from the net win shall be owed and become due on the first day of the month that follows the previous month of operations. Taxes or assessments that are not paid to the city by the fifth day of the month in which they become due shall incur a penalty of two (2) percent per month until paid. 
(m)  General. Except as specifically provided with respect to electronic video bingo, all other requirements and penalties relating to bingo, keno and raffles shall apply to the operation of electronic video bingo machines. To the extent that any this section is in conflict with any other section(s) of this chapter, the provisions of the section shall control. 
(Ord. No. 07-4117, 1-11-07; Ord. No. 07-4118, 1-22-07; Ord. No. 07-4131, 6-14-07)  
Sec. 13-41. - Same—application; designating responsible person. 
(a)  Each applicant for such a license shall file with the city clerk or the clerk's designee a written application therefor in the form prescribed herein, duly executed and verified, in which shall be stated: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant together with sufficient facts relating to its incorporation and/or organization to enable a determination of whether or not it is a bona fide organization or corporation subject to the provisions of this article; 
(2)  The names and addresses of its officers; 
(3)  The specific kind of games of chance intended to be held, operated and conducted by the applicant, and the places where, the dates and the times when, such games of chance are intended to be conducted, by the applicant, under the license applied for; 
(4)  The items of expense intended to be incurred or paid in connection with the holding, operating and conducting of such games of chance and the names and addresses of the persons to whom, and the purposes for which, they are to be paid; 
(5)  The specific purposes of which the entire net proceeds of such games of chance are to be devoted and in what manner; 
(6)  That no commission, salary, compensation, reward or recompense will be paid to any person for holding, operating and conducting or assisting in the holding, operating and conducting of, such games of chance; 
(7)  A description of all prizes to be offered and given in all such games of chance to be held, operated and conducted under such license; 
(8)  Such other information as shall be prescribed by the regulations promulgated by the city clerk from time to time. 
(b)  In each application there shall be designated one (1) or more active members of the applicant under whom the games of chance described in the application are to be held, operated and conducted and to the application shall be appended a statement executed by the applicant and by the members so designated, that they will be responsible for the holding, operating and conducting of such games of chance in accordance with the terms of the license and the provisions of regulations governing the holding, operating and conducting of such games of chance and of this article, if such license is granted. 
(Code 1966, § 26-02; Ord. No. 3338, 10-14-86)  
Sec. 13-42. - Same—Investigation of qualifications of applicant; issuance. 
(a)  The city clerk or the clerk's designee shall make an investigation of the qualifications of each applicant and the merits of the application, with due expedition after the filing of the application, and shall make the following determinations: 
(1)  That the applicant is duly qualified to hold, operate and conduct games of chance under the provisions of this article and the rules and regulations governing the holding, operating and conducting thereof in the municipality. 
(2)  That the members of the organization designated in the application to hold, operate, or conduct or assist in holding, operating, or conducting the games of chance for which the license application is made are bona fide active members of the applicant and are persons of good moral character who have never been convicted of certain related offenses as established by the division of charitable gaming control of the office of state police within the state department of public safety and corrections. 
(3)  That such games of chance are to be held, operated and conducted in accordance with the provisions of this article and in accordance with the rules and regulations governing the holding, operating, and conducting thereof and that the proceeds thereof are to be disposed of as provided by this article. 
(b)  If the governing body is satisfied that no commission, salary, compensation, reward, or recompense whatever will be paid or given to any person holding, operating or conducting or assisting in the holding, operating or conducting of any such game of chance, it shall issue a license to the applicant for the holding; operating and conducting of the specific kind of games of chance applied for accordingly. 
(c)  No license for holding, operating, or conducting of any game or games of chance shall be issued under this article to be effective for a period of more than one (1) calendar year. 
(Code 1966, § 26-03; Ord. No. 3338, 10-14-86)  
Sec. 13-43. - Same—Special. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, the governing body may provide by ordinance for the issuance of a special license for the conduct of not more than two (2) bingo sessions annually at which the total amount of prizes which may be awarded on any one (1) calendar day under such a license shall not exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) in cash or other thing or things of value. Except as otherwise provided in this section, all other provisions of this article shall apply to the issuance of such special licenses. 
(b)  The governing body shall not issue a special license or a regular license to any organization as provided herein unless that organization has first obtained a special charitable gaming license from the division of charitable gaming control of the office of state police within the state department of public safety and corrections, as further provided in R.S. 40:1485.5. 
(Code 1966, § 26-04; Ord. No. 3338, 10-14-86)  
Sec. 13-44. - Same—Refusal; amending; suspension and revocation. 
(a)  In the event the city clerk or the clerk's designee refuses to issue a license to an applicant, the applicant shall have the right to a hearing to be held before the governing body at a regular or special meeting. In the event the applicant desires such a hearing, the applicant shall notify the city clerk in writing by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, of such desire. At least fifteen (15) days prior to the meeting of the governing body at which the applicant shall be entitled to be heard upon the qualifications of the applicant and the merits of the application, the city clerk shall notify the applicant in writing, mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, of the date and time of the meeting of the governing body. 
(b)  Any license issued under this article may be amended, upon application made to the city clerk or the clerk's designee, if the subject matter of the proposed amendment could lawfully and properly have been included in the original license. 
(c)  The city clerk or the clerk's designee shall have the power and authority to suspend any license issued by the city and/or revoke the same. In the event the city clerk or designee suspends and/or revokes any license so issued, the licensee shall have the right to a hearing to be held before the governing body at a regular or special meeting. In the event the licensee desires such a hearing, the licensee shall notify the city clerk in writing by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, of such desire. At least fifteen (15) days prior to the meeting of the governing body at which the licensee shall be entitled to be heard upon the reasons for the suspension and/or revocation, the city clerk shall notify the licensee in writing, mailed to the licensee at the address shown on the license by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, of the date and time of the meeting of the governing body. 
(Code 1966, §§ 26-05, 26-07; Ord. No. 3338, 10-14-86)  
Sec. 13-45. - Same—Form; display; fees; duration. 
(a)  Each license shall be in such form as shall be prescribed in the regulations promulgated by the city clerk or the clerk's designee and shall contain: 
(1)  A description of the kinds of games of chance authorized to be held, operated and conducted thereunder; 
(2)  A statement of the name and address of the licensee; 
(3)  A statement of the names and addresses of the members of the applicant under whom such games of chance will be held, operated and conducted; 
(4)  A statement of the number of times, or the hours during which, such games of chance are authorized to be conducted and the places where and the dates and the times when such games of chance are to be conducted; 
(5)  A statement of the specific purposes to which the entire net proceeds of such games of chance are to be devoted; 
(6)  Any other information which may be required by the regulations shall be contained therein. 
(b)  Each license issued for the conduct of any game of chance shall be conspicuously displayed at the place where the game is to be conducted thereunder at all times during the conduct thereof. 
(c)  If the licensee requests a license for only one (1) game of chance authorized to be held, operated and conducted hereunder, the licensee shall pay to the city the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the issuance of such license, which license fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of such license. If the licensee requests license for more than one (1) game of chance authorized to be held, operated and conducted hereunder in any calendar year, the licensee shall pay to the city the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the issuance of such license, which license fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of such license. All licenses issued pursuant to this subsection shall be for the fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00), regardless of the period of time remaining in the current calendar year for which the same are issued. 
(d)  The license shall be effective for the calendar year for which it is issued. 
(Code 1966, §§ 26-06, 26-13; Ord. No. 3338, 10-14-86)  
Sec. 13-46. - Conduct and supervision over games; right of entry of officers. 
The governing body shall have and exercise control and supervision over all games of chance held, operated and conducted under such license, to the end that the same are fairly held, operated and conducted in accordance with the provisions of such license, the regulations promulgated by the city clerk or designee and the provisions of this article and R.S. 33:4861.1 et seq., governing the holding, operating and conducting of the same. 
(Code 1966, § 26-07; Ord. No. 3338, 10-14-86)  
Sec. 13-47. - Number of games per month; number of prizes per game. 
(a)  No licensee shall hold, operate or conduct any game or games of chance under any license issued under this article more often than on twelve (12) days in one (1) calendar month. 
(b)  The total amount of prizes which may be awarded on any one (1) session by a licensee shall not exceed four thousand five hundred dollars ($4,500.00) in cash or other things of value, except as specifically provided in R.S. 33:4861.7, R.S. 33:4861.17 and R.S. 33:4861.18. 
(Code 1966, § 26-08; Ord. No. 3338, 10-14-86)  
Sec. 13-48. - Restrictions on conducting of games. 
(a)  No person shall hold, operate and conduct or assist in holding, operating and conducting of any game of chance under any license issued under this article, except after full compliance with the provisions of R.S. 33:4861.1 et seq., and except an active member of the organization to which the license is issued. 
(b)  No such game of chance shall be conducted with any equipment except such as shall be owned absolutely or used without payment of any compensation thereof by the licensee. 
(c)  No item of expense shall be incurred or paid in connection with the holding, operating and conducting of any game of chance held, operated and conducted pursuant to any license issued under this article, except such as bona fide items of reasonable amounts of goods, wares and merchandise furnished or services rendered, which are reasonably necessary to be purchased or furnished for the holding, operating and conducting thereof, under any circumstances whatever. 
(d)  No commission, salary, compensation, reward or recompense whatever shall be paid or given, directly or indirectly, to any person holding, operating and conducting, or assisting in the holding, operating and conducting of any game or games of chance so held, operated and conducted. 
(e)  Any such game or games shall be held, operated and conducted only on or in premises owned and occupied or leased by the licensee hereunder, unless a waiver is granted by the city clerk or the clerk's designee upon written request by the licensee. 
(Code 1966, § 26-09; Ord. No. 3338, 10-14-86)  
Sec. 13-49. - Statement of receipts; expenditures; books and records required. 
(a)  No later than ten (10) days after the end of the month in which the game of chance was held, operated and conducted, the organization or association which held, operated and conducted the game and its member or members who were in charge thereof, shall furnish to the city clerk or his designee, the following: 
(1)  A verified statement showing the amount of the gross receipts derived from each such game of chance, which shall include receipts from the sale of shares, tickets or rights in any manner connected with participation in such game or the right to participate therein; 
(2)  Each item of expense incurred, or paid, and each item of expenditure made or to be made; 
(3)  Name and address of each person to whom each such item has been, or is to be paid, with a detailed description of the merchandise purchased or the services rendered therefor; 
(4)  The net profit derived from each such game of chance, and the uses to which such net profit has been or is to be applied; and 
(5)  A list of prizes offered or given, with the respective values thereof. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of each licensee to maintain and keep such books and records as may be necessary to substantiate the particulars of each such report. 
(Code 1966, § 26-10; Ord. No. 3338, 10-14-86)  
Sec. 13-50. - Examination of books, records and personnel. 
The city clerk or the clerk's designee shall have the power to examine or to cause to be examined the books and records of any organization or association to which such license is issued so far as they may relate to any transaction connected with the holding and conducting of any game of chance thereunder and to examine any manager, officer, director, agent, member or employee thereof under oath in relation to the conduct of any such game of chance under any such license; but any information so received shall not be disclosed except so far as may be necessary for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1966, § 26-11; Ord. No. 3338, 10-14-86)  
Sec. 13-51. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person who shall make any false statement in any application for a license under this article, or shall fail to keep such books and records as shall fully and truly record all transactions connected with the holding, operating and conducting of games of chance under any such license or shall falsify or make any false entry in any books or records so far as they relate to any transaction connected with the holding, operating and conducting of any game of chance under any such license or shall violate any of the provisions of this article or of any term of such license, shall be a disorderly person and if convicted as such, shall, in addition to suffering any other penalties which may be imposed, forfeit any license issued to it under this article and shall be ineligible to apply for a license under this article for one (1) year thereafter. 
(b)  All activities conducted requiring such license by the proposed licensee who has not obtained such license shall subject the conductors of such activity to the criminal penalties to which the conductors of unlicensed games of chance, as described in this article, are subject. 
(Code 1966, §§ 26-06, 26-12; Ord. No. 3338, 10-14-86)  
Secs. 13-52—13-59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SALES AND USE TAXES 
 
Sec. 13-60. - Ordinances incorporated by reference. 
Ordinance number 3261, dated May 14, 1985, and ordinance number 88-3402, dated July 19, 1988, levying sales and use taxes are hereby incorporated into and made a part of this Code by reference, as fully as if set out at length herein.  
Secs. 13-61—13-69. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - GOING-OUT-OF-BUSINESS, FIRE, BANKRUPTCY OR FIDUCIARY SALES 
 
Sec. 13-70. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them [in this section]: 
Going-out-of-business, fire, bankruptcy, or fiduciary sale includes an insurance, mortgage, insolvent, assignees, executors, administrators, receivers, trustees, removal or closing-out sale, a sale of damaged goods, or a sale in which a merchant advertises that he is disposing of all goods, as a means of ceasing to do business. 
Goods includes goods, wares and merchandise. 
(Ord. No. 89-3454, § 1, 9-14-89)  
Sec. 13-71. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this part shall not apply to sheriffs, constables, or public or court officers, or to persons acting under the license, direction or authority of any court, state or federal, selling goods in the course of their official duties. 
(Ord. No. 89-3454, § 2, 9-14-89)  
Sec. 13-72. - License—Required. 
Every person who advertises, represents or holds out that any sale of goods is a going-out-of-business, fire, bankruptcy or fiduciary sale shall first obtain a license to conduct the sale from the mayor of the city. 
(Ord. No. 89-3454, § 3, 9-14-89)  
Sec. 13-73. - Same—Application; contents. 
(a)  Every person who desires a license under the provisions of this article shall make an application to the mayor in writing and under oath, showing all the facts in regard to the going-out-of-business, insurance, bankruptcy, mortgage, insolvency, assignment, administration, receivership, trusteeship or removal by reason of which the sale is to be conducted, or in regard to the closing-out of his stock of goods, or any particular line or part with the statement as to the reason for the closing-out, or in regard to the damage to the goods, and in regard to the sale which he proposes to conduct, the place and manner of conducting it, including an inventory of the goods to be sold, a statement, as far as possible, of the names of the persons from whom the goods were obtained, the date of delivery of the goods to the person applying for the license, the place from which the goods were last taken, and all details necessary to identify fully the goods to be sold. The application shall also specify whether the applicant proposes to advertise or conduct the sale as a going-out-of-business, fire, bankruptcy or fiduciary sale with a statement of the fiduciary relationship. 
(b)  The application shall specify the proposed period of time over which the sale is to continue, which period shall not exceed three (3) months. If it appears, upon sworn application to the mayor, at any time during during the three-month period, that all of the goods described in the inventory in the original application have not been sold, and if the application is accompanied by an inventory of what remains, a supplemental license, granting authority to continue the sale for a further period of three (3) months shall be issued by the mayor upon the same terms and conditions as the original license. 
(Ord. No. 89-3454, § 4, 9-14-89)  
Sec. 13-74. - Same—Issuance. 
If the mayor is satisfied from the application required by section 13-73 that the proposed sale is of the character which the applicant desires to conduct and advertise, he shall issue a license upon the payment of the fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), to the person applying, authorizing him to advertise and conduct a sale of the particular kind mentioned in the application, according to the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 89-3454, § 5, 9-14-89)  
Sec. 13-75. - Same—Record of application; abstract. 
The mayor to whom application is made, as provided for in section 13-73, shall endorse upon the application the date of its filing, preserve it in a record of his office, make an abstract of the facts set forth in the application in a book, properly indexed and kept for this purpose, which abstract shall contain the name of the person asking for a license, the nature of the proposed sale, the place where the sale is to be conducted, its duration, the inventory value of the goods to be sold, and a general statement as to where the goods came from, and make in the book a notation as to the issuance or refusal of the license applied for, together with the date of issuance or refusal and endorse on the application the date that the license, as applied for, is granted or refused. The application and abstract should be prima facie evidence of all statements contained therein. 
(Ord. No. 89-3454, § 6, 9-14-89)  
Sec. 13-76. - Same—Removal of goods; validity. 
The license required by section 13-72 shall be valid only for a sale of the goods inventoried and described in the application for a license in the manner and at the time and place mentioned and set forth in the application. Any removal of the goods so inventoried and described in the application on the place of sale mentioned in the application shall cause the goods to lose their identity as an insurance, bankrupt, mortgage, insolvent's, assignees', executors', administrators', receivers' or trustees' stock of goods or a damaged stock of goods, and thereafter no license shall be issued for the conducting of a sale of any goods so removed from the place set forth and described in the application, under the provisions of this article and any other place. 
(Ord. No. 89-3454, § 7, 9-14-89)  
Sec. 13-77. - Additional goods—purchase for resale prohibited. 
No person intending to conduct a going-out-of-business, fire, bankruptcy or fiduciary sale under the license required by section 13-72 shall order any goods for the purpose of selling and disposing of the same at the sale, and any unusual purchase and additions to the stock of goods within sixty (60) days prior to the filing of the application for license to conduct the sale mentioned in section 13-73 shall be presumptive evidence that the purchases and additions of the stock were made in contemplation of the sale and for the purpose of selling the purchases and additions at the sale. 
(Ord. No. 89-3454, § 8, 9-14-89)  
Sec. 13-78. - Same—Not to be added during sale. 
(a)  No person carrying on or conducting a going-out-of-business, fire, bankruptcy or fiduciary sale under the license required by section 13-72 shall, during the continuance of the sale, add any goods to the stock of goods described and inventoried in his original application, and no goods shall be sold at or during the sale, except the goods described and inventoried in such original application. 
(b)  Each and every and every addition of goods to the stock of goods described and inventoried in the application, and each sale of the goods inventoried and described in the application, shall constitute a separate offense under this article. 
(Ord. No. 89-3454, § 9, 9-14-89)  
Sec. 13-79. - False advertising; penalty for violation of section. 
(a)  No person shall advertise, represent or hold out any sale of goods to be a going-out-of-business, fire, bankruptcy or fiduciary sale without having complied with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00), nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisoned for not more than six (6) months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 89-3454, § 10, 9-14-89)  
Sec. 13-80. - Violations of article; penalty. 
(a)  No person shall hold, or carry on any sale of goods as a going-out-of-business, fire, bankruptcy or fiduciary sale contrary to the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Whoever violates any of the provisions of this article, except as provided in section 13-79, shall be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 89-3454, § 11, 9-14-89)  
Secs. 13-81—13-99. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - DEALERS IN USED GOODS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Junk, § 10-40 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - PAWNBROKERS 
 
Sec. 13-100. - Pawnbroker defined. 
"Pawnbroker" means a person, partnership or corporation, who lends money on deposit or pledge, or who takes other things as security for the money advanced, or who purchases property for the purpose of selling it back at a stipulated price, or who makes a public display at his place of business of the sign generally used by pawnbrokers to denote their business, namely, three (3) gilt or yellow balls, or who publicly exhibits a sign that money is to be loaned on personal property or deposit. 
(Ord. No. 90-3481, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Sec. 13-101. - License required. 
(a)  No person shall do business as a pawnbroker without having first obtained the license required by La.R.S. 37:1752, La.R.S. 47:350, and section 13-1 of the Code of Ordinances of the city. Any person desiring a license as pawnbroker shall make application, in writing, stating the full name(s) and residence(s) of the applicant(s). If the applicant is a partnership, or if a corporation, the name and residence of each of its officers and the location at which the business will be conducted, will be included on the application. 
(b)  Upon the payment of the license fee and the filing of the bond hereafter provided for, the applicant shall be licensed to carry on, conduct or engage in the business of pawnbroker at the place designated in the license. 
(Ord. No. 90-3481, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Sec. 13-102. - Location of business. 
(a)  If, after issuance and delivery of a license under the provisions of this article, any change is made in the location of the place of business designated therein, the business shall not be conducted at the location or under such license until the official issuing the license notes the change on the license and the chief of police, Bastrop police department, and the sheriff of Morehouse Parish are notified in writing of the change. 
(b)  If the business is being carried on, conducted or engaged in more than one (1) location, then each location must have a separate license. 
(Ord. No. 90-3481, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Sec. 13-103. - Bond. 
Every applicant for a license under the provisions of this article shall submit with the application a bond in favor of the city in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00), with security, conditioned for the due observance of all provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 90-3481, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Sec. 13-104. - Book to be kept; entries required. 
(a)  Every pawnbroker shall keep a book which shall be a bound volume, in which shall be fairly written in ink at the time of each transaction, an accurate description in the English language of the person making the loan or selling any goods, as well as an accurate description of the goods, article or item pawned, pledged or sold, the amount of money loaned thereon, and the time of pledging the same. When a watch is pawned, the number, name of maker, all letters or marks thereon must also be entered in the book; and whenever any articles manufactured from gold or silver are pawned, all letters or marks thereon must also be entered in the same book. 
(b)  The name, address, sex, race, height, weight, Social Security number and driver's license number of the person or persons making the loan, pledging, pawning, selling or delivering said merchandise to the pawnbroker shall be obtained and included with each ledger entry. 
(c)  Records of each transaction shall be preserved for a period of at least three (3) years. No entry made in such book shall be erased, obliterated, defaced or removed. 
(Ord. No. 90-3481, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Sec. 13-105. - Photographic and other records; exceptions. 
In addition to the information required in section 13-104, every pawnbroker shall be required to obtain a photograph of a person selling or delivering merchandise to the dealer. The quality of such photograph shall be sufficient to readily identify the person depicted. In lieu of the photograph of the person selling or delivering the merchandise, pawnbrokers may obtain a thumbprint of such person, the quality of which thumbprint shall be sufficient to readily identify the person. Each photograph or thumbprint shall be cross-referenced with the ledger entry required by section 13-104, and shall be preserved for a period of at least three (3) years. 
(Ord. No. 90-3481, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Sec. 13-106. - Book to be open for inspection. 
The book containing the records of loans, pledges, purchases and deliveries required in section 13-104 and the various articles pledged and referred to therein shall at all times be opened to the inspection of law enforcement officers of the Louisiana state police, the Bastrop police department and the Morehouse Parish sheriff's department. 
(Ord. No. 90-3481, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Sec. 13-107. - Copy of book entries to be furnished daily. 
Every person licensed under the provisions of this article shall make and deliver to the Bastrop police department and the Morehouse Parish sheriff's department, every day before the hour of 12:00 noon, a legible and correct copy of the entries made in the book required by section 13-104, during the previous day. In lieu of the copies of entries made in the book required above, pawnbrokers may furnish to the Bastrop police department and the Morehouse Parish sheriff's department a copy of each of the tickets required by section 13-119 below. This exception is allowable only if the tickets or memoranda are sequentially numbered and a copy of each and every ticket and/or memoranda is furnished. 
(Ord. No. 90-3481, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Sec. 13-108. - Sale of property, time for; record. 
(a)  No pawnbroker shall sell any jewelry pledged to him as collateral security for loans made before a lapse of twelve (12) months from the time of the loan; neither shall he sell other property other than jewelry pledged to him for a loan before the lapse of three (3) months. 
(b)  All sales of property by a pawnbroker, whether acquired through forfeiture or purchase, shall be recorded in the same manner as required in section 13-104. 
(Ord. No. 90-3481, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Sec. 13-109. - Hours of pawnbrokers. 
A pawnbroker shall neither open his place of business before the hour of 7:30 a.m. nor keep it open after the hour of 7:00 p.m., except Saturdays and the month of December, during which times the hour of 7:00 p.m. shall be extended to 10:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 90-3481, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Sec. 13-110. - Minors; taking property in payment or pledge. 
No pawnbroker shall take or receive in payment or pledge for money loaned, any property, bonds, notes, securities, articles, or other things of value from any minor. Lack of knowledge of age shall not be defense to a violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 90-3481, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Sec. 13-111. - Violations by pawnbrokers; penalty. 
Any pawnbroker who shall violate, neglect or refuse to comply with any provisions of this article shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), or imprisoned for not less than ten (10) days or more than thirty (30) days, or both, for the first offense. For the second and subsequent offenses, the pawnbroker shall be fined five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisoned for not less than thirty (30) days nor more than sixty (60) days, or both. If convicted three (3) times, his license shall be revoked and he shall thereafter not be permitted to engage in the business of pawnbroker in the city. 
(Ord. No. 90-3481, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Sec. 13-112. - Failure to comply; penalty. 
Anyone acting as a pawnbroker without complying with the provisions of this article shall be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisoned for not less than thirty (30) days nor more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 90-3481, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Sec. 13-113. - Pledgor's liability prohibited. 
A pledgor shall have no obligation to redeem pledged goods or make any payment on a pawn transaction. 
(Ord. No. 90-3481, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Sec. 13-114. - Prohibited practices. 
A pawnbroker shall not: 
(1)  Accept a pledge from a person under the age of eighteen (18) years. Lack of knowledge of age shall not be a defense. 
(2)  Make any agreement requiring the personal liability of the pledgor in connection with a pawn transaction. 
(3)  Accept any waiver, in writing or otherwise, of any right or protection accorded a pledgor under this article or under the provisions of any applicable state law. 
(4)  Fail to exercise reasonable care to protect pledged goods from loss or damage. 
(5)  Enter any pawn transaction which has a maturity date of more than ninety (90) days after the date of the transaction on miscellaneous items and one (1) year on jewelry items. 
(6)  Accept for pledge, pawn or security any articles prohibited under this article or prohibited under the provisions of any applicable state law. 
(7)  Display to the public any pistol, dirk, dagger, blackjack, handchain, sword cane, knuckles made of any hard substance, switchblade knife, spring-blade knife, or throwing knife, or depict the same on any sign or advertisement which may be viewed from the street. 
(8)  Violate, neglect or refuse to comply with any provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 90-3481, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Sec. 13-115. - Presentation of ticket; presumption. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article or in the applicable provisions of state law, any person properly identifying himself and presenting a pawn ticket to the pawnbroker shall be presumed to be entitled to redeem the pledged goods described therein. 
(Ord. No. 90-3481, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Sec. 13-116. - Lost or destroyed tickets. 
In the event the pawn ticket has been lost, destroyed or stolen, a pawnbroker shall deliver the pledged goods or issue a new pawn ticket. Before delivering the pledged goods or issuing a new pawn ticket, the pawnbroker shall require the pledgor to attest to the loss, destruction or theft of the original ticket. 
(Ord. No. 90-3481, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Sec. 13-117. - Accepting pawn of certain articles prohibited. 
No pawnbroker shall buy, sell or take for pledge, pawn or security any razor, except a safety razor, any dirk, bowie knife, or other knife of like kind or size, any sword cane, sling-shot, blackjack, knuckles made of a hard substance, or Spanish stiletto. Firearms, which shall include pistols, handguns, shotguns and rifles, shall be exempt from this provision. 
(Ord. No. 90-3481, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Sec. 13-118. - Posting of maximum compensation. 
The maximum charge of compensation charged by a pawnbroker pursuant to the authority herein shall be posted in a place clearly visible to the general public. 
(Ord. No. 90-3481, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Sec. 13-119. - Pawn ticket contents. 
The pawnbroker, at the time the pawn transaction is entered, shall deliver to the pledgor a sequentially numbered memorandum or ticket which shall clearly set forth the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the pawnshop. 
(2)  The name and address of the pledgor and pledgor's description, or the distinctive number from the pledgor's driver's license or other photographic identification document. 
(3)  The date of the transaction. 
(4)  A brief but complete description of the pledged goods as set forth in section 13-104. 
(5)  The amount of cash advanced or the credit extended to the pledgor which shall be designated as the amount financed. 
(6)  The total amount, which shall include the amount financed plus the finance charge to be paid on a monthly basis to redeem the pledged goods, and the total of payments if paid on the maturity date. 
(7)  The annual percentage rate. 
(8)  The maturity date of the pawn transaction. 
(9)  A statement to the effect that the pledgor is not obligated to redeem the pledged goods, and a further statement that the pledged goods may be forfeited to the pawnbroker one (1) year after the specified maturity date of any jewelry pledged or may be forfeited after three (3) months in the case of property other than jewelry. 
(10)  The service charges which shall be incurred upon entering the pawn transaction and any other service charges which may accrue during the period of pawn. 
(11)  No more than four (4) items shall be listed on each ticket. 
(Ord. No. 90-3481, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Sec. 13-120. - Stolen items. 
Notwithstanding any provision of the Louisiana Civil Code or of any other provisions of law to the contrary, when the operator of a pawnshop has acquired a stolen item, the operator of the pawnshop shall return the item to the owner at no cost to the owner, upon presentation by the owner of proof of ownership of the item and a certified copy of the police report in which the item was reported stolen. 
(Ord. No. 90-3481, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Sec. 13-121. - Maximum rate of interest for pawn transactions. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, a person licensed as a pawnbroker pursuant to this article and Louisiana RS 37:1751 et seq., may charge a maximum rate of interest of ten (10) percent per month on pawn transactions. In addition to the interest charged on pawn transactions, the pawnbroker may charge a one-time fee not to exceed ten (10) percent for all other services, to include storage. Any transaction whereby property is transferred to the pawnbroker and later redeemed by the previous owner shall be considered a loan for the purpose of this section. 
(Ord. No. 90-3481, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Secs. 13-122—13-129. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SECONDHAND DEALERS 
 
Sec. 13-130. - Secondhand dealer defined. 
(a)  Every person, partnership or corporation in this city engaged in the business of buying, selling, trading in, or otherwise acquiring or disposing of used or secondhand property such as jewelry, silverware, diamonds, pictures, objects of art, clothing, mechanic's tools, carpenter's tools, automobile accessories and supplies, and other such property is a secondhand dealer. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to the retail sale of jewelry, automobiles, furniture, and antique businesses. 
(Ord. No. 90-3481, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Sec. 13-131. - License required; application; bond; exemptions. 
(a)  No person shall do business as a secondhand dealer in this city without having first obtained the license required by La.R.S. 376:1862, La. R.S. 47:350 and section 13-1 of the city Code of Ordinances. Any person desiring a license as a secondhand dealer shall make application in writing, specifying the street address of the building where the business is to be carried on. If the applicant is a partnership or corporation, the name(s) and residence(s) of each of its officers and the location at which the business will be conducted, will be included on the application. The application shall be signed by at least three (3) property taxpayers of the city, certifying that the applicant is of good moral character. The applicant shall also submit with his application a bond in favor of the city in the sum of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), with security, conditioned for the due observance of all provisions of this article. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to a retail tire outlet or to an automobile dealer dealing in tires. 
(Ord. No. 90-3481, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Sec. 13-132. - Location of business. 
(a)  If, after issuance and delivery of a license under the provisions of this article, any change is made in the location of the place of business designated therein, the business shall not be conducted at the location under such license, until the official issuing the license notes the change on the license and the chief of police, Bastrop police department and the sheriff of Morehouse Parish are notified in writing of the change. 
(b)  If the business is being carried on, conducted or engaged in at more than one (1) location, each location must have a separate license. 
(Ord. No. 90-3481, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Sec. 13-133. - Record of secondhand goods or objects purchased or sold. 
(a)  Every secondhand dealer as defined in this article shall be required to maintain book or ledger, which shall be a bound volume, setting forth each purchase or sale of secondhand or used merchandise when the value of any single piece of merchandise or article received or sold shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or more, for each single transaction. The price at which a piece of merchandise is offered for sale by the secondhand dealer shall be considered prima facie evidence of the value of the piece of merchandise. Each ledger entry shall be entered at the time of each transaction and shall contain an accurate description in the English language of the merchandise or article received or sold, including serial numbers, model numbers, brand names, colors, sizes, initials, style and any other distinguishing letters, number or marks, numbers of said objects, if distinguishable, along with the amount paid therefor. 
(b)  The name, address, sex, race, height, weight, Social Security number and driver's license number or other photographic identification document number of the person or persons delivering said merchandise to the secondhand dealer shall be obtained and included with each ledger entry. Records of each purchase or sale shall be preserved for a period of at least three (3) years. 
(c)  The secondhand dealer, at the time each transaction is entered into the book required by (a) above, shall deliver to the customer a sequentially numbered memorandum or ticket which shall clearly set forth the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the secondhand dealer; 
(2)  The name and address of the customer and the customer's description, or the distinctive number from the customer's driver's license or other photographic identification document; 
(3)  The date of the transaction; 
(4)  A brief but complete description of the items as set forth in section 13-133(a); 
(5)  The total dollar amount of the transaction; and 
(6)  No more than four (4) items shall be listed on each ticket or memorandum. 
(Ord. No. 90-3481, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Sec. 13-134. - Photographic and other records required; exceptions. 
(a)  In addition to the information required in section 13-133, every secondhand dealer shall be required to obtain a photograph of the person selling or delivering the merchandise to the dealer. The quality of such photograph shall be sufficient to readily identify the person depicted. In lieu of the photograph of the person selling or delivering the merchandise, secondhand dealers may obtain a thumbprint of such person, the quality of which thumbprint shall be sufficient to readily identify the person. Each photograph or thumbprint shall be cross-referenced with the ledger entry required by section 13-133, and shall be preserved for a period of at least three (3) years. 
(b)  These provisions shall not apply to: 
(1)  A transaction between dealers who are licensed under Article I of this chapter, Part 1 of Chapter 21 of Title 37 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes of 1950; 
(2)  The sale or purchase of manufactured registered bullion bars, coins, or other numismatic items; or 
(3)  A retail tire outlet or an automobile dealer dealing in tires. 
(Ord. No. 90-3481, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Sec. 13-135. - Purchase of precious metals and stones from minors. 
(a)  No secondhand dealer shall purchase gold, silver, copper, brass or other precious metals, jewelry, precious stones or objects composed of such precious metals or stones from a person under the age of eighteen (18) years. Lack of knowledge of age shall not be a defense to the violation of this section. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the sale of manufactured registered bullion bars, coins or other numismatic items; or, a retail tire outlet or an automobile dealer dealing in tires. 
(Ord. No. 90-3481, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Sec. 13-136. - Book to be open for inspection. 
The book containing records of purchase or sale required in section 13-133 and the articles purchased or sold and referred to therein shall, at all times, be opened to the inspection of law enforcement officers of the Bastrop police department, the Louisiana state police or the Morehouse Parish sheriff's department. 
(Ord. No. 90-3481, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Sec. 13-137. - Daily reports of entries. 
Every person licensed under the provisions of this article shall make and deliver to the Bastrop police department and the Morehouse Parish sheriff's department every day before the hour of 12:00 noon, a legible and correct copy of the entries made in the book required by section 13-133 above, during the previous day. In lieu of the copies of entries made in the book required above, secondhand dealers may furnish to the Bastrop police department and the Morehouse Parish sheriff's department a copy of each of the tickets or memoranda required by section 13-133(c). This exception is allowable only if the tickets or memoranda are sequentially numbered and a copy of each and every ticket and/or memoranda is furnished. 
(Ord. No. 90-3481, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Sec. 13-138. - Disposal or changing identity prohibited during thirty-day period; exceptions. 
(a)  No secondhand dealer shall sell or dispose of or change or destroy the identity of any goods, articles or things purchased by him before an interval of thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the purchase has elapsed. Any secondhand dealer may sell, dispose of, change or destroy any goods, articles or things purchased by him from a customer known to him without any delay, and the secondhand dealer shall certify his knowledge of the customer in the book set forth in section 13-133. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to a retail tire outlet or an automobile dealer dealing in tires. 
(Ord. No. 90-3481, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Sec. 13-139. - Hours of business. 
A secondhand dealer shall neither open his place of business before the hour of 7:30 a.m., nor keep it open after the hour of 7:00 p.m., except Saturdays and the month of December, during which times the hour of 7:00 p.m. shall be extended to 10:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 90-3481, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Sec. 13-140. - Violations; penalties. 
Any secondhand dealer who shall violate, neglect or refuse to comply with any provision of the article shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), or imprisoned for not less than ten (10) days or more than thirty (30) days, or both, for the first offense. For the second and subsequent offenses, the secondhand dealer shall be fined five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisoned for not less than thirty (30) days nor more than sixty (60) days, or both. If convicted three (3) times, his license shall be revoked and he shall thereafter not be permitted to engage in the business of secondhand dealer in the city. 
(Ord. No. 90-3481, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Sec. 13-141. - Failure to comply; penalty. 
Anyone acting as a secondhand dealer without complying with the provisions of the article shall be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 90-3481, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Secs. 13-142—13-149. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - JUNK AND/OR SCRAP DEALERS 
 
Sec. 13-150. - Junk and/or scrap dealer defined. 
Any person, partnership or corporation engaged in the business of selling or buying junk and/or scrap items in the city is a junk and/or scrap dealer. 
(Ord. No. 90-3481, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Sec. 13-151. - License required; application; bond; exemptions. 
(a)  No person shall do business as a junk dealer and/or scrap dealer in the city without having first obtained the license required by section 13-1 of the Code of Ordinances of the city. Any person desiring a license as a junk dealer and/or scrap dealer shall make application in writing, specifying the street address of the location where the business is to be carried on. The application shall be signed by at least three (3) property taxpayers of the city certifying that the applicant is of good moral character. If the applicant is a partnership or corporation, the name(s) and residence(s) of each of its officers and the location at which the business will be conducted, will be included in the application. The applicant shall also submit with his application a bond in favor of the city in the sum of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), with security, conditioned for the due observance of all provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 90-3481, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Sec. 13-152. - Location of business. 
(a)  If after issuance and delivery of a license under the provisions of the article, any change is made in the location of the place of business designated therein, the business shall not be conducted at the location under such license, until the official issuing the license notes the change on the license and the chief of police, Bastrop police department and the sheriff of Morehouse Parish are notified in writing of the change. 
(b)  If the business is being carried on, conducted or engaged in at more than one (1) location, each location must have a separate license. 
(Ord. No. 90-3481, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Sec. 13-153. - Record of junk and/or scrap goods purchased, sold or offered. 
(a)  Every junk dealer and/or scrap dealer as defined in the article shall be required to maintain a book or ledger, which shall be a bound volume, setting forth each purchase, sale or offer of purchase of junk or scrap item when the value of any item received, sold or offered shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or more, for each single transaction. The price at which an item is offered for sale by the junk or scrap dealer shall be considered prima facie evidence of the value of the item. Each ledger entry shall be entered at the time of each transaction and shall contain an accurate description in the English language of the merchandise or article received, sold or offered, including serial numbers, model numbers, brand names, colors, sizes, initials, style and any other distinguishing letters, number or marks, numbers of said objects, if distinguishable, along with the amount paid therefor. 
(b)  The name, address, sex, race, height, weight, Social Security number and driver's license number or other photographic identification document number of the person or persons delivering said item to the junk or scrap dealer shall be obtained and included with each ledger entry. Records of each purchase, offer or sale shall be preserved for a period of at least three (3) years. 
(c)  Transaction ticket. The junk dealer or scrap dealer, at the time the transaction is entered into the book required in subsection (a) above, shall deliver to the customer a sequentially numbered memorandum or ticket which shall clearly set forth the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the junk dealer or scrap dealer; 
(2)  The name and address of the customer and the customer's description, or the distinctive number from the customer's driver's license or other photographic identification document; 
(3)  The date of the transaction; 
(4)  A brief but complete description of the items as set forth in subsection (a) above; 
(5)  The total dollar amount of the transaction; and 
(6)  No more than four (4) items shall be listed on each ticket or memorandum. 
(Ord. No. 90-3481, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Sec. 13-154. - Purchase of junk or scrap from minors. 
(a)  No junk dealer or scrap dealer shall purchase any item from a person under the age of eighteen (18) years. Lack of knowledge of age shall not be a defense to the violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 90-3481, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Sec. 13-155. - Book to be open for inspection. 
The book containing records of purchase or sale required in section 13-153 and the articles purchased, offered or sold and referred to therein shall, at all times, be opened to the inspection of law enforcement officers of the Bastrop police department, the Louisiana state police, and the Morehouse Parish sheriff's department. 
(Ord. No. 90-3481, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Sec. 13-156. - Daily reports of entries. 
Every person licensed under the provisions of this article shall make and deliver to the Bastrop police department and the Morehouse Parish sheriff's department every day before the hour of 12:00 noon, a legible and correct copy of the entries made in the book required by section 13-153 during the previous day. In lieu of the copies of entries made in the book required above, junk dealers or scrap dealers may furnish to the Bastrop police department and the Morehouse Parish sheriff's department, a copy of each of the tickets required by section 13-153(c). This exception is allowable only if the tickets or memoranda are sequentially numbered and a copy of each and every ticket and/or memoranda is furnished. 
(Ord. No. 90-3481, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Sec. 13-157. - Disposal or changing identity prohibited during thirty-day period; exceptions. 
No junk dealer or scrap dealer shall sell or dispose of, change or destroy the identity of any item purchased by him before an interval of thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the purchase has elapsed. Any junk or scrap dealer may sell, dispose of, change or destroy the items purchased by him from a customer known to him without delay, and the junk or scrap dealer shall certify his knowledge of the customer in the book set forth in section 13-153. 
(Ord. No. 90-3481, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Sec. 13-158. - Hours of business. 
A junk or scrap dealer shall neither open his place of business before the hour of 7:30 a.m., nor keep it open after the hour of 7:00 p.m., except Saturdays and the month of December, during which times the hour of 7:00 p.m. shall be extended to 10:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 90-3481, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Sec. 13-159. - Violations; penalties. 
Any junk or scrap dealer who shall violate, neglect or refuse to comply with any provision of this article shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), or imprisoned for not less than ten (10) days or more than thirty (30) days, or both, for the first offense. For the second and subsequent offenses, the junk or scrap dealer shall be fined five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisoned for not less than thirty (30) days nor more than sixty (60) days, or both. If convicted three (3) times, his license shall be revoked and he shall thereafter not be permitted to engage in the business of junk and/or scrap dealer in the city. 
(Ord. No. 90-3481, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Sec. 13-160. - Failure to comply; penalty. 
Anyone acting as a junk and/or scrap dealer without complying with the provisions of this article shall be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 90-3481, § 1, 4-12-90)  
Secs. 13-161—13-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - CHAIN STORE LICENSE TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 90-3515, adopted Nov. 28, 1990, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1—7 as Art. VII was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 13-201. - Title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "chain store license tax ordinance."  
Sec. 13-202. - Imposition of tax. 
(a)  Because of the advantages accruing from the operation of multiple stores wherever situated and because of the basic difference inherent in such character of operations, there is hereby levied an annual license tax for the year 1991 and each succeeding year upon each person engaged in the business of operating or maintaining, as part of a group or chain, any store or stores within the corporate boundary of the city, where goods, wares, merchandise or commodities of every description, whatsoever, are sold or offered for sale at retail under the same general management, supervision, ownership and control, and who are commonly recognized as a member of a chain and as a branch store. 
(b)  The license herein authorized and levied shall be in addition to ad valorem taxes and any other licenses prescribed or authorized under the laws of this state and municipality. 
(Ord. No. 90-3515, § 2, 11-28-90)  
Sec. 13-203. - Basis and rates of tax. 
(a)  The license tax for the business described in this article levied upon the store or stores operating within the corporate limits of the city shall be based upon the number of stores or merchandise establishments included under the same general management, supervision, ownership and control, whether within the city or not, and whether within the state or not; the license tax for each store or establishment shall be as follows: 
Number of Stores 
in Group, at Least 	But Not More Than 	Annual License Shall Be 
2 	10 	$ 10.00 
11 	35 	15.00 
36 	50 	20.00 
51 	75 	25.00 
76 	100 	30.00 
101 	125 	50.00 
126 	150 	100.00 
151 	175 	150.00 
176 	200 	200.00 
201 	225 	250.00 
226 	250 	300.00 
251 	275 	350.00 
276 	300 	400.00 
301 	400 	450.00 
401 	500 	500.00 
501 and over 		550.00 
 
(b)  The tax for any store opened after June 30 of any year shall consist of one-half of the license tax applicable under the foregoing schedule. 
(Ord. No. 90-3515, § 3, 11-28-90)  
Sec. 13-204. - Reports. 
Every person engaged in business in the city shall, on or before the first day of February of 1991, and each succeeding year, render to the city, through the city clerk, a report containing a true and complete statement showing the number of stores or establishments operated or maintained in the city by such person and the name, location and street address of each store; the total number of stores or merchandise establishments included under the same general management, supervision, ownership and control by such person, whether within the city or not, and whether in this state or not; the report date; and such other information as may be required by the city clerk. Whenever a new store is opened, which was not included in the above-mentioned report, a supplemental report setting forth the required information shall be filed prior to the expiration of thirty (30) days after the date of opening. 
(Ord. No. 90-3515, § 4, 11-28-90)  
Sec. 13-205. - Payment of tax and delinquency. 
Payment of the license tax levied under this article shall accompany the report required by section 13-204 and shall become delinquent if not paid when due. 
(Ord. No. 90-3515, § 5, 11-28-90)  
Sec. 13-206. - Interest, penalties and enforcement. 
(a)  Interest on the delinquent tax shall be computed at the rate of fifteen (15) percent per annum and, in addition thereto, there shall be a penalty of five (5) percent per month for each month that the tax is not paid, not to exceed twenty-five (25) percent. 
(b)  Any person, association of persons, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article, punishment for which is not otherwise provided, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in a sum of not less than ten dollars ($10.00), nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisoned in the city jail for not less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days, or both fined and imprisoned at the discretion of the court. For a second or any subsequent offense, the penalty shall be doubled. 
(Ord. No. 90-3515, § 7, 11-28-90)  
Sec. 13-207. - Issuance and posting of license. 
A license shall be issued by the city clerk for each store for which the tax has been paid, and it shall be the duty of the licensee to post the license in a conspicuous place in each store. 
(Ord. No. 90-3515, § 6, 11-28-90)  
Sec. 13-208—13-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - LICENSING AND REGULATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES AND EMPLOYEES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Sexually oriented businesses, ch. 16.5. 
 
Sec. 13-301. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content or reasonable access to any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution or the corresponding provisions of the Louisiana Constitution, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(b)  Findings. Based on evidence of the adverse secondary effects of adult uses presented in (2000); City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc., 122 S. Ct 1728 (2002); City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v. American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976), Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); FW/PBS, Inc. v. City of Dallas, 493 U.S. 215 (1990); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972); Baby Dolls Topless Saloons, Inc. v. City of Dallas, 2002 U.S. App. LEXIS 12202 (5 th Cir., June 20, 2002); LLEH, Inc. v. Wichita County, 289 F.3d 358 (5 th Cir. 2002); Hang On, Inc. v. City of Arlington, 65 F.3d 1248 (5 th Cir. 1995); Woodall v. City of El Paso, 49 F.3d 1120 (5 th Cir. 1995); J & B Entertainment, Inc. v. City of Jackson, 152 F.3d 362 (5 th Cir. 1998); SDJ, Inc. v. City of Houston, 837 F.2d 1268 (5 th Cir. 1988); TK's Video, Inc. v. Denton County, 24 F.3d 705 (5 th Cir. 1994); Lagrange Trading Co. v. Nicolosi, 1991 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 3551 (E.D. La. 1991); Vonderhaar v. Parish of St. Tammany, 633 So. 2d 217 (La. Ct. App. 1993); Liberto v. Rapides Parish Police Jury, 667 So. 2d 552 (La. Ct. App. 1995); City of Gretna v. RusslandEnterprises, Inc., 564 So. 2d 367 (La. Ct. App. 1990); and other cases; and on testimony to Congress in 136 Cong. Rec. S 8987; 135 Cong. Rec. S. 14519; 135 Cong. Rec. S 5636; 134 Cong. Rec. E 3750; and reports of secondary effects occurring in and around sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, Phoenix, Arizona - 1984; Minneapolis, Minnesota-1980; Houston, Texas - 1997; Indianapolis, Indiana - 1984; Amarillo, Texas - 1977; Garden Grove, California - 1991; Los Angeles, California - 1977; Whittier, California - 1978; Austin, Texas - 1986; Seattle, Washington - 1989; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma - 1986; Cleveland, Ohio - 1977; and Dallas, Texas - 1997; St. Croix County, Wisconsin - 1993; Bellevue, Washington, - 1998; Newport News, Virginia - 1996; New York Times Square study - 1994; Phoenix, Arizona - 1995-98; and also on findings of physical abuse from the paper entitled "Stripclubs According to Strippers: Exposing Workplace Sexual Violence," by Kelly Holsopple, Program Director, Freedom and Justice Center for Prostitution Resources, Minneapolis, Minnesota, and from "Sexually Oriented Businesses: An Insider's View," by David Sherman, presented to the Michigan House Committee on Ethics and Constitutional Law, Jan. 12, 2000, and the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group On The Regulation Of Sexually Oriented Businesses, (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), the council finds: 
(1)  Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled by the unlicensed operators of the establishments. Further, there is presently no mechanism in this city to make the owners and operators of these establishments responsible for the activities that occur on their premises. 
(2)  Some employees of unregulated sexually oriented businesses defined in this article as adult theaters and cabarets engage in higher incidence of certain types of illicit sexual behavior than employees of other establishments. 
(3)  Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur at unregulated sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or semi-private booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos, or live sex shows. 
(4)  Offering and providing such unregulated space encourages such activities, which creates unhealthy conditions. 
(5)  Some persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades, and other sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex within the premises of such sexually oriented businesses, or for the purpose of purchasing or selling illicit drugs. 
(6)  Numerous communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV-AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis salmonella, campylobacter and shigella infections, chlamydial, myoplasmal and ureoplasmal infections, trichomoniasis and chancroid. 
(7)  According to research from the Kaiser Family Foundation, an estimated six hundred fifty thousand (650,000) to nine hundred thousand (900,000) Americans are infected with HIV. The number of new HIV infections occurring each year is now about forty-one thousand (41,000). Men and women of all races are most likely to be infected by sexual contact. 
(8)  Reserved. 
(9)  The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimate that as many as one in three (3) people with HIV/AIDS do not know they are infected. 
(10)  The number of cases of early (less than one year) syphilis in the United States reported annually has risen, with thirty-three thousand six hundred thirteen (33,613) cases reported in 1982 and forty-five thousand two hundred (45,200) through November of 1990. 
(11)  The number of cases of gonorrhea in the United States reported annually remains at a high level, with over one-half million cases being reported in 1990. 
(12)  The Surgeon General of the United States in his report of October 22, 1986, has advised the American public that AIDS and HIV infection may be transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug abuse, exposure to infected blood and blood components, and from an infected mother to her newborn. 
(13)  According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts. See, e.g. Findings of U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services. 
(14)  Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy, and, in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of the owners and the operators of the facilities to self-regulate those activities and maintain those facilities. 
(15)  Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found in the areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons view "adult" oriented films. 
(16)  The findings noted in paragraphs number (1) through (15) raise substantial governmental concerns. 
(17)  Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics that should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial governmental concerns. 
(18)  A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and the operators of the sexually oriented businesses. Further, such a licensing procedure will place a heretofore nonexistent incentive on the operators to see that the sexually oriented business is run in a manner consistent with the health, safety and welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the city. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual operator of the sexually oriented business, fully in possession and control of the premises and activities occurring therein. 
(19)  Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting on premises with adult booths advances a substantial governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in adult theaters. 
(20)  Requiring licensees of sexually oriented businesses to keep information regarding current employees and certain past employees will help reduce the incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects and by preventing minors from working in such establishments. 
(21)  The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the sexually oriented business, where such information is substantially related to the significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will aid in preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases and will prevent the further secondary effects of dissemination of illegal obscenity, child pornography, and to minors, materials harmful to them; 
(22)  It is desirable in the prevention of the spread of communicable diseases to obtain a limited amount of information regarding certain employees who may engage in the conduct which this article is designed to prevent or who are likely to be witnesses to such activity. 
(23)  The fact that an applicant for an adult use has been convicted of a sexually related crime leads to the rational assumption that the applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention of this article. 
(24)  The barring of such individuals from employment in sexually oriented businesses for a specified period of years serves to prevent distribution of illegal material, to prevent conduct which leads to the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases, and to preclude the establishment of criminal enterprises within the city. 
(25)  The general welfare, health, morals and safety of the citizens of the city will be promoted by the enactment of this article. 
(Ord. No. 08-4183, § 1, 11-13-08)  
Sec. 13-302. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the words and phrases defined in the sections hereunder shall have the meanings therein respectively ascribed to them unless a different meaning is clearly indicated by the context. 
Adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store means a commercial establishment which has significant or substantial portion of its stock-in trade or derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues or devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or advertising, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or display space to the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of any one or more of the following: 
(a)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides, or other visual representations which are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; 
(b)  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of themselves or others. 
The term "adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store" shall also include a commercial establishment which regularly maintains one or more "adult arcades." "Adult arcade" means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon matter exhibiting or describing "specified sexual activities" or specified "anatomical areas." 
Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant, bottle club, or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served, which regularly features persons who appear semi-nude. 
Adult motel means a motel, hotel, or similar commercial establishment which: 
(a)  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, other photographic reproductions, or live performances which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; and which advertises the availability of such material by means of a sign visible from the public right-of-way, or by means of any on or off-premises advertising, including but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio or television; or 
(b)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours; or 
(c)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours. 
Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions which are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" are regularly shown for any form of consideration. 
Controlling interest means the power, directly or indirectly, to direct the operation, management or policies of a business or entity, or to vote twenty (20) percent or more of any class of voting securities of a business. The ownership, control, or power to vote twenty (20) percent or more of any class of voting securities of a business shall be presumed, subject to rebuttal, to be the power to direct the management, operation or policies of the business. 
Distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon means the dominant or principal theme of the object described by such phrase. For instance, when the phase refers to films "which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas," the films so described are those whose dominant or principal character and theme are the exhibition or description "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities." 
Employ, employee, and employment describe and pertain to any person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business, on a full time, part time, or contract basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, or otherwise. Employee does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises. 
Establish or establishment shall mean and include any of the following: 
(a)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(b)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; or 
(c)  The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business. 
Hearing officer shall mean an attorney at law duly appointed by the mayor, for the purpose of presiding over administrative hearings that are conducted pursuant to the regulations enacted by this article. 
Licensed shall mean a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual or individuals listed as an applicant on the application for a sexually oriented business license. In case of an "employee," it shall mean the person in whose name the sexually oriented business employee license has been issued. 
Nudity or a state of nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple and areola. 
Operate or cause to operate shall mean to cause to function or to put or keep in a state of doing business. "Operator" means any persons on the premises of a sexually oriented business who is authorized to exercise overall operational control of the business or who causes to function or who puts or keeps in operation the business. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business. 
Person shall mean individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
Regularly features or regularly shows means a consistent or substantial course of conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited constitute a substantial portion of the films or performances offered as a part of the ongoing business of the sexually oriented business. 
Semi-nude or state of semi-nudity shall mean a state of dress in which opaque clothing covers no more than the genitals, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, pubic area, vulva, and nipple and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. This definition shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel provided that the areola and nipple are not exposed in whole or in part. 
Semi-nude model studio means any place where a person, who regularly appears in a state of semi-nudity is provided for money or any form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons. 
It is a defense to prosecution for any violation of this article that a person appearing in a state of semi-nudity or semi-nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
(a)  By a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(b)  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credited are transferable to college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or: 
(c)  In a structure: 
(1)  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a semi-nude person is available for viewing; and 
(2)  Where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three (3) days in advance of the class. 
Sexually oriented business means any establishment that is an adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater or semi-nude model studio as defined in this section, as well as any other establishment that regularly features or regularly shows any sexually oriented entertainment activity. 
Sexually oriented entertainment activity means the sale, rental, or exhibition for any form of consideration, of books, films, video cassettes, magazines, periodicals, or live performances which are characterized by an emphasis on the exposure or display of specific sexual activity. 
Specified anatomical areas shall mean human genitals, anus, cleft of the buttocks, or the female breast. 
Specified criminal activity" means any of the following offenses: 
(a)  La. R.S. 14:41-43.5 (rape and sexual battery offenses); La. R.S. 14:80-81.2 (sexual offenses affecting minors); La. R.S. 14:82-86 (offenses concerning prostitution); La. R.S. 14:104-6.1 (offenses concerning disorderly places and obscenity); La. R.S. 14:281-284 (operating places of prostitution, voyeurism); La. R.S. 40:971, et seq. (Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Law); engaging in organized criminal activity relating to a sexually oriented business, specifically La. R.S. 14:230 (money laundering) La. R.S. 33:2845 (tax evasion); criminal attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses or offenses in other jurisdictions that, if the acts would have constituted any of the foregoing offenses if the acts had been committed in Louisiana; for which: 
(1)  Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
(2)  Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or 
(3)  Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any twenty-four-month period. 
(b)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant. 
Specified sexual activity means any of the following: 
(a)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, including intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy; or 
(b)  Excretory functions as a part of or in connection with any of the activities described in subsection (a) above. 
Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business shall mean any of the following: 
(a)  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
(b)  The transfer of securities (including interests in a limited liability company or partnership) which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(c)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
Viewing room shall mean the room, booth, or area where a patron of sexually oriented business would ordinarily be positioned while watching a film, videocassette, or other video reproduction. 
(Ord. No. 08-4183, 11-13-08)  
Sec. 13-303. - Classification. 
Sexually oriented businesses shall be classified as follows: 
(1)  Adult bookstores, adult novelty stores, adult video stores; 
(2)  Adult cabarets; 
(3)  Adult motels; 
(4)  Adult motion picture theaters; 
(5)  Semi-nude model studios; 
(6)  Other sexually oriented businesses. 
(Ord. No. 08-4183, 11-13-08)  
Sec. 13-304. - License required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a sexually oriented business in the City of Bastrop without a valid sexually oriented business license. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be an "employee," as defined in this chapter, of a sexually oriented business in the City of Bastrop without a valid sexually oriented business employee license. 
(c)  An applicant for a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license shall file in person at the office of the chief of police a completed application made on a form provided by the chief of police. The application shall be signed by the applicant and notarized. An application shall be considered complete when it contains the information required in paragraphs (1) through (5) as follows: 
(1)  The applicant's full true name and any other names used in the preceding five (5) years. 
(2)  Current business address or another mailing address of the applicant. 
(3)  Written proof of age, in the form of a copy of a birth certificate and a picture identification document issued by a governmental agency. 
(4)  If the application is for a sexually oriented business license, the business name, location, legal description, mailing address and phone number of the sexually oriented business. 
(5)  If the application is for a sexually oriented business license, the name and business address of the statutory agent or other agent authorized to receive service of process. 
(6)  A statement of whether the applicant has been convicted or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity as defined in this article, and if so, the specified criminal activity involved, including the date, place, and jurisdiction of each as well as the dates of conviction and release from confinement, where applicable. 
The information provided pursuant to paragraphs (1) through (6) of this subsection shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the chief of police within ten (10) working days of a change of circumstances which would render the information originally submitted false or incomplete. 
(d)  An application for a sexually oriented business license shall be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but shall be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. Applicants who are required to comply with sections 13-314 and 13-318 of this chapter shall submit a diagram meeting the requirements of those sections. 
(e)  If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he shall sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each officer, director, general partner or other person who will participate directly in decisions relating to management and control of the business shall sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under section 13-315 and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
(f)  The information provided by an applicant in connection with an application for a license under this chapter shall be maintained by the chief of police on a confidential basis, except that such information may be disclosed only to law enforcement agencies in connection with a law enforcement or public safety function, or as may be required by governing law or court order. 
(Ord. No. 08-4183, 11-13-08)  
Sec. 13-305. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  Upon the filing of a completed application under section 13-304(c) for a sexually oriented business license, the chief of police shall immediately issue a temporary license to the applicant, which temporary license shall expire upon the final decision of the city to deny or grant the license. Within forty (40) days of the initial filing date of the completed application, the officer shall issue a license to the applicant or issue to the applicant a letter of intent to deny the application. The officer shall approve the issuance of a license unless one or more of the following is found to be true: 
(1)  An applicant is less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
(2)  An applicant has failed to provide information as required by section 13-304 for issuance of a license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(3)  The license application fee required by this chapter has not been paid. 
(4)  An applicant has been shown to have committed a violation of section 13-307(a), section 13-310(b), section 13-318(a), (b), or (c) of this chapter within the previous year. 
(5)  The sexually oriented business premises is not in compliance with the interior configuration requirements of this chapter or is not in compliance with locational requirements established in the applicable zoning regulations. 
(6)  An applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity, as defined in this article. 
(b)  Upon the filing of a completed application for a sexually oriented business employee license, the officer shall issue a temporary license to the applicant, which temporary license shall expire upon the final decision of the city to deny or grant the license. Within forty (40) days of the initial filing date of the receipt of a completed application, the officer shall either issue a license or issue a written notice of intent to deny a license to the applicant. The officer shall approve the issuance of a license unless one or more of the following is found to be true. 
(1)  An applicant is less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
(2)  An applicant has failed to provide information as required by section 13-304 for issuance of a license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(3)  The license application fee required by this chapter has not been paid. 
(4)  An applicant has been shown to have committed a violation of section 13-307(a), section 13-310(b), section 13-318(a), (b), or (c) of this chapter within the previous year. 
(5)  An applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity, as defined in this article. 
(c)  The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the number of the license issued to the licensee(s), the expiration date, and, if the license is for a sexually oriented business, the address of the sexually oriented business. The sexually oriented business license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time. A sexually oriented business employee shall keep the employee's license on his or her person or on the premises where the licensee is then working or performing and shall produce such license for inspection upon request by a law enforcement officer or other city official performing functions connected with the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 08-4183, 11-13-08)  
Sec. 13-306. - Fees. 
The initial license and annual renewal fees for sexually oriented business licenses and sexually oriented business employee licenses shall be as follows: one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the initial fee for a sexually oriented business license and fifty dollars ($50.00) for annual renewal; fifty dollars ($50.00) for the initial sexually oriented business employee license and twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for annual renewal. 
(Ord. No. 08-4183, 11-13-08)  
Sec. 13-307. - Inspection. 
(a)  Sexually oriented businesses and sexually oriented business employees shall permit officers or agents of the City of Bastrop to inspect, from time to time on an occasional basis, the portions of the sexually oriented business premises where patrons are permitted, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the specific regulations of this chapter, during those times when the sexually oriented business is occupied by patrons or is open for business. A licensee's knowing or intentional refusal to permit such an inspection shall not constitute a misdemeanor, but shall constitute a violation of this section for purposes of license denial, suspension, and/or revocation. This section shall be narrowly construed by the city to authorize reasonable inspections of the licensed premises pursuant to this chapter, but not to authorize a harassing or excessive pattern of inspections. 
(b)  The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer for use as a permanent or temporary habitation. 
(Ord. No. 08-4183, 11-13-08)  
Sec. 13-308. - Expiration of license. 
(a)  Each license shall remain valid for a period of one calendar year from the date of issuance unless otherwise suspended or revoked. Such license may be renewed only by making application and payment of a fee as provided in section 13-304 and section 13-306. 
(b)  Application for renewal should be made at least ninety (90) days before the expiration date, and when made less than ninety (90) days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected. 
(Ord. No. 08-4183, 11-13-08)  
Sec. 13-309. - Suspension. 
(a)  The city shall issue a written letter of intent to suspend a sexually oriented business license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if the sexually oriented business licensee has knowingly violated this chapter or has knowingly allowed an employee to violate this chapter. 
(b)  The city shall issue a written letter of intent to suspend a sexually oriented business employee license if it is determined that the employee has knowingly violated this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 08-4183, 11-13-08)  
Section 13-310. - Revocation. 
(a)  The city shall issue a letter of intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license if a cause of suspension in section 13-309 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding twelve (12) months. 
(b)  The city shall issue written intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license if the officer determines that: 
(1)  The licensee has knowingly given false information in the application for the sexually oriented business license. 
(2)  The licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises; 
(3)  The licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises; 
(4)  The licensee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the license was suspended; 
(5)  The licensee has knowingly allowed any specified sexual activity to occur in or on the licensed premises. 
(c)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license. 
(d)  Nature of revocation. When, after the notice and hearing procedure described in section 13-311, the hearing officer revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one (1) year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license or sexually oriented business employee license for one (1) year from the date revocation becomes effective, provided that, if the conditions of section 13-311 (b) are met, a provisional license will be granted pursuant to that section. If, subsequent to revocation, the chief of police finds that the basis for the revocation based on subsection (b)(1) of this section has been corrected or abated, the applicant shall be granted a license if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. If the license was revoked under subsections (b)(2), (b)(3), (b)(4) or (b)(5) of this section, an applicant may not be granted another license until at least one (1) year has elapsed. 
(Ord. No. 08-4183, 11-13-08)  
Sec. 13-311. - Hearing; denial, revocation, and suspension; appeal. 
(a)  If the chief of police determines that facts exist for denial, suspension, or revocation of a license under this chapter, the city shall notify the applicant or licensee (respondent) in writing of the intent to deny, suspend or revoke the license, including the grounds thereof, by personal delivery, or by certified mail. The notification shall be directed to the most current business address or other mailing address on file with the chief of police for the respondent. Within ten (10) working days of receipt of such notice, the respondent may provide to the chief of police a written response that shall include a statement of reasons why the respondent believes the license should not be denied, suspended, or revoked. 
(b)  Within five (5) days of the receipt of respondent's written response, the chief of police shall notify respondent in writing of the hearing date on respondent's denial, suspension, or revocation proceeding. Within ten (10) working days of the receipt of respondent's written response, the hearing officer shall conduct a hearing at which respondent shall have the opportunity to present all of respondent's arguments and to be represented by counsel, present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf, and cross-examine any of the city's witnesses. The city shall also be represented by counsel, and shall bear the burden of proving the grounds for deny, suspending, or revoking the license. The hearing shall take no longer than two (2) days, unless extended to meet the requirements of due process and proper administration of justice. The hearing officer shall issue a written opinion within five (5) days after the hearing. 
(c)  If a court action challenging the city's decision is initiated, the city shall prepare and transmit to the court a transcript of the hearing within ten (10) days after the issuance of the hearing officer's written opinion. If a response is not received by the chief of police in the time stated or, if after the hearing the hearing officer finds that grounds as specified in this article exist for denial, suspension, or revocation, then such denial, suspension, or revocation shall become final five (5) days after the hearing officer sends, by certified mail, written notice to the respondent that the license has been denied, suspended, or revoked. Such notice shall include a statement advising the respondent of the right to appeal such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction. If the hearing officer finds that no grounds exist for denial, suspension, or revocation of a license, then within five (5) days after the hearing, the hearing officer shall order the chief of police to immediately withdraw the intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the license and to notify the respondent in writing by certified mail of such action. The chief of police shall contemporaneously therewith issue the license to the applicant. 
(d)  When a decision to deny, suspend or revoke a license becomes final, the applicant or licensee (aggrieved party) whose application for a license has been denied or whose license has been suspended or revoked shall have the right to appeal or challenge such action to any court of competent jurisdiction. Upon the filing of any court action to appeal, challenge, restrain, or otherwise enjoin the city's enforcement of the denial, suspension, or revocation, the city shall immediately issue the aggrieved party a provisional license. The provisional license shall allow the aggrieved party to continue operation of the sexually oriented business or to continue employment as a sexually oriented business employee and will expire upon the court's entry of a judgment on the aggrieved party's appeal or other action to restrain or otherwise enjoin the city's enforcement. 
(e)  Application of ordinance during temporary license or provisional license periods. Sexually oriented businesses or sexually oriented business employees operating or working under temporary licenses (as provided for in section 13-305(a)), provisional licenses (as provided for in section 13-311(b)), or de facto temporary licenses (as provided for in section 13-317) shall be subject to the provisions of section 13-312, section 13-313, section 13-314, section 13-315, section 13-317, and section 13-318 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 08-4183, 11-13-08)  
Sec. 13-312. - Transfer of license. 
A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the sexually oriented business license application. 
(Ord. No. 08-4183, 11-13-08)  
Sec. 13-313. - Hours of operation. 
No sexually oriented business shall be or remain open for business between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m., provided that, a sexually oriented business which has obtained a license to sell alcoholic beverages from the State of Louisiana or Bastrop may remain open to sell alcoholic beverages under the terms of that license, but may not conduct sexually oriented entertainment activity between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 08-4183, 11-13-08)  
Sec. 13-314. - Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette, or other video reproduction characterized by an emphasis on the display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas shall comply with the following requirements. 
(1)  Each application for a sexually oriented business license shall contain a diagram of the premises showing the location of all manager's stations, viewing rooms, overhead lighting fixtures, video cameras and monitors installed for monitoring purposes and restrooms, and shall designate all portions of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. Restrooms shall not contain video reproduction equipment. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram shall be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. The officer may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant. 
(3)  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station or viewing room may be made without the prior approval of the chief of police. 
(4)  It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subsection. 
(5)  The interior premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one (1.0) foot candle as measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that the premises is occupied by patrons or open for business. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that no sexual activity occurs in or on the licensed premises. 
(7)  It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that not more than one person is present in a viewing room at any time. No person shall enter a viewing room that is occupied by another person. 
(8)  It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that no openings of any kind exist between viewing rooms. No person shall make an attempt to make an opening of any kind between viewing rooms. 
(9)  It shall be the duty of the operator, or of any employee who discovers two (2) or more patrons in a viewing room or discovers any person making or attempting to make an opening of any kind between viewing rooms, to immediately escort such persons from the premises. 
(10)  It shall be the duty of the operator, or of any employee, who discovers an opening of any kind between viewing rooms to immediately secure such rooms, and prevent entry into them by any patron until such time as the wall between the rooms has been repaired to remove the opening. Removal and repairing openings between viewing rooms shall be in a manner that is as structurally substantial as the original wall construction. 
(11)  It shall be the duty of the operator, at least once each business day, to inspect the walls between viewing rooms for openings of any kind, documented by appropriate logs. 
(12)  It shall be the duty of the operator to post conspicuous signs in well-lighted entry areas of the business stating all of the following: 
(i)  That no loitering is permitted in viewing rooms. 
(ii)  That the occupancy of viewing rooms is limited to one (1) person. 
(iii)  That sexual activity on the premises is prohibited. 
(iv)  That the making of openings between viewing rooms is prohibited. 
(v)  That violators will be required to leave the premises. 
(vi)  That violations of subparagraphs (ii), (iii) and (iv) of this paragraph are unlawful. 
(13)  It shall be the duty of the operator or manager of the business to ensure that no sexually oriented entertainment activity or visual depictions characterized by an emphasis on actual "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities" are visible from a public right of way adjacent to the establishment. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under this section to knowingly fail to fulfill that duty. 
(Ord. No. 08-4183, 11-13-08)  
Sec. 13-315. - Loitering and exterior lighting and monitoring requirements. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the operator of a sexually oriented business to: (a) post conspicuous signs stating that no loitering is permitted on such property; (b) designate one (1) or more employees to monitor the activities of persons on such property by visually inspecting such property at least once every ninety (90) minutes or inspecting such property by use of video cameras and monitors; and (c) provide lighting of the exterior premises to provide for visual inspection or video monitoring to prohibit loitering. If used, video cameras and monitors shall operate continuously at all times that the premises are open for business. The monitors shall be installed within a manager's station. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under this section to knowingly fail to fulfill that duty. 
(Ord. No. 08-4183, 11-13-08)  
Sec. 13-316. - Penalties and enforcement. 
(a)  A person who knowingly violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a citation and a civil fine, not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), upon proper adjudication in city court. Each day the violation is committed, or permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be fined as such. 
(b)  The city attorney is hereby authorized to institute civil proceedings necessary for the enforcement of this chapter to prosecute, restrain, or correct violations hereof. Such proceedings, including injunction, shall be brought in the name of the city, provided, however, that nothing in this section and no action taken hereunder, shall be held to exclude such criminal proceedings as may be authorized by other provisions of the City Code, or any of the laws or ordinances in force in the city or to exempt anyone violating this Code or any part of the said laws from any penalty which may be incurred. 
(Ord. No. 08-4183, 11-13-08)  
Sec. 13-317. - Applicability of ordinance to existing businesses. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to the activities of all sexually oriented businesses and sexually oriented business employees described herein, whether such businesses or activities were established or commenced before, on, or after the effective date of this article. All existing sexually oriented businesses and sexually oriented business employees are hereby granted a de facto temporary license to continue operation or employment for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days following the effective date of this article. Within said one hundred eighty (180) days, all sexually oriented businesses and sexually oriented business employees must make application for a license pursuant to this chapter. Within said one hundred eighty (180) days, sexually oriented businesses must make any necessary changes to the interior configurations of the regulated business premises to conform to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 08-4183, 11-13-08)  
Sec. 13-318. - Additional regulations concerning live public nudity. 
It is unlawful for a sexually oriented business to knowingly violate the following regulations or to knowingly allow an employee or any other person to violate the following regulations. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for a patron, employee, or any other person knowingly or intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, to appear in a state of nudity, regardless of whether such public nudity is expressive in nature. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for a person, knowingly or intentionally, in a sexually oriented business to appear in a semi-nude condition unless the person is an employee who, while semi-nude, shall be at least six (6) feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at least eighteen (18) inches from the floor. 
(c)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any employee, while semi-nude in a sexually oriented business, to knowingly or intentionally receive any pay or gratuity directly from any patron or customer or for any patron or customer to knowingly or intentionally pay or give any gratuity directly to any employee, while said employee is semi-nude in a sexually oriented business. 
(d)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any employee of a sexually oriented business, while semi-nude, to knowingly or intentionally touch a customer or the clothing of a customer. 
(e)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to knowingly or intentionally touch an employee of a sexually oriented business or such employee's clothing or costume, while such employee is semi-nude. 
(f)  A sign in a form to be prescribed by the chief of police and summarizing the provisions of paragraphs (a), (b), (c), (d) and (e) of this section, shall be posted near the entrance of the sexually oriented business in such a manner as to be clearly visible to patrons upon entry. 
(Ord. No. 08-4183, 11-13-08)  
Sec. 13-319. - Scienter required to prove violation or business licensee liability. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, for the purposes of this chapter, an act by an employee that constitutes grounds for suspension or revocation of that employee's license shall be imputed to the sexually oriented business licensee for purposes of finding a violation of this article, or for purposes of license denial, suspension, or revocation, only if an officer, director, or general partner, or a person who managed, supervised, or controlled the operation of the business premises, knowingly allowed such act to occur on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 08-4183, 11-13-08)  
Sec. 13-320. - Severability. 
Bastrop Code of Ordinances Chapter 13, Section 301 through 319 and each section, subsection and provision of said chapter thereunder, are hereby declared to be independent divisions and subdivisions and, notwithstanding any other evidence of legislative intent, it is hereby declared to be the controlling legislative intent that if any provisions of said chapter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid, the remaining sections or provisions and the application of such sections and provisions to any person or circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid, shall not be affected thereby, and it is hereby declared that such sections and provisions are severable and would have been passed independently of such section or provision so known to be invalid. 
(Ord. No. 08-4183, 11-13-08)  
Chapter 14 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority as to recreation, § 5(20). 
Cross reference— Litter in parks, § 10-27. 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Identification card or permit—Required for admission to gym. 
All persons desiring to participate in gym use are required to have an identification card or a valid permit issued by the city. Persons not possessing the necessary identification card or permit will be refused admittance to the gym. 
(Ord. No. 3310, § 1, 5-5-86; Ord. No. 3342, § 1, 12-29-86)  
Sec. 14-2. - Same—Fees. 
The fees required to obtain the identification card or permit shall be as follows: 
(1)  Persons having reached their sixth birthday, but being less than eighteen (18) years of age, shall be charged the sum of five dollars ($5.00) per year, or one dollars ($1.00) per month. 
(2)  All persons eighteen (18) years of older shall be charge the sum of twenty-four dollars ($24.00) per year, or three dollars (43.00) per month, except that senior citizens (those age sixty-five (65) or older) or disabled persons, not requiring any supervision, shall not be required to pay any fee for such permits, but if engaged in an activity requiring supervision, such person shall pay the sum of one dollar ($1.00) per month. 
(3)  Visitor shall be charged the sum of one dollars (41.00) for a permit, which shall be valid for seven (7) days, with only fourteen (14) days per person. 
(4)  Nonparticipating visitors or spectators will not be charged a fee, but must first be cleared with supervising personnel. 
(Ord. No. 3310, § 2, 5-5-86; Ord. No. 3342, § 2, 12-29-86)  
Sec. 14-3. - Setting of fees for Dotson Gym and the Municipal Center. 
Until such time that definite fees are established by the governing body for the use of Dotson Gym and the Municipal Center, the mayor and recreational director shall have full authority to set fees for the use of such facilities. 
(Ord. No. 3310, § 3, 5-5-86; Ord. No. 3336, § 3, 10-14-86)  
Sec. 14-4. - Fees for exclusive use of Carter Park and Dotson Park. 
Persons desiring the exclusive use of Carter Park or Dotson Park on a per day basis shall be charged the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day or fraction thereof, and such persons shall deposit the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) as a clean up and breakage deposit. 
(Ord. No. 3310, § 4, 5-5-86; Ord. No. 07-4116, 1-11-07)  
Sec. 14-5. - Admission fees to swimming pools at East Madison park and Dotson Park; swimming pool hours. 
(a)  Admission fees for the swimming pools at East Madison park and Dotson Park shall be seventy-five cents (40.75) under the age of eighteen (18) years; one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) for eighteen (18) years of age and older. 
(b)  Swimming pool hours for East Madison Park and Dotson park will be as follows: 
2:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m. and 
6:00 p.m. to 8:00 (Mondays, Thursday and Fridays) 
2:00 p.m. to 5:30 p.m. (Sundays) 
(Ord. No. 3310, § 6, 5-5-86)  
Sec. 14-6. - Fees for night use of tennis courts at Dotson Park, Carter Park and East Madison Park. 
The fees for the use of the tennis courts at Dotson Park, Carter Park and East Madison Park at night with the lights shall be two dollars ($2.00) per hour. 
(Ord. No. 3310, § 7, 5-5-86)  
Sec. 14-7. - Concession stand fees. 
All persons desiring to operate concession stands at any of the parks belonging to the city shall pay to the city a fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per season, or ten (10) percent of the gross sales per day. 
(Ord. No. 3310, § 8, 5-5-86)  
Sec. 14-8. - Night rental fees for softball and baseball fields. 
All persons desiring to rent the softball or baseball fields for night play shall pay to the city the sum of five dollars (45.00) per hour for each hour of such use. 
(Ord. No. 3310, § 9, 5-5-86)  
Chapter 15 - PERSONNEL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Duties, compensation, selection and discharge as prescribed, § 19. 
State Law reference— Authority of mayor, R.S. 33:404A(3). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 15-1. - General personnel policy. 
The general personnel policy, attached to the ordinance from which this section is derived, and on file in the city clerk's office, is adopted for all employees of the city except members of the police and fire departments. 
(Ord. No. 3189, § 1, 1-10-84)  
Secs. 15-2, 15-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 90-3474, adopted Feb. 8, 1990, repealed Ord. Nos. 3202 and 3203, adopted April 10, 1984, from which former §§ 15-2 and 15-3 were derived. Such former sections pertained to the personnel policies for the police and fire departments of the city. Such policies are on file in the city clerk's office.  
Sec. 15-4. - Use of private automobiles. 
(a)  Those persons designated by the governing body who are required to use their privately owned automobiles in the furtherance of city business are hereby authorized to receive the following compensation: 
(1)  The sum of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per month payable in advance on the first day of each month. 
(2)  Minor repairs to such vehicles to be performed by city personnel at the city garage. 
(3)  Gasoline, oil and filters used in such vehicles during the performance of city duties. 
Upon written application to the city clerk such amount specified in (1) will be added to the regular monthly salary of the person entitled thereto. 
(b)  Each city employee who is required to operate such employee's privately owned automobile in the furtherance of business for the city will show proof of liability insurance. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any policy provision that provides to the contrary, for all out-of-town trips taken by the mayor for city business to destinations of one hundred (100) miles or more, the mayor, when using his automobile, shall be entitled to either (1) bill the cost of all fuel used in his automobile for travel to a credit account maintained by the city or (2) obtain financial reimbursement from the city in the amount of $.28 per mile for the total distance traveled. All other policies of the city that are not inconsistent herewith shall remain in effect. 
(Ord. No. 3048, 4-14-81; Ord. No. 3095, § 1, 1-29-82; Ord. No. 02-3954, § I, 2-14-02)  
Secs. 15-5—15-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RETIREMENT 
 
Sec. 15-20. - Initial participation in municipal employees' retirement system—Declaration of policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend the provisions of R.S. 33:7151 through 33:7394, providing retirement to eligible officers and employees of the city. In pursuance of such policy, and for such purpose, the officers and employees of the city shall take such action as may be required by applicable state laws or regulations. The coverage of eligible officers and employees shall be retroactive. 
(Code 1966, § 2-50)  
Sec. 15-21. - Same—Securing coverage of eligible officers and employees. 
The mayor of the city is hereby authorized and directed to execute an agreement with the board of trustees of the municipal employees retirement system to secure coverage of eligible officers and employees. 
(Code 1966, § 2-51)  
Sec. 15-22. - Same—Withholdings. 
Withholdings from salaries or wages of officers and employees are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by the board of trustees in accordance with R.S. 33:7151 through 33:7394, and shall be paid over to the board of trustees in such amounts and at such times as are designated by state laws and regulations of such agency. 
(Code 1966, § 2-52)  
Sec. 15-23. - Same—Employer contributions and assessments for administrative expenses. 
Employer contributions and assessments for administrative expenses shall be paid from amounts appropriated for such purposes to the board of trustees in accordance with applicable state laws and regulations of such board of trustees. 
(Code 1966, § 2-53)  
Sec. 15-24. - Same—Records and reports. 
The city clerk shall maintain such records and submit such reports as may be required by applicable state laws or regulations of the board of trustees. 
(Code 1966, § 2-54)  
Sec. 15-25. - Transfer from Plan B to Plan A (effective July 1, 1983) of the municipal employees' retirement system. 
(a)  The city agrees to back service coverage for all eligible employees from October 1, 1978 to June 30, 1983, subject to the same procedures and payments as is in conformity to the rules of the board and applicable state law, providing as an attachment to the agreement, and at the municipality expense, an actuarial study of the total existing accrued liability for securing back service. 
(b)  In pursuance of such policy, and for such purpose, the city shall take such actions as may be required by applicable state laws or regulations. 
(c)  The mayor is hereby authorized and directed to execute an agreement with the board of trustees of the municipal employees' retirement system to secure coverage of eligible employees. 
(d)  Withholdings from salaries or wages of eligible employees are hereby authorized to be made in the amount and at such times as may be required by the board of trustees of the municipal employees' retirement system in accordance with R.S. 33:7151 through 33:7394, or any amendment thereof, and such withholdings shall be transferred to the board of trustees of the municipal employees' retirement system in such amounts and at such times as are designated by state laws and regulations. 
(e)  An "authorized agent" shall be appointed to act as the coordinator between the city and the board of trustees of the municipal employees' retirement system. Such agent shall be any employee working on a permanent, regularly scheduled basis of at least thirty-five (35) hours per week. Such agent may be an elected official. The authorized agent shall maintain necessary records and submit such reports as may be required by applicable state laws or regulations of the board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 3195, §§ 1—5, 1-31-84)  
Sec. 15-26. - Merger of city pension and relief fund with police retirement system. 
The city pension and relief fund is hereby merged into the municipal police employees' retirement system. 
(Ord. No. 2921, 10-24-78)  
Sec. 15-27. - Exemption of fire department members from firefighters' retirement system. 
Pursuant to the provisions of R.S. 33:2153(A)(1)(b), the city hereby declares that members of the fire department shall be exempt from membership in the statewide firefighters' retirement system. 
(Ord. No. 2975, 12-31-79)  
Sec. 15-28. - Hospitalization insurance cost payment for retired employees. 
The city agrees to enable retired employees, whether regular retired or retired by reasons of disability to receive the same benefit they were receiving at the time of their retirement toward hospitalization insurance cost provided that such benefit shall not exceed the percentage that the retired employee is receiving under such retired employee's respective system. 
(Ord. No. 3215, § 1, 5-29-84)  
Secs. 15-29—15-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SUBSTANCE ABUSE POLICY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— The substantive provisions of Ord. No. 91-3538, adopted July 11, 1991, were included in the Code pursuant to § 5 of the ordinance; designation as Art. III, §§ 15-51—15-62, was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec 15-51. - Introduction. 
The City of Bastrop (hereinafter referred to as "the city") desires to maintain a safe, healthful and productive environment for all of its employees and the public they serve. To that end, the city will act to eliminate any substance abuse which increases the potential for accidents, absenteeism, substandard performance, poor employee morale or damage to the community's reputation. 
Employees are expected to report to work in a physical and emotional condition that will allow them to perform their assigned tasks in a competent and safe manner. The use, abuse, presence in the body or reporting to work under the influence of alcohol, drugs, and other substances by the employee limits the ability of the users to exercise good judgment, react properly in unexpected situations, perform tasks safely and efficiently and endangers not only that employee but fellow employees and property. The city has implemented this policy to eliminate these problems and to meet the following objectives as set out in this article. (Ord. No. 91-3538, § 1(I), 7-11-91)  
Sec. 15-52. - Purposes and objectives. 
The objectives of this police are to: 
(1)  Assist in maintaining a safe and healthful working environment for employees of the city and its affiliated or subsidiary agencies, as well as contractors and visitors. 
(2)  Maintain a drug/alcohol-free work place and a drug/alcohol-free work force; 
(3)  Provide counseling and/or rehabilitation assistance for employees when appropriate; 
(4)  Prevent accidental injuries and to protect property; 
(5)  Minimize absenteeism, tardiness, improve productivity and to insure quality workmanship; 
(6)  Protect the reputation of the city and its employees within the community; 
(7)  Comply with existing laws and contractual obligations; 
(8)  Protect the public health and safety of the general community. (Ord. No. 91-3538, § 1(II), 7-11-91)  
Sec. 15-53. - Application. 
This policy will apply to all regular, part-time, casual or contract employees. This policy shall also apply to employment applicants. Compliance with the adopted policy shall be required as a condition of employment. (Ord. No. 91-3538, § 1(III), 7-11-91)  
Sec. 15-54. - City premises. 
For the purposes of this policy, the term city, its affiliates or subsidiaries includes all property, offices, facilities, land, platforms, buildings, structures, fixtures, installations, boats, aircraft, automobiles, trucks, and all other vehicles and equipment, whether owned, leased or used. The policy includes all areas under city control, any other work location or mode of transportation to and from those locations while in the course and scope of the employee's city duty. (Ord. No. 91-3538, § 1(IV), 7-11-91)  
Sec. 15-55. - Policy statement. 
City employees are hereby notified that the use, possession, concealment, transportation, manufacture, distribution, dispensation, promotion, sale or being under the influence of any item named in this policy is strictly prohibited on city premises or while on city business. The following prohibited items are as listed: 
(1)  Illegal drugs, unauthorized controlled substances, lookalikes, inhalants of abuse, designer and synthetic drugs; including being under the influence of such drugs, and/or having a positive test amount in any employee while being at his/her job. 
(2)  Unauthorized alcoholic beverages; including being under the influence of alcohol, and/or having a positive test amount in an employee at his/her job. 
(3)  Prescription drugs: 
a.  Employees working in "safety or security sensitive" positions who have been informed that the medication could cause adverse side effects while working or where medication indicated such warning, must inform their supervisor prior to using such substances on the job. Employees must only possess a reasonable amount of medication. 
b.  The employee must not consume the prescribed drugs more often than as prescribed by the employee's physician. 
c.  The employee whose name appears on the prescription label must not allow any other person to consume the prescribed drugs. 
d.  All medicine must be in its original container and must be in the employee's name and have the doctor's name and prescription number on the label. 
e.  Each prescription must be not older than one (1) year of the date of issue. 
The use of drugs/medicine prescribed by a licensed physician for the individual employee is permitted provided that it will not affect work performance. However, the city at all times reserves the right to have a licensed physician determine if use of a prescription drug or medication by an employee produces effects which may increase the risk of injury to the employee or others while working. If such a finding is made, the city reserves the right to limit or suspend the work activity of the employee during the period that the physician advised that the employee's ability to perform his/her job safely may be adversely affected by the consumption of such medication. 
Further, any narcotics violation conviction of an employee, as defined in the Louisiana Revised Statutes, whether on duty or off duty, will be grounds for disciplinary action by the appointing authority. 
In addition, an employee shall cooperate or participate in his/her sampling or testing when requested to do so under this policy; shall submit the necessary testing sample without substitution or tampering; shall report to an approved counseling or rehabilitation program after a confirmed positive test for any substance prohibited by this policy; shall complete such treatment program as evidenced by a formal release; shall maintain himself/herself free of any substance prohibited by this policy after completion of a counseling or rehabilitation program and subsequent return to work. 
Finally, any employee convicted of criminal drug violation occurring in the workplace is required to notify the appointing authority within five (5) days of such conviction. (Ord. No. 91-3538, § 1(V), 7-11-91)  
Sec. 15-56. - Testing situations. 
The city reserves the right, in certain circumstances, to require employees to submit to medical or physical examinations or tests as a condition of continued employment, including but not necessarily limited to urine drug test or other examinations to determine the presence of any illegal or unauthorized drugs, alcohol or other substances prohibited by the policy. These unannounced tests may be utilized under the following circumstances: 
(1)  For-cause testing will be used when there is a reasonable cause to suspect that an employee's behavior, performance, error in judgment, accident or incident, or unsafe actions while working is related to substance abuse. 
(2)  Post-accident or incident testing shall be used if an employee suffers an occupational on the job injury requiring treatment from a doctor, or causes injury to a fellow employee requiring treatment by a doctor, or where the injury was due to the employees failure to wear required personal protective equipment, or where the property damage of said accident is estimated at greater than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(3)  Routine testing will be used periodically for those employees in a "safety-sensitive" or "security-sensitive" position where any form of substance abuse may affect the operation of the facility through unsafe work behavior/performance or error in judgment, or where substance abuse could jeopardize the safety and well-being of the employee, other personnel or the general public. Fifty (50) percent of the job positions named as eligible for random testing shall be tested annually. 
(4)  Post-counseling/rehabilitation testing will be used as a condition of reinstatement upon completion of a drug and/or alcohol treatment or counseling program. Testing of the employee shall continue after reinstatement randomly once each quarter for a period of five (5) years. 
(5)  Preemployment testing will be required of any applicant as a condition of employment for any city position, including promotions. 
All sampling will be performed with concern for each employee's personal privacy, dignity and confidentiality. No employee shall be tested without his or her written consent. (Ord. No. 91-3538, § 1(VI), 7-11-91)  
Sec. 15-57. - Level of testing. 
For the purpose of this policy, a positive drug test shall be determined in accordance with NIDA guidelines with the exception that initial testing for marijuana metabolites shall be at fifty (50) ng/ml. Alcohol-related policy violation shall be a blood level over four one-hundredths (.04) percent (forty (40) mg/dl blood). (Ord. No. 91-3538, § 1(VII), 7-11-91)  
Sec. 15-58. - Testing methods. 
Initial testing for prohibited drugs will be immunoassay screen. Confirmation of positive tests will be by gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) techniques. Testing for alcohol shall be by those methods approved and recognized by the State of Louisiana for cases concerning driving while intoxicated. All testing procedures shall conform with applicable state and federal law. (Ord. No. 91-3538, § 1(VIII), 7-11-91)  
Sec. 15-59. - Penalty for policy violation. 
(a)  Failure to comply with the provisions of the policy will be grounds for disciplinary action. Discharge from employment may occur even for a first offense violation, except as otherwise provided in this policy. 
(b)  Any employee who is found to be in violation of this policy because of use, abuse, presence in the body, reporting to work under the influence, bringing on city property, possession, transfer, storage, concealment, transportation, promotion or sale of prohibited substances or possession of drug-related paraphernalia will be subject to disciplinary action up to and including discharge. 
(c)  Any employee who is found to be in violation of this policy for a second time shall immediately be dismissed from city employment. (Ord. No. 91-3538, § 1(IX), 7-11-91)  
Sec. 15-60. - Employment assistance program. 
(a)  Scope. The city shall offer an employees assistance plan covering the following areas: 
(1)  Education. 
(2)  Training. 
(3)  Counseling/rehabilitation. 
The mayor shall determine the steps used to meet the requirements in these areas and promulgate those steps in the city's substance abuse procedures. 
(b)  Counseling/rehabilitation. Employees with drug/alcohol problems are encouraged to seek early assistance. No employee's job will be placed in jeopardy nor will any employee be subject to disciplinary action for voluntarily requesting help from alcohol and other drug addictions. However, a request for assistance will not excuse an employee of a policy violation after he/she has been selected for testing or while an actual drug screen, blood sampling, search or inspection is being made in the work area or after the screen or test has been completed. 
Confidential assistance may be requested from the appointing authority or his designated representative. Participation in the city approved counseling/rehabilitation program is the responsibility of the employee. 
Confidentiality will be followed regarding a rehabilitation program. When it becomes necessary for an employee to undergo treatment under a prescribed program, absences will be handled in accordance with existing policies regarding disability, sick leave or leave of absence. City benefits for rehabilitation and medical care will be in accordance with existing policies. 
Any employee who tests positive for a prohibited substance shall be offered a referral to an approved counseling or rehabilitation program for the first offense. However, an employee will not be offered rehabilitation if: 
(1)  There are multiple violations of the policy. 
(2)  Where violations of the policy occur in connection with a violation of other work or safety rules which would ordinarily result in discharge. 
(3)  Where the employee's prior disciplinary record in connection with the policy violation would ordinarily result in discharge. 
(Ord. No. 91-3538, § 1(X), 7-11-91)  
Sec. 15-61. - Administration. 
Specific administrative procedures shall be reviewed and approved by the appointing authority prior to implementation of this policy. Such procedures may be changed, from time to time, by the appointing authority as long as they fully and faithfully carry out the policies duly adopted herein. 
(Ord. No. 91-3538, § 1(XI), 7-11-91)  
Sec. 15-62. - Implementation guidelines. 
(a)  Any employee, confirmed positive, upon his written request, shall have the right of access within seven (7) working days to records relating to his drug tests and any records relating to the results of any relevant certification, review or suspension/revocation-of-certification proceedings. 
(b)  Each case shall be dealt with on an individual basis with all facts and circumstances taken into consideration. 
(c)  All actions taken shall be in accordance with civil service rules or appropriate disciplinary procedures in effect that protect non-civil service employees. Any employee who is qualified under a civil service plan and who is disciplined as a result of this policy shall have the right to appeal to the appropriate civil service board. 
(d)  All information, interviews, reports, statements, memoranda, or test results received by the employer through its drugs testing program are confidential communications and may not be used or received in evidence, obtained in discovery, or disclosed in any public or private proceedings except in administrative or disciplinary proceedings or hearings, or civil litigation where drug use by the tested individual is relevant. 
(e)  It is the intention of the city that this policy be in conformance with the laws of the State of Louisiana and requirements promulgated by the government of the United States of America. In such case where state or federal law or regulation hold the city to a higher standard than adopted in this policy, the mayor shall be authorized to enforce the higher standard. Upon knowledge of the higher standard, the mayor shall, within thirty (30) days, propose the necessary amendment to this policy. 
(Ord. No. 91-3538, § 1(XII), 7-11-91)  
Secs. 15-63—15-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SEXUAL HARASSMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 00-3908, adopted April 13, 2000, repealed in their entirety the provisions of §§ 15-71—15-84 and replaced them with the similar provisions of § 15-71 and Appendix A which accompanies it. Former §§ 15-71—15-84 pertained to sexual harassment and derived from Ord. No. 98-3821, adopted Jan. 8, 1998. 
 
Sec. 15-71. - Discrimination and harassment in the work place. 
The City of Bastrop hereby adopts the "City of Bastrop Harassment and Employment Discrimination Policy" prohibiting harassment, discrimination and such other unlawful employment practices that are prohibited by Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, and which provides procedures and methods for pursuing and maintaining a work environment free from harassment and discrimination. The text of the City of Bastrop Harassment and Employment Discrimination Policy shall be as set forth in Appendix A of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 00-3908, 4-13-00)  
APPENDIX A. - SEXUAL HARASSMENT AND EMPLOYMENT DISCRIMINATION POLICY 
 
Sec. I. - Purpose. 
This policy establishes procedures and methods for department heads, managers, supervisors, and employees to individually pursue a work environment free from sexual harassment and employment discrimination.  
Sec. II. - Scope. 
The City of Bastrop recognizes that sexual harassment/employment discrimination is an unlawful employment practice in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. Therefore, this policy shall apply to all departments, including contractors, vendors, consultants, and others who conduct business with the city.  
Sec. III. - Definitions. 
(a)  Sexual harassment. Sexual harassment is a form of sex discrimination which is a violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. Sexual harassment is defined by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) as: unwelcome sexual advances, request for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature. [This behavior] constitutes sexual harassment when: 
•  Submission to such conduct is made, either explicitly or implicitly, a term or condition of an individual's employment; 
•  Submission to, or rejection of, such conduct by an individual is used as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual; or 
•  Such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating hostile or offensive working environment. 
Simply put, "sexual harassment" is unwelcome behavior of a sexual nature. The EEOC's guidelines define two (2) types of sexual harassment: "quid pro quo" and "hostile environment." 
(1)  Quid Pro Quo: Unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature constitute "quid pro quo" sexual harassment when: 
a.  Submission to such conduct is made, either explicitly or implicitly, a term or condition of an individual's employment; or 
b.  Submission to, or rejection of, such conduct by an individual is used as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual. 
(2)  Hostile environment: Unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors and other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature constitute "hostile environment" sexual harassment when such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive working environment. 
(b)  Victim of sexual harassment. The victim may be a woman or a man. The victim does not have to be of the opposite sex. The victim does not have to be the person harassed but could be anyone affected by the offensive conduct. 
(c)  Sexual harasser: The harasser may be a woman or a man. He or she can be the victim's supervisor, an agent of the employer, a supervisor in another area, a co-worker, or a non-employee. 
(d)  Third party harassment: In some cases, people may engage in off-color remarks and joking that they do not find offensive. This behavior may be offensive to others who are not directly involved in the conversation. This type of harassment is called third party harassment, and is considered a form of sexual harassment. 
(e)  Other work-related activities: Sexual harassment can occur outside the work site and still be work-related. Incidents that occur at retirement parties and office socials, in-training sessions, at conventions, or on temporary duty are some of the situations where work-related sexual harassment can occur. 
(f)  Between contractor, city employees, and the public: Sexual harassment policies and definitions apply to our employees in their interactions with any contract employees, the public, or other city employees. In cases involving contract employees, you may have to work through the company's human resource department to conduct an inquiry or to report allegations of sexual harassment. Contact the EEO office for additional guidance. 
(g)  Employment discrimination: Title VII prohibits employment discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, and national origin. 
(h)  Zero tolerance: The city will not condone sexual harassment. By taking appropriate disciplinary action not only for the harasser but for employees who witnessed it and did not report the incident. Employment discrimination likewise will not be condoned.  
Sec. IV. - Responsibilities. 
(a)  Mayor shall hold each department head accountable for the conduct of their employees. If situations should arise that are not covered in this policy, the mayor will convene a meeting with the appropriate personnel to determine the course of action to be taken. 
(b)  City clerk shall perform responsibilities outlined in this policy and other duties delegated by the mayor. 
(c)  City attorney shall review complaints and provide and/or assist rendering a decision regarding what action, if any, should be taken. 
(d)  Department heads shall ensure this policy is fully implemented and that each employee understands the meaning of zero tolerance. 
(e)  Supervisors shall take allegations seriously and conduct an inquiry promptly. Find out what happened, when it happened, names of witnesses, and document findings. Notify the department head and human resources director immediately of the allegation. 
(f)  Human resources director shall be the primary investigator for sexual harassment/employment discrimination complaints. This responsibility may be delegated to another qualified investigator with the approval of the mayor or city clerk.  
Sec. V. - Prohibited conduct. 
The management of the City of Bastrop considers sexual harassment/employment discrimination to include, but not limited to, the following: 
(a)  Physical assaults of a physical nature, such as: 
(1)  Rape, sexual molestation, or attempts to commit these assaults; and 
(2)  Intentional physical conduct that is sexual in nature, such as touching, pinching, patting, grabbing, brushing against another employee's body, or poking another employee's body. 
(b)  Unwanted sexual advances, propositions, or other sexual comments such as: 
(1)  Sexually oriented gestures, noises, remarks, jokes or comments about a person's sexuality or sexual experience directed at, or made in the presence of, any employee who indicates or has indicated in any way that such conduct in his or her presence is unwelcome; 
(2)  Preferential treatment or promises of preferential treatment to any employee for submitting to sexual conduct, including soliciting or attempting to solicit any employee to engage in sexual activity for compensation or reward; and 
(3)  Subjecting or making threats of subjecting an employee to unwelcome sexual attention or conduct, or intentionally making performance of the employee's job more difficult because of that employee's sex to include uninvited letters and telephone calls. 
(c)  Sexual or discriminatory displays or publications anywhere in the work place by employees, such as: 
(1)  Displaying pictures, calendars, graffiti, objects, promotional materials, reading materials, or other materials that are sexually suggestive, sexually demeaning or pornographic, or bringing into the work environment or possessing any such material to read, display, or view at work; 
(2)  Reading or otherwise publicizing in the work environment materials that are in any way sexually revealing, sexually suggestive, sexually demeaning, or pornographic; and 
(3)  Displaying signs or other materials purporting to segregate an employee by sex in any area of the work place, (other than restrooms and other semi-private locker/changing rooms.) 
(d)  Employment discrimination such as: 
(1)  Failure or refusal to hire or to discharge any individual or otherwise to discriminate against any individual with respect to his or her compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment because of such individual's race, color, religion, sex, or national origin; and 
(2)  Limit, segregate or classify employees or applicants for employment in any way which would deprive or tend to deprive any individual of employment opportunities or adversely affect the employee's/applicant's status as an employee because of individual's race, color, religion, sex, or national origin.  
Sec. VI. - Procedures for sexual harassment/employment discrimination complaints. 
(a)  The human resources director shall coordinate and direct the investigation and review all complaints. The following procedures shall apply to the receipt, review, and conclusion of such complaints: 
(1)  Any employee who believes that he or she has been the subject of sexual harassment/employment discrimination must report the alleged charge immediately, but not later than ninety (90) calendar days, to the human resources office, providing the following information: 
a.  Employee's name, department, and position title. 
b.  The name of the person or persons committing the sexual harassment/employment discrimination. 
c.  The specific nature of the sexual harassment/employment discrimination, how long it has gone on, and any employment action (demotion, failure to promote, dismissal, refusal to hire, transfer, etc.) taken against him or her as a result of the harassment/discrimination, or any other threats made against him or her as a result of the harassment/discrimination. 
d.  Witnesses, if any. 
e.  Whether he or she has previously reported such harassment/discrimination and, if so, when and to whom. 
All information disclosed will be held in strict confidence and will only be disclosed on a need-to-know basis in order to investigate and resolve the complaint. 
(2)  Upon notification of a complaint, the human resources director, or a qualified delegate, shall immediately notify the individual's supervisor and department head of the sexual harassment/employment discrimination complaint. 
(3)  The individual alleging the complaint will be interviewed by the human resources director, or his or her designate, on the nature of the allegations. During the interview, the individual will be informed that in order to ensure an effective investigation, he or she must complete the complaint form, providing the information listed in subsection (a)(1) of this section. If for some reason the individual alleging the complaint is unable to complete the form, the information may be provided by means of a tape recorder during the interview with approval of the complainant. 
(4)  Within two (2) working days after receiving the complaint in writing/recording, the accused harasser will be called to the human resources office to review a copy of the completed complaint form or hear the recording, and will be informed of the seriousness of the allegation. 
(5)  The accused harasser will have the opportunity to refute the allegation by responding on the complaint form or recording his or her response immediately, or within two (2) working days. The response must be made in the presence of the interviewer. Forms/tapes are confidential and shall be retained by the interviewer. 
(6)  After interviewing the complainant and accused harasser, the human resources director will meet with the department head(s) of both individuals and discuss the seriousness of the allegation. If the evidence warrants, disciplinary action shall be taken as outlined in this policy. 
(7)  A complainant may withdraw a complaint at any time. However, the city may still pursue an investigation and determine that disciplinary action is warranted, either on the basis of a validated complaint or falsification of a complaint, even though withdrawn. 
NOTE: Employment discrimination complaints shall be reported and investigated, using the procedures for sexual harassment complaints and investigations. Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, and Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 shall be used to determine employment discrimination complaints.  
Sec. VII. - Obligation of employees. 
(a)  Employees are not only encouraged to report instances of sexual harassment/employment discrimination, they are obligated to report instances of sexual harassment/employment discrimination. 
(b)  Employees are obligated to cooperate in every investigation, including coming forward with evidence, both favorable and unfavorable, to a person accused of sexual harassment/employment discrimination, fully and truthfully making a written report, or verbally answering questions when required to do so by an investigator during the course of an investigation. 
(c)  Employees are also obligated to refrain from filing bad faith complaints of sexual harassment/employment discrimination. 
(d)  Disciplinary action may also be taken against any employee who fails to report instances of sexual harassment/employment discrimination, who fails or refuses to cooperate in the investigation of a complaint, or who files a complaint in bad faith. 
(e)  No employee shall be subject to retaliation in any form as a result of bringing a complaint or testifying or assisting in a grievance brought pursuant to this procedure. A complaint of such retaliation should be directed to the human resources director.  
Sec. VIII. - Investigation of complaint. 
(a)  The human resources director shall conduct a fact-finding investigation of the complaint when the accused has rejected the charges. 
(b)  The investigator shall make and keep a written record of the investigation, including notes of verbal responses made to the investigator by the person complaining of sexual harassment/employment discrimination, witnesses interviewed during the investigation, the person against whom the complaint was made, and any other person contacted by the investigator in connection with the investigation. The notes shall be made at the time the verbal interview is in progress. 
(c)  Based upon the report, the human resources director shall determine whether the conduct of the person against whom a complaint of sexual harassment/employment discrimination has been made constitutes sexual harassment/employment discrimination. In making that determination, the human resources director shall look at the record as a whole and at the totality of circumstances, including the nature of the conduct in question, and the context in which the conduct, if any, occurred. The determination of whether sexual harassment occurred will be made on a case-by-case basis. Investigation procedures are as follows: 
(1)  The investigation will include testimony from the complainant, the accused, and such other parties as the human resources director may deem essential to reaching a decision on the validity of the accusation. 
(2)  The complainant has the responsibility to demonstrate, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the accusation is valid. 
(3)  No testimony will be received in the absence of the complainant or the accused, unless either willfully absents himself or herself from the proceedings. 
(4)  The right of cross-examination of any testifying party is guaranteed to both the complainant and the accused, assuming the presence of the same at the hearing. 
(5)  The complainant and the accused each have the right to bring an advisor to the hearing. The advisor may not act as a participant in the hearing, but may render consultation to the complainant and or the accused. 
(d)  Within five (5) working days of the conclusion of a fact-finding hearing, the human resources director and city attorney will provide to the accused's department head a conclusion regarding the validity, or lack of validity, of the complainant's allegations. 
(e)  In cases where the accused admits to the charges, and upon the opinion of the human resources director and city attorney, the information available substantiates the description of events by the complainant and accused, a fact-finding hearing may be waived.  
Sec. IX. - Disciplinary action. 
(a)  After reviewing the initial complaint, and if warranted, the accused shall be suspended, with pay, for a period not to exceed two (2) weeks (unless extended with approval of the mayor) pending a complete investigation. 
(b)  Within five (5) working days after receiving the determination of validity from the human resources director and city attorney, the department head will consult with the human resources director and city attorney and render a decision regarding the action to be taken. Such actions include: 
(1)  If the allegations prove not to constitute sexual harassment/employment discrimination, the accused can return to work. 
(2)  If an offense is validated: 
a.  Require counseling of the accused and/or transfer the complainant and/or accused; or 
b.  If the offense is severe, recommend termination or terminate the accused. 
(3)  If the accusation was false, apply discipline to the complainant, up to and including termination. 
(4)  If the validity or falsification of the offense cannot be satisfactorily established, the department head shall execute the action(s) which: 
a.  Is in the best interest of the city; 
b.  Minimizes interference of divisional/departmental operations; and/or 
c.  Allows for the accused and complainant to continue their work routines with feasible and minimal personal consequence. 
(c)  The decision of the department head will be sent by registered mail, return receipt requested, to the complainant and the accused, with copies to the mayor, city clerk, and human resources director, as appropriate. 
(d)  If the department head is the accused, these actions shall be carried out by the mayor or city clerk in coordination with the city attorney. 
In all cases, the disciplinary action shall be consistent with the nature and severity of the offense, whether a supervisory relationship exists, and any other factors the investigator believes relate to fair and efficient administration of the city, including the effect of the offense on employee morale and public perception of the city. The disciplinary action may include demotion, suspension, dismissal, verbal warning, or written reprimand. A determination of the level of disciplinary action shall also be made on a case-by-case basis.  
Sec. X. - Appeal of the decision. 
(a)  Within ten (10) working days of the postmark of the written notification to the employee of the department head's decision, the complainant or accused may make a written request for a final review of the record or a final meeting with the mayor or department head, as appropriate. 
The human resources director, in response to a timely appeal, will: 
(1)  Schedule a meeting with the appealing party to hear his or her appeal, within ten (10) days following the receipt of the appeal. 
a.  The meeting date can be scheduled on any date convenient to all parties, with mutual consent (including beyond the ten-day period). 
b.  Within three (3) working days after the meeting, a decision will be provided to the appealing party by the city clerk. 
c.  Copies of the decision shall be sent to the complainant and accused by registered mail, return receipt requested, and copies given to the human resources director, city attorney, and respective department heads.  
Sec. XI. - Records of complaints. 
(a)  All records, except those affected by civil service statutes concerning a sexual harassment/employment discrimination complaint, shall be kept in a separate, locked file in the human resources director's office. Access shall be only with the human resources director's approval to parties who have a direct and relevant need to know. 
(b)  The records maintained with respect to each complainant of sexual harassment/employment discrimination shall contain: 
(1)  The written/recorded complaint. 
(2)  The written/recorded response from the accused. 
(3)  Witness statements—Written or recorded. 
(4)  Any written statements produced by the investigation. 
(5)  The investigation report produced by the investigator. 
(6)  Records of appeals. 
(7)  Record of disciplinary action. 
(c)  Records shall be maintained for the duration of employment and for five (5) years after termination.  
Sec. XII. - Training. 
(a)  The elimination and prevention of sexual harassment/employment discrimination are premier goals of the City of Bastrop. It is incumbent upon everyone not to engage in conduct which could undermine the integrity of the employee and/or interfere with the work productivity of the city or the services provided to the public. To assist that our work environments are free of sexual harassment/employment discrimination, the prevention of sexual harassment training shall be attended by all employees. 
(b)  All employees shall attend Session 1, a 4-hour session that covers the law and the nature of sexual harassment/employment discrimination, conduct to avoid, liability issues, guidance from the EEOC, and expectations of both the employees and the city, including the city's written policy. 
(c)  Supervisory personnel shall attend Session 1 and Session 2 for supervisors. 
(d)  Investigators shall attend Session 1, Session 2, and Session 3 for investigators. 
(e)  All training shall be documented, indicating training date, employee name, session attended, and certified by the instructor. Training records shall be maintained for the duration of employment and for five (5) years after termination. 
CONFIDENTIAL 
SEXUAL HARASSMENT/EMPLOYEE DISCRIMINATION 
COMPLAINT FORM 
Employee Name: _____ 	Title: _____ 
Date: _____ 	Dept.: _____ 
 
Complaint Information 
  [ ]  Sexual Harassment 	  [ ]  Employment Discrimination 
 
Name of person/persons who harassed/discriminated against you: 






Nature of the harassment/discrimination. Explain what they did: 






When did it happen? List dates/time. How long it has gone on: 






Where did it happen? List place/places: 






List names of individuals you told about the harassment/discrimination: 






List witnesses: 






Who else has been harassed/discriminated by this person? 






Have you previously reported such harassment/discrimination? If yes, list to whom and when: 






What did you do in response? 






What do you want done? 






Do you have other information? If so, explain: 






Are you planning to enroll in an Employee Assistance Program? 






         [ ] Yes   [ ] No   [ ] Undecided at this time 
 
The information provided is true and correct to the best of my knowledge. I fully understand that my complaint will be investigated and false allegations are grounds for termination. 
_____
     Complainant Signature 	_____
   Date 
		
		
_____
     Complaint Received By 	_____
  Date 	_____
  Time 
 
RESPONSE FROM THE ACCUSED 
Accused Name: _____ 	Title: _____ 
Date: _____ 	Dept.: _____ 
	
	
   [ ]  Concur with the allegations 	   [ ]  Deny the allegations 
	
	
Prepare a brief response on why you deny allegations, if denied. 
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
 
_____
     Accused Signature 	_____
   Date 
		
		
_____
     Investigator Signature 	_____
  Date 	_____
  Time 
  
Chapter 16 - PLANNING COMMISSION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-4017, §§ 1—3, adopted Feb. 12, 2004, repealed the former chapter 16, §§ 16-1—16-9, and enacted a new chapter 16 as set out herein. The former chapter 16 pertained to similar subject matter. For complete derivation see the Code Comparative Table at the end of this volume. 
 
Sec. 16-1. - Planning commission created. 
There is hereby created a planning commission which shall also serve as a zoning commission. 
(Ord. No. 04-4017, § 1, 2-12-2004)  
Sec. 16-2. - Membership. 
(a)  The planning commission shall consist of seven members, all appointed by the mayor, who may remove any member of the commission, after public hearing for inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance. The first-appointed members of the commission shall hold office for terms of one (1), two (2), three (3), four (4), five (5), six (6), seven (7) years respectively. Their successors shall be appointed for terms of seven (7) years from and after the expiration of the terms of their predecessors in office. If a vacancy occurs otherwise than by expiration of a term, it shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term. 
(b)  All members of the commission shall serve without compensation and shall hold no other public office. 
(Ord. No. 04-4017, § 2, 2-12-2004)  
Sec. 16-3. - Powers and duties of the commission. 
(a)  The planning commission shall make, adopt, publish, and occasionally revise a comprehensive plan for the continued physical development of the city, considering present and future considerations. 
(1)  Such plan, with its accompanying maps, plats, charts, and other descriptive matter, shall show a commission's recommendations for the development of the city, including, among other things: 
a.  The general location, character, and extent of public rights-of-way, facilities, utilities, etc.; 
b.  The nature and extent of land use regulations that may be adopted or amended by the city; 
c.  The character, extent and layout of public housing and of the replanning of blighted districts and slum areas; and 
d.  The character, extent, and layout of subdivisions according to duly adopted subdivision ordinance provisions. 
(2)  The planning commission may promote interest in and understanding of the comprehensive plan and may employ such means as is necessary to do so. 
(3)  As the work of making the whole comprehensive plan progresses, the commission may from time to time adopt and publish a part or parts thereof, any such part to cover one or more sections or divisions of the city or one or more of the functional matters to be included in the plan. 
4.  After adoption of such plan, all new or expanded rights-of-way, public and private facilities, utilities, etc., shall be in accordance with such plan. 
5.  The planning commission may from time to time amend, extend, or add to the comprehensive plan. 
(b)  The planning commission shall recommend to the appropriate public officials programs for public structures and improvements and for the financing thereof. 
(c)  The planning commission shall also serve as the zoning commission for the City of Bastrop, Louisiana; and, when acting as such, shall hold separate meetings with separate minutes and records. 
(Ord. No. 04-4017, § 3, 2-12-2004)  
Chapter 16.5 - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Licensing and regulation of sexually oriented businesses and employees, § 13-301 et seq. 
 
Sec. 16.5-1. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  Purpose and findings. 
(1)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to regulate the location of sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses within the city, and to preserve and enhance the value and enjoyment of property in the neighborhoods of the city, including the central business district of the city. The provisions of this section have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content or reasonable access to any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this section to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution or the corresponding provisions of the Louisiana Constitution, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(2)  Findings. Based on evidence of the adverse secondary effects of adult uses presented in hearings and in reports made available to the council, and on findings, interpretations, and narrowing constructions incorporated in the cases of Pap's AM. v. City of Erie, 529 U.S. 277 (2000); City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc., 122 S. Ct. 1728 (2002); City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v. American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976), Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); FW/PBS, Inc. v. City of Dallas, 493 U.S. 215 (1990); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972); Baby Dolls Topless Saloons, Inc. v. City of Dallas, 2002 U.S. App. LEXIS 12202 (5 th Cir., June 20, 2002); LLEH, Inc. v. Wichita County, 289 F.3d 358 (5 th Cir. 2002); Hang On, Inc. v. City of Arlington, 65 F.3d 1248 (5 th Cir. 1995); Woodall v. City of El Paso, 49 F.3d 1120 (5 th Cir. 1995); J&B Entertainment, Inc. v. City of Jackson, 152 F.3d 362 (5 th Cir. 1998); SDJ, Inc. v. City of Houston, 837 F.2d 1268 (5 th Cir. 1988); TK's Video, Inc. v. Denton County, 24 F.3d 705 (5 th Cir. 1994); Lagrange Trading Co. v. Nicolosi, 1991 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 3551 (E.D. La. 1991); Vonderhaar v. Parish of St. Tammany, 633 So. 2d 217 (La. Ct. App. 1993); Liberto v. Rapides Parish Police Jury, 667 So. 2d 552 (La. Ct. App. 1995); City of Gretna v. RusslandEnterprises, Inc., 564 So. 2d 367 (La. Ct, App. 1990); and other cases; and on testimony to Congress in 136 Cong. Rec. S 8987; 135 Cong. Rec. S. 14519; 135 Cong. Rec. S 5636; 134 Cong. Rec. E 3750; and reports of secondary effects occurring in and around sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, Phoenix, Arizona - 1984; Minneapolis, Minnesota-1980; Houston, Texas - 1997; Indianapolis, Indiana - 1984; Amarillo, Texas - 1977; Garden Grove, California - 1991; Los Angeles, California - 1977; Whittier, California - 1978; Austin, Texas - 1986; Seattle, Washington - 1989; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma - 1986; Cleveland, Ohio - 1977; and Dallas, Texas - 1977; St. Croix County, Wisconsin - 1993; Bellevue, Washington, - 1998; Newport News, Virginia - 1996; New York Times Square study - 1994; Phoenix, Arizona - 1995-98; and also on findings of physical abuse from the paper entitled "Stripclubs According to Strippers: Exposing Workplace Sexual Violence," by Kelly Holsopple, Program Director, Freedom and Justice Center for Prostitution Resources, Minneapolis, Minnesota, and from "Sexually Oriented Businesses: An Insider's View," by David Sherman, presented to the Michigan House Committee on Ethics and Constitutional Law, Jan. 12, 2000, and the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group On The Regulation Of Sexually Oriented Businesses, (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), the council finds that providing specific zoning standards for sexually oriented businesses is necessary to advance the health, safety, and welfare of the community. 
(b)  Definitions. For purposes of this chapter, the words and phrases defined in the sections hereunder shall have the meanings therein respectively ascribed to them unless a different meaning is clearly indicated by the context. 
Adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store means a commercial establishment which has significant or substantial portion of its stock-in trade or derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues or devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or advertising, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or display space to the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of any one (1) or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides, or other visual representations which are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; 
(2)  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of themselves or others. 
The term "adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store" shall also include a commercial establishment which regularly maintains one (1) or more "adult arcades." "Adult arcade" means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon matter exhibiting or describing" specified sexual activities" or specified "anatomical areas." 
Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant, bottle club, or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served, which regularly features persons who appear semi-nude. 
Adult hotel means a motel, hotel, or similar commercial establishment which: 
(1)  Offers public accommodations, for any form of consideration, and which regularly provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" and which regularly advertises the availability of such material by means of a sign visible from the public right-of-way, or by means of any off-premises advertising, including but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio or television, and 
(2)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time less than ten (10) hours. 
Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions which are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" are regularly shown for any form of consideration. 
Distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon means the dominant or principal theme of the object described by such phrase. For instance, when the phase refers to films "which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas," the films so described are those whose dominant or principal character and theme are the exhibition or description "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities." 
Establish or establishment shall mean and include any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; or 
(3)  The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business. 
Nudity or a state of nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple and areola. 
Regularly features or regularly shows means a consistent or substantial course of conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited constitute a substantial portion of the films or performances offered as a part of the ongoing business of the sexually oriented business. 
Semi-nude or state of semi-nudity shall mean a state of dress in which opaque clothing covers no more than the genitals, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, pubic area, vulva, and nipple and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. This definition shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel provided that the areola and nipple are not exposed in whole or in part. 
Semi-nude model studio means any place where a person, who regularly appears in a state of semi-nudity is provided for money or any form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons. 
It is a defense to prosecution for any violation of this article that a person appearing in a state of semi-nudity or semi-nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
(1)  By a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(2)  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credited are transferable to college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or: 
(3)  In a structure: 
(i)  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a semi-nude person is available for viewing; and 
(ii)  Where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three (3) days in advance of the class. 
Sexually oriented business means any establishment that is an adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater or semi-nude model studio as defined in this section, as well as any other establishment that regularly features or regularly shows any sexually oriented entertainment activity. 
Sexually oriented entertainment activity means the sale, rental, or exhibition for any form of consideration, of books, films, video cassettes, magazines, periodicals, or live performances which are characterized by an emphasis on the exposure or display of specific sexual activity. 
Specified anatomical area shall mean human genitals, anus, cleft of the buttocks, or the female breast. 
Specified sexual activity means any of the following: 
(1)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, including intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy; or 
(2)  Excretory functions as a part of or in connection with any of the activities described in subsection (1) above. 
(c)  Locational requirements. 
(1)  No person or entity shall be issued a license to operate sexually oriented business, or to be employed by a sexually oriented business, that is: 
(i)  Within two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet of the property line of a residential zoning district within the city; 
(ii)  Within two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet of the property line of any public library, public park, or public museum; 
(iii)  Within two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet of the property line of any church, shrine, chapel, mortuary, or any other place used regularly for religious services. 
(iv)  Within two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet of the property line of any school, kindergarten or day care center. "School" shall include only such public, private, or church-sponsored schools as regularly teach the subjects commonly taught in the primary and secondary schools of Louisiana; 
(v)  Within two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet of another sexually oriented business; or 
(vi)  In the same building as another sexually oriented business; or upon the same parcel as another sexually oriented business, provided that, if the single parcel is large enough to maintain both sexually oriented businesses with at least two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet between them, simultaneous existence of both businesses shall be allowed under this section. 
Measurement shall be made as a person walks using the sidewalk (or public rights-of-way when sidewalks do not exist) from the nearest point of the property line of any residential zoning district, church, synagogue, public library, public playground, school, other sexually oriented business (subject to the provisions of subsection (c) (1)(iv) above), shrine, chapel, mortuary, any other place used regularly for religious services or public museum to the nearest point of public entry of the sexually oriented business. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(d)  Nonconforming sexually oriented business uses. 
(1)  A nonconforming sexually oriented business, wherein a person or entity has been issued a license to operate a sexually oriented business existing in a specific location prior November 13, 2008, may continue to operate for three (3) years following that date in order to make a reasonable recoupment of its investment in its current location. On November 14, 2011, or should the business cease operations at its current location, the use will no longer be recognized as a legal nonconforming use, provided that a nonconforming sexually oriented business may apply for up to two (2) six-month extensions of the original two-year period upon a showing financial hardship. An application for an initial extension based upon financial hardship ("hardship exception") shall be made at least sixty (60) days before November 14, 2011. If a hardship extension is granted, subsequent applications for a hardship extension shall be made at least sixty (60) days before the conclusion of the non-conforming business's then-current extension period. 
(ii)  An application for a hardship extension shall be filed in writing with the city clerk, and shall include evidence of purchase and improvement costs, income earned and lost, depreciation, and costs of relocation. Within ten (10) days after receiving the application, the mayor and board of alderpersons shall schedule a public hearing on the application, which public hearing shall be conducted within sixty (60) days after the receipt of the application. Notice of the time and place of such public hearing shall be published for the same time and in the same manner as a meeting of the mayor and board of alderpersons. 
(ii)  The mayor and board of alderpersons shall issue a written decision within ten (10) days after the public hearing on the application for a hardship extension. The hardship extension shall be granted upon a showing that the nonconforming adult use is unable to recoup its investments, made prior to November 13, 2008, in its current location unless the hardship extension is granted. 
(iv)  Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, should any nonconforming sexually oriented business cease to operate or be discontinued for any period of time, it shall not thereafter be reestablished without being in full compliance with all provisions of this chapter and other applicable codes and ordinances. The terms "cease to operate" or "discontinued for any period of time" shall mean the voluntary or intentional termination, cessation or discontinuance of the business by the owner or other party in interest or an involuntary termination of the business resulting from a violation of any applicable rule, regulation, ordinance, statute or law. The nonconforming use shall not be deemed to terminate if the cessation, termination of discontinuance of the business operations are caused by an act of God, or other catastrophic occurrence or event not caused by or under the control of the business owner or other party in interest. The holder of the certificate of occupancy or operator of the business shall be responsible for providing documentation, acceptable to the zoning administrator, that a nonconforming sexually oriented business has not ceased to operate or been discontinued. A nonconforming sexually oriented business shall not be enlarged, increased or altered, as provided in Code of Ordinances. Any change in use shall require full compliance with all provisions of this chapter and other applicable codes. 
(Ord. No. 08-4184, § 1, 11-13-08)  
Chapter 17 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Obstruction of highway, § 8-130. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 17-1. - Street names and numbering—Base streets; street and avenue designating. 
(a)  Washington Street is the base for all streets running north and south and Madison Avenue is the base for all streets running east and west, making the center of such streets in the intersection of Washington Street and Madison Avenue the hub of the system. 
(b)  All streets running north and south shall be known as streets; all streets running east and west, except Madison Avenue, shall be known as avenues. 
(Code 1966, §§ 21-05, 21-06)  
Sec. 17-2. - Same—Numbering plan. 
The plan of numbering for the city shall be the Philadelphia System of one hundred (100) for each block, with the number determined for each twenty-five (25) feet of street frontage in the business district (regardless of the size or shape of lot) and a number determined for each fifty (50) feet of street frontage in the residence portion of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 21-04)  
Sec. 17-3. - Same—Odd and even sides. 
Even numbers shall be placed on the right and odd numbers on the left from the difference bases of the respective streets and avenues, commencing at Washington Street and at Madison Avenue. 
(Code 1966, § 21-07)  
Sec. 17-4. - Same—Affixing numbers. 
Each property owner within the corporation limits of the city is required to number such person's buildings with the proper size number, the material to be of either metal or glass, as approved by the governing body in accordance with the city system of numbering houses. 
(Code 1966, § 21-01)  
Sec. 17-5. - Obstruction of view at intersections. 
It shall be unlawful to construct, or maintain or permit to remain, any fence or other structure, or any bushes or other plants on a corner lot within fifty (50) feet of the street line, which obstructs the view, at a height of more than two (2) feet above the level of the adjacent street pavement. 
(Code 1966, § 21-09) 
Cross reference— Similar requirement in subdivisions, § 18-7(e).  
Sec. 17-6. - Culvert placements. 
(a)  No person shall construct or place in any open ditch in the streets of this city any culvert, without first having obtained a permit from the city. No charge shall be made for the issuance of a culvert permit. 
(b)  Such culvert shall be of such size and shall be constructed of such material as determined by the city, depending upon the conditions existing. 
(c)  Any culvert placed in violation of this section shall be removed by the city and replaced with the proper culvert, such charges being assessed against the property and to rank as a lien and privilege against the property. 
(Code 1966, §§ 21-10, 21-13)  
Secs. 17-7—17-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATIONS 
 
Sec. 17-20. - Compliance with article. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make an excavation in any street, alley, sidewalk, or other city-owned place, or to disturb or break the pavement of any such place, without complying with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2386, § 1, 6-28-66)  
Sec. 17-21. - Minimizing traffic interference; restoring surface; required barricades, etc. 
(a)  Where utilities are to be installed under the existing street surfacing or pavement, the person installing such utilities shall schedule its operations to minimize interference to traffic and shall restore all pavement cuts to a condition at least equivalent to the condition of the pavement prior to cutting. One-half of every pavement shall be kept open to traffic at all times. 
(b)  Barricades, flares and warning signs shall be placed in sufficient number and located in proper positions to adequately protect the public. 
(Ord. No. 2386, § 2, 6-28-66)  
Sec. 17-22. - Backfilling trenches; removal of pavement. 
Trenches under surfacing or pavement shall be backfilled in six-inch layers from the bottom of the trench to the bottom of the base course material. All surfacing or pavement shall be removed for a distance of two (2) feet beyond the edges of the trench and trimmed to a straight, neat edge. 
(Ord. No. 2386, § 3, 6-28-66)  
Sec. 17-23. - Base course material; compaction. 
The base course material shall be a sand-clay gravel conforming to Grade "B," Division II, of the state department of highways specifications for roads and bridges. Base course beneath concrete pavement shall be a six-inch thickness, and beneath asphalt surface shall be an eight-inch thickness. Compaction shall be ninety-five (95) percent of maximum density when tested in accordance with A. A. S. H. O. Standard Methods. Subgrade shall be compacted to ninety (90) percent of maximum density. 
(Ord. No. 2386, § 5, 6-28-66)  
Sec. 17-24. - Pavement replacement. 
The concrete pavement removed shall be replaced with eight-inch concrete. In the case of bituminous pavements, replacement shall be of a two-inch thickness of hot mix asphaltic concrete. Other surfaces shall be replaced in kind. 
(Ord. No. 2386, § 4, 6-28-66)  
Sec. 17-25. - Reimbursement of city for repairs. 
Any person violating this article shall be subject to reimbursing the city for expenses made in repairing the breakage in a like-new condition. 
(Ord. No. 2386, § 6, 6-28-66)  
Secs. 17-26—17-29. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STREET CONSTRUCTION BY PRIVATE INTERESTS 
 
Sec. 17-30. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, certain words and phrases used herein are defined as follows: 
Base course: The layers of specified material of designed thickness on a subbase or a subgrade to support a surface course. 
City engineer: The consulting engineer for the city. 
Contract: The person having a state contractor's license for the performance of prescribed works. 
Designated authority: The mayor, governing body, director of public works or any other person so authorized and designated by the governing body. 
D.O.T.D.: Department of Transportation and Development, Louisiana Standard Specifications for Roads and Bridges, 1977 edition. 
Inspector: The city's authorized representative assigned to make detailed specifications of performance of work and the necessary approval of same for the governing body. 
Laboratory: Any approved testing laboratory which may be designated by the city to perform all testing for the performance of such work. 
Plans: The contract drawings which show the location, character, dimensions of the prescribed work, including layouts, profiles, cross sections, bridges and drainage structures, designed by a state-licensed engineer or surveyor. 
Private interest: An individual, partnership or corporation as distinguished from a publicly financed body. 
Right-of-way: A general term denoting land, property, or interest therein, usually in a strip, acquired for or devoted to a street. 
Roadbed: The graded portion of a street within top and side slopes, prepared as a foundation for the pavement structure and shoulder. 
Roadway: In general that portion of a street, including shoulders, provided for vehicular use. 
Shoulder: The portion of roadway contiguous with the traveled way for accommodation of stopped vehicles, for emergency use and/or for lateral support of base and surface courses. 
Specifications: The compilation of provisions and requirements for the performance of prescribed work. 
Subbase: The layers of specified or selected material of designed thickness placed on a subgrade to support a base course. 
Subgrade: The top surface of a roadbed upon which the pavement structure and shoulders are constructed. 
Surface course: One (1) or more layers of a pavement structure designed to accommodate the traffic load, the top of which resists skidding, traffic abrasion, and the disintegrating effects of climate. 
Work: The furnishing of all labor, materials, equipment and other incidentals necessary or convenient to the successful completion of the project and the carrying out of all the duties and obligations imposed by the contract. 
(Ord. No. 2951, § 1, 8-14-79)  
Sec. 17-31. - Copies of plans and specifications. 
Before any construction is started, two (2) copies of plans and specifications shall be submitted to the governing body for approval. 
(Ord. No. 2951, § 3, 8-14-79)  
Sec. 17-32. - Minimum right-of-way widths. 
Minimum right-of-way widths are as follows: 
(1)  Streets ..... 60 feet 
(2)  Easement for utilities ..... 20 feet 
(3)  Cul-de-sacs ..... 50-foot radius 
(Ord. No. 2951, § 2, 8-14-79)  
Sec. 17-33. - Paving width and depths; shoulder width and slope. 
(a)  All streets to receive bituminous concrete paving shall have a minimum width of twenty (20) feet and shall be covered to a depth of not less than one and one-half (1 1/2) inches thick with bituminous paving material. All portland cement concrete pavement shall have a width of twenty (20) feet, and shall be at least eight (8) inches in thickness. Each of the above shall be in accordance with D.O.T.D. specifications. 
(b)  Shoulders shall have a minimum width of six (6) feet from edge of pavement to beginning of ditch slope. Shoulders shall have the same slope as that of the paving surface. 
(Ord. No. 2951, § 5, 8-14-79)  
Sec. 17-34. - Drainage. 
(a)  Drainage pipes shall be reinforced concrete or standard size gauge asphalt-coated galvanized iron pipe and shall be of such size as to permit adequate water runoff during heavy rainfall. Sizes are to conform with those recommended in standard drainage tables of this area. All piping must meet D.O.T.D. specifications. 
(b)  Side ditches for streets are to have a minimum of three to one (3:1) slope and in no case shall the bottom of ditch be less than eighteen (18) inches below the shoulder of street at the edge of pavement. 
(Ord. No. 2951, § 4, 8-14-79)  
Sec. 17-35. - Base course. 
(a)  The base course shall be a minimum of six (6) inches of soil cement and not more than eight (8) inches and a width of twenty-one (21) feet for a twenty-foot surface. The volume and percent of cement are to be determined by laboratory soil samples before work is started. During the performance of the work the laboratory shall perform such tests as are needed to insure conformance to D.O.T.D. specifications. 
(b)  Any area found not suitable for stabilization shall be undercut and filled with select material of the type and quality necessary to make the base course meet D.O.T.D. specifications. 
(Ord. No. 2951, § 6, 8-14-79)  
Sec. 17-36. - Submission of plans and specifications; standards; bearing costs. 
All private interest as described in this article, shall submit all plans and specifications to the governing body for approval before any work is begun. All plans and specifications must meet the D.O.T.D. Louisiana Standard Specifications for Roads and Bridges, 1977 edition. The private interests must bear all costs of engineering, plans, specifications, construction cost, testing and any legal expense necessary in the performance of the work. The city shall not bear any cost incurred in this work. 
(Ord. No. 2951, § 7, 8-14-79)  
Sec. 17-37. - Inspection. 
All private interests shall, after all plans and specifications have been approved, notify the city by letter ten (10) days prior to the commencement of work. The inspector designated by the city shall inspect each stage of the work in progress to insure that all such work is in conformity with the plans and specifications for such work. 
(Ord. No. 2951, § 8, 8-14-79)  
Sec. 17-38. - Approval of plans and specifications; determining compliance. 
(a)  The city engineer or such other proper designated city authority shall review the plans and specifications submitted by the private interest and indicate approval or disapproval on at least one (1) copy of such plans which shall be returned to the submitting party. 
(b)  It shall be the function of the inspector to determine that all work performed complies with the approved plans and specifications. 
(Ord. No. 2951, § 9, 8-14-79)  
Sec. 17-39. - Nonacceptance by city. 
In the event the provisions of this article are not complied with, the designated authority shall indicate this to the city who shall then notify the private interest that until all provisions of this article are complied with the city will not accept the streets into the city street system for maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 2951, § 10, 8-14-79)  
Chapter 18 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority, § 5(37). 
 
Sec. 18-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  Words and terms not otherwise defined herein shall have the definitions given in the definition of terms used in geodetic and other surveys, Special Publication No. 142 of the U.S. Department of Commerce, 1948 edition. 
(b)  For the purposes of this chapter certain words and phrases used herein are defined as follows: 
Alley: Any public space or thoroughfare twenty (20) feet or less in width which has been dedicated or deeded for public use. 
Block: A parcel of land entirely surrounded by streets, streams, railroad rights-of-way, parks, or other public spaces or by a combination thereof. 
Building setback line: The line indicating the minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the face of buildings. 
Closed-end street: A short street having one (1) end open to traffic and being terminated at the other end with a vehicular turnaround. 
Collector street: A street, existing or planned, which serves or is intended to serve as a secondary trafficway, collecting traffic from minor streets and feeding it into major streets or to important generators of traffic. 
Conditional approval: The approval by the planning commission of the general subdivision plan or plat as such approval is required by the legislation constituting the authority for these regulations. 
Crosswalkway: A public right-of-way ten (10) feet or more in width between property lines, which provides pedestrian access to adjacent properties. 
Development: The act of installing site improvements and building structures. 
Easement: A grant by the owner of the use of a strip of land by others for specific purposes. 
Engineering plans: The drawings on which the proposed subdivision improvements are shown and which, if approved, will be used for construction of the improvements. 
Final plat: The final map or drawing on which the subdivision plan is submitted to the planning commission for approval and which, if approved, will be submitted to the clerk of court for recording. 
General subdivision plan: The preliminary map or drawing on which the proposed layout of a subdivision is submitted to the planning commission for consideration and conditional approval. 
Improvements: Street surfacing, with curb and gutter, sidewalks, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, utilities and monuments. 
Lot: A portion of a subdivision intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or for development. 
Major street: A street, existing or planned, which serves or is intended to serve as a principal trafficway and which is designated on the plan for growth as a limited-access highway, major street, parkway or other term to identify those streets comprising the basic structure of the street system of the city. 
Major street plan: The component part of the plan for growth for the city showing the general locations of principal thoroughfares. 
Marginal access street: A street running parallel to and adjacent to or in the immediate vicinity of a major street and which has as its principal purpose the relief of such major street from the local service of abutting properties. 
Minor street: A street of limited continuity which serves or is intended to serve the local needs of a neighborhood. 
Municipal or municipality: The city and, where appropriate to the context, that area lying within the corporate limits of such city as such corporate limits exist or may exist in the future. 
Parks, recreation and school sites plan: The component part of the plan for growth for the city showing the general locations of parks, recreation areas and school sites. 
Plan for growth: The master plan made and adopted by the planning commission for the physical development of the city; the term includes any unit or component part of such plan separately adopted and any amendment to such plan or part thereof. 
Planning commission, commission: The city planning commission. 
Reserve strip: A strip of land smaller than a lot retained in private ownership for the purpose of controlling access to land dedicated or intended to be dedicated to street or other public use. 
Roadway: The portion of a street available for vehicular traffic; where curbs are laid, the portion between curbs. 
Sidewalk: The portion of a street or crosswalkway, paved or otherwise surfaced, intended for pedestrian use only. 
Sketch plan: The sketch map or drawing showing the general design of a proposed subdivision. 
Street: A public right-of-way which provides vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent properties. 
Subdivider: Any person, group or corporation acting as a unit, or any agent thereof, dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision as defined herein. 
Subdivision: The division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, plats, sites or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development. The term includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or the land area subdivided. For the purposes of these regulations, divisions of land for agricultural purposes, when the resulting parcels are five (5) acres or larger in size, divisions of land by court decree, and testamentary divisions shall not be deemed to be subdivisions of land. Any conveyance correcting or rearranging not more than one (1) lot line and which does not create a smaller or narrower lot than is permitted under these regulations shall not be considered a subdivision of land for the purposes of these regulations. A copy of such conveyance, however, shall be furnished the office of planning commission for its files. 
(Code 1966, § 22-02)  
Sec. 18-2. - Purposes; scope. 
(a)  Area of jurisdiction: These regulations shall govern all subdivisions of land within the city as now or hereafter defined. 
(b)  Application of regulations: Every plat of land that is a subdivision, as defined in section 18-1, hereafter shall be prepared, presented for approval and recorded as required herein, and no plat shall be recorded or shall have any validity unless it shall have been approved by the planning commission, as having fulfilled the requirements of these regulations. 
(Code 1966, § 22-01)  
Sec. 18-3. - Procedure and documents—General procedure. 
The procedure for review and approval of a subdivision by the planning commission consists of three (3) consecutive steps, as follows: 
(1)  Preparation and submission of a sketch plan of the proposed subdivision, together with the attendant items required herein. Submission of a sketch plan is not mandatory, but this step is recommended as a means of identifying and solving design and other subdivision problems. 
(2)  Preparation and submission for review and conditional approval of a general subdivision plan, together with the attendant items required herein. 
(3)  Preparation and submission for review and final approval of a final plat, together with the attendant items required herein. 
(Code 1966, § 22-03(A))  
Sec. 18-4. - Same—Sketch plan. 
(a)  Purpose: The purpose of the sketch plan is to develop a general design on which to base the general subdivision plan, and thus to avoid having to revise such design to make it conform to the plan for growth and to relate it to surrounding development. To this end, the subdivider should consult informally with the planning commission's technical staff on preparation of the sketch plan. 
(b)  Submission and review: Prior to the filing of an application for conditional approval of the general subdivision plan, the subdivider shall submit to the planning commission two (2) copies of the sketch plan of the proposed subdivision, together with the attendant items required herein. This step does not require formal application, or filing of the subdivision plat with the planning commission. The sketch plan shall be reviewed by the planning commission or by the planning director. The review shall take into consideration, in addition to the requirements set out in these regulations, the components of the plan for growth, the zoning ordinance, and other plans, programs and regulations that might affect the area and the design and development of the subdivision. 
(c)  Action on sketch plan: Within fifteen (15) days, the planning commission or the planning director shall inform the subdivider that the sketch plan as submitted or as modified does or does not meet the objectives of these regulations. When the planning commission or the planning director finds that the sketch plan does not meet the objectives of these regulations, the reasons therefor shall be given, together with any changes recommended to be made. In the event the subdivider does not agree to changes recommended by the planning director, the subdivider may request and shall receive review and formal action by the planning commission at its next regular meeting. 
(d)  General form: The sketch plan shall show in simple outline the general design of the proposed subdivision in relation to existing conditions and to its surroundings. It may be either a mechanical drawing or a freehand sketch, made at any convenient scale and size. 
(e)  Information to be shown: The sketch plan shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Survey data: Contours or spot elevations required for the general subdivision plan or a sufficiently close approximation of such contours or spot elevations to determine necessary drainage. 
(2)  Miscellaneous data: The scale of the sketch plan, north arrow and date, and the name and address of the owner, the subdivider and the professional engineer or land surveyor. 
(3)  Streets: The street pattern arrangement of lots and blocks with dimensions of typical lot widths and depths. 
(4)  Nonresidential sites: Identification of existing and proposed parks, recreation areas, schools or other public uses; sites if any for multifamily dwellings, shopping centers, churches, industry or other nonpublic uses exclusive of single-family dwellings. 
(5)  Utilities: The approximate locations and sizes of existing utility lines. 
(6)  Easements: The approximate locations, widths and purposes of existing easements. 
(Code 1966, § 22-03(B))  
Sec. 18-5. - Same—General subdivision plan. 
(a)  Purpose: The purpose of the general subdivision plan, together with the attendant items required herein, is to provide plans for the construction of the subdivision and its improvements. To this end, during preparation of the general subdivision plan, the subdivider should consult with the planning commission's technical staff, with city engineer and with other officials and agencies concerned with the subdivision and the improvements. The general subdivision plan shall be based upon the general design shown on the sketch plan together with the recommended or required changes. 
(b)  Submission and review: The subdivider shall submit to the planning commission four (4) copies of the general subdivision plan together with the attendant items required herein with written application for conditional approval at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered. This step shall constitute formal application for approval and filing of the subdivision plat with the planning commission. The general subdivision plan, together with the attendant items required herein, shall be reviewed by the planning commission and will be referred for review and report to the city engineer, the director of the parish health unit, the utility companies concerned, and other appropriate officials. The review shall take into consideration, in addition to the plans and other factors considered in connection with the sketch plan, the particular requirements and conditions affecting installation of improvements. 
(c)  Action on general subdivision plan: Before acting on the general subdivision plan, the planning commission shall give notice by registered or certified mail to the subdivider and owner of the land, whose names and address are shown on such plat, of the time and place of the hearing to be held on such plat, at least five (5) days before the date fixed for such hearing. At the regular meeting next following the submission of a general subdivision plan, but any event within forty-five (45) days, the planning commission shall act upon the general subdivision plan and shall communicate in writing to the subdivider its conditional approval or its disapproval. In the case of conditional approval, the planning commission shall state: 
(1)  The specific changes required to be made in general subdivision plan. 
(2)  The character and extent of the required improvements. 
(3)  The amount of the surety bond which it will require in lieu of the completion of improvements required herein. 
In the case of disapproval, the planning commission shall state the ground of disapproval. 
(d)  Effect of approval: Conditional approval of a general subdivision plan shall not constitute acceptance of the plat of the proposed subdivision, but shall be deemed only as an expression of approval of the plan submitted as a guide to the preparation of the planning commission and for recording upon fulfillment of the requirements of these regulations and the conditions of approval. Conditional approval of a general subdivision plan shall be effective for a maximum period of one (1) year unless, upon application by the subdivider, the planning commission grants an extension. If the final plat has not been submitted to the planning commission for final approval within this time limit, the general subdivision plan shall again be submitted for conditional approval. 
(e)  General form: The general subdivision plan shall show accurately and in sufficient detail for construction of the subdivision and its improvements the design of the proposed subdivision in relation to existing conditions and its surroundings. It shall be drawn to a scale of one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet except that when the above requirements can be met and if the number of sheets to be submitted can be reduced, a one (1) inch equals two hundred (200) feet scale drawing may be used. The sheet size shall not be larger than eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches. Where necessary, the plat may be on several sheets accompanied by an index sheet showing the entire subdivision. 
(f)  Information to be shown: The general subdivision plan shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Location map: A diagram showing the location of the proposed subdivision. 
(2)  Survey data: The boundary lines of the subdivision with length and bearing of lines; section and corporation lines, contours at intervals of five (5) feet, based on a datum plane approved by the city engineer; where five-foot contours will not provide sufficient information for drainage determinations, closer contour intervals or spot elevations in sufficient number to show drainage conditions shall be given. 
(3)  Miscellaneous data: Present tract designation according to the records of the clerk of court of the parish; the title or name under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded, with name and address of the owner and the subdivider; notations giving scale, (true) north arrow, datum, benchmarks, date of survey and name of the registered professional engineer or land surveyor. 
(4)  Streets: The name, right-of-way width and location of streets and other public ways on and adjacent to the tract; the type, width and elevation of surfacing; any legally established centerline elevations; walks, curbs, gutters, culverts and similar features; the names, right-of-way widths and locations of proposed streets, with their approximate grades and gradients, and similar data for alleys, if any. 
(5)  Lots and blocks: Lot lines, lot numbers and block letters, tabulation stating gross and net acreage of the subdivision, acreage of existing and proposed public areas within the tract, number of residential lots, typical lot size and lineal feet of proposed streets. 
(6)  Nonresidential sites: Sites to be reserved or dedicated for parks, recreation areas, schools or other public uses; sites, if any, for multifamily dwellings, shopping centers, churches, industry or other nonpublic uses exclusive of single-family dwellings. 
(7)  Utilities: The location, size and invert elevation of sanitary and storm sewers; the location and size of water mains, the location of gas lines, fire hydrants, approximate locations of the utility poles and streetlights; if water mains are not on or adjacent to the tract, the direction and distance to, and the size of, the nearest ones, showing invert elevation of sewers; the location of proposed utilities, if not shown elsewhere. 
(8)  Easements: The location, width and purpose of existing and proposed easements. 
(9)  Adjoining land: Insofar as they affect the subdivision, the approximate direction and gradient of the ground slope, including any levees or embankments; the character and location of buildings, railroads, power lines, towers and other nearby nonresidential land uses or adverse influences; and recorded subdivision plats of adjoining platted land by record name, date and number and the names of record owners of adjoining unsubdivided land. 
(10)  Building setback lines: Minimum building setback lines. 
(11)  Other existing conditions: The locations of watercourses, marshes, wooded areas, buildings or structures and other significant features on the tract. 
(12)  Proposed public improvements: Highways or other major public improvements planned by public authorities for future construction on or near the tract. 
(g)  Attendant items: The general subdivision plan shall be accompanied by the following items: 
(1)  Protective covenants: A draft of the protective covenants, if any, whereby the subdivider proposes to regulate land use in the subdivision and otherwise protect the proposed development. 
(2)  Engineering plans: Profiles showing existing ground surface and proposed street grades, including extensions for a reasonable distance beyond the limits of the proposed subdivision; typical cross sections of the proposed gradings, roadways and sidewalks; and preliminary plan of sanitary and stormwater sewers with grades and size indicated. All elevations shall be based on a datum plane approved by the city engineer. 
(3)  Subsurface conditions report: A report on the location and results of tests made to ascertain subsurface soil and groundwater conditions; depth of groundwater, unless test pits are dry at a depth of five (5) feet; location and results of soil percolation tests if individual sewage disposal systems are proposed. 
(Code 1966, § 22-03(C))  
Sec. 18-6. - Same—Final plat. 
(a)  Purpose: The purpose of the final plat, together with the attendant items required herein, is to provide an accurate record of street and property lines and other elements being established on the land and the conditions of their use. The final plat shall be based upon the general subdivision plan, together with the required changes, but it may include only that portion of the approved general subdivision plan which the subdivider proposes to all requirements of these regulations. 
(b)  Submission and review: The subdivider shall submit to the planning commission four (4) copies of the final plat, together with the attendant items required herein, with written application for final approval at least seven (7) days prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered. The final plat, together with the attendant items required herein, shall be reviewed by the planning commission and will be referred for review and report to the city engineer, the director of the parish health unit, the utility companies concerned and other appropriate officials. The review shall take into consideration conformance to the approved general subdivision plan and fulfillment of any conditions of such approval and the proper installation of required improvements in conformance with the requirements of these regulations and other applicable standards and regulations. 
(c)  Action on final plat: The planning commission shall approve or disapprove a plat within sixty (60) days after the submission thereof to it; otherwise such plat shall be deemed to have been approved, and a certificate to that effect shall be issued by the commission on demand. The application for the commission's approval may, however, waive this requirement and consent to an extension of such period. The ground of disapproval of any plat shall be stated upon the records of the commission. Any plat submitted to the commission shall contain the name and address of a person to whom notice of a hearing shall be sent; and no plat shall be acted on by the commission without affording a hearing thereon. Notice shall be sent to such address by registered or certified mail of the time and place of such hearing not less than five (5) days before the date fixed therefor. Similar notice shall be mailed to the owners of land immediately adjoining the platted land, as their names appear upon the parish assessment rolls. Every plat approved by the commission shall, by virtue of such approval, be deemed to be an amendment of or an addition to or a detail of the official plan and a part thereof. Approval of a plat shall not be deemed to constitute or effect an acceptance by the public of any street or other open space shown upon the plat. The planning commission may, from time to time, recommend to the governing body amendments of the zoning ordinance or map or additions thereto to conform to the commission's recommendations for the zoning regulation of the territory comprised within approved subdivisions. 
(d)  Effect of approval: Final approval of a final plat shall show accurately the subdivision as established on the ground and in relation to its surroundings. It shall be an original drawing on linen drawn to a scale of one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet except that when the above requirements can be met and if the number of sheets to be submitted can be reduced, a one (1) inch equals two hundred (200) feet scale drawing may be used. The sheet size shall be eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches. Where necessary, the plat may be on several sheets accompanied by an index sheet showing the entire subdivision. For large subdivisions, the final plat may be submitted for approval progressively in contiguous sections satisfactory to the planning commission. 
(e)  General form: The final plat shall show accurately the subdivision as established on the ground and in relation to its surroundings. It shall be an original drawing on linen drawn to a scale of one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet except that when the above requirements can be met and if the number of sheets to be submitted can be reduced, a one (1) inch equals two hundred (200) feet scale drawing may be used. The sheet size shall be eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches. Where necessary, the plat may be on several sheets accompanied by an index sheet showing the entire subdivision. For large subdivisions, the final plat may be submitted for approval progressively in contiguous sections satisfactory to the planning commission. 
(f)  Information to be shown: The final plat shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Survey data: Primary control points, tied to the nearest geodetic control station or to an astronomical azimuth, or descriptions and ties to such control points, to which all dimensions, angles, bearings, and similar data on the plat shall be referred; the boundary lines of the subdivision, right-of-way lines of streets, easements and other rights-of-way, and property lines of residential lots and other sites, with accurate dimensions, bearing or deflection angles, and radii, arcs and central angles of all curves; the location and description of monuments, according to state law; and a statement of the closure error. 
(2)  Miscellaneous data: Notations giving scale, (true) north arrow, datum, benchmarks and date of final plat. 
(3)  Streets: The name and right-of-way width of each street or public way. 
(4)  Lots and blocks: Identification by letter of each block and by number of each lot in each block. 
(5)  Nonresidential sites: The purposes for which sites, other than residential lots, are dedicated or reserved. 
(6)  Utilities: The location and dimensions of any utility rights-of-way of easement. 
(7)  Easements: The location, dimensions and purpose of any other easement. 
(8)  Building setback line: Minimum building setback line on all lots and other sites. 
(9)  Adjoining land: The names of recorded subdivision plats of adjoining platted land by record name, date and number; the name of record owners of adjoining unsubdivided land. 
(10)  Certificate of owner: Notarized certification by the landowner of the adoption of the plat and the dedication of streets and other public areas. 
(11)  Certificate of survey: Certification by the registered professional engineer or land surveyor that the plat represents a survey meeting the requirements of R.S. 33:5051, as amended, that the monuments shown thereon actually exist as located and that all dimensional and other data are correct. 
(12)  Approvals: Space for certificates of approval of the planning commission, the city engineer, the director of the parish health unit, where such approval is called for by these regulations. The certificate of the city engineer shall state that the subdivider has complied with one (1) of the following alternatives: 
a.  All improvements have been installed in accord with the requirements of these regulations and with the action of the planning commission in giving conditional approval of the general subdivision plan. 
b.  A bond or certified check has been posted, which is available to the city, and in sufficient amount to assure such completion of all required improvements. 
(g)  Attendant items: The final plat shall be accompanied by the following items: 
(1)  Protective covenants: The protective covenants, if any, in form for recordings. 
(2)  Engineering plans: The cross sections and profiles of streets showing grades approved by the city engineer. The profiles shall be drawn to city standard scales and elevations and shall be based on a datum plane approved by the city engineer. 
(3)  Conveyance: A conveyance to the city by fee simple or easement of land set aside for park, recreation area or other public use. 
(4)  Zoning change: If the proposed use of the land requires a change in zoning classification, a copy of the amendment application for such change. 
(h)  Small resubdivisions: 
(1)  Purpose: The purpose of this procedure for small resubdivisions is to simplify the preparation and expedite the processing of the plats of such resubdivisions. Except as otherwise specified, the resubdivision and the plat thereof shall conform to all the requirements of these regulations. For the purpose of this section, a small resubdivision is one in which not more than five (5) lots are being created from one (1) or more land parcels constituting an existing subdivision and containing an aggregate of not more than four (4) acres and in which every lot will face an existing dedicated street. 
(2)  Submission and review: No preliminary plan or engineering plans are required to be submitted for a small resubdivision, but the subdivider should consult with the planning commission's technical staff and with other officials and agencies concerned with the resubdivision prior to preparation of the final plat. The subdivider shall file with the planning commission four (4) copies of the final plat, with written application for final approval. The final plat shall be reviewed by the planning commission and shall take into consideration conformance with the requirements of these regulations and other applicable standards and regulations. 
(3)  Action on final plat: Action on the final plat shall be in accordance with the procedure prescribed herein for other final plats; provided, however, that the planning commission may authorize the chairman to give required hearings at such times as will expedite action on the final plat. 
(Code 1966, § 22-03(D)) 
Cross reference— Plans required before sewer connection, § 12-66(c).  
Sec. 18-7. - Design standards—Principles of acceptability. 
(a)  Conformance to plan for growth: In general, the subdivision shall conform to the plan for growth for the city and to the zoning ordinance, and other applicable ordinances or regulations. If a suggested plan for the neighborhood in which the land to be subdivided is located has been made by the planning commission, the layout of the subdivision should be in general conformance thereto. 
(b)  Provisions for future subdivision: If a tract is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged to allow the opening of future streets and logical further subdivision. 
(c)  Land subject to flooding: Land subject to periodic flooding and land deemed by the planning commission to be uninhabitable shall not be platted for residential occupancy, nor for any use that may increase danger to health, life or property or aggravate the flood hazard, but such land with the tract to be subdivided shall be set aside for such uses as shall not be endangered by periodic or occasional inundation or shall not produce unsatisfactory or unsanitary or unhealthful living conditions. If the land to be subdivided is located in an area having poor drainage or other physical impairment, the planning commission may approve the subdivision, provided the subdivider agrees to make such improvements as are necessary to render the area substantially safe for residential use, or, in lieu of the improvements, shall furnish a surety bond or a certified check covering the cost of the required improvements, as provided herein. 
(d)  Natural features: Natural scenic features of the land, such as the bayous, shall be considered to be community assets, and the design of the subdivision shall protect and utilize such natural scenic features. 
(e)  Trees: Because of their value in soil conservation, health, and community appearance, large trees shall be preserved wherever possible. Street trees placed within the public right-of-way shall not be of a low, bushy species that might obstruct vision, and no tree or shrubbery shall be planted within forty (40) feet of the intersecting property lines at a street intersection. 
(f)  Reserve strips: There shall be no reserve strips controlling land dedicated or intended to be dedicated to street or other public use except where their control is placed in the appropriate governing body under conditions approved by the planning commission. 
(g)  Buffer park strips: Where a residential subdivision adjoins land zoned for or used for a railroad right-of-way, an industrial area, a commercial area or other land use which would have a depreciating effect on the residential use of the land, a buffer park strip may be required by the planning commission. 
(h)  Names: The name of the subdivision and new street names shall not duplicate, nor closely approximate phonetically, the name of any other subdivision or street in the city. Street names shall be subject to approval of the planning commission. In general, the use of names associated with the history and development of the city is desirable. 
(Code 1966, § 22-04(A))  
Sec. 18-8. - Same—Streets. 
(a)  Street layout: The street layout shall be devised for the most advantageous development of the entire neighborhood or neighborhoods in which the land to be subdivided is located. Existing streets that abut the subdivision shall be continued, and the continuations shall be at least as wide as the existing streets and in alignment with them. The street layout shall also provide for the future projection into adjoining unsubdivided lands of a sufficient number of streets to provide convenient circulation. 
(b)  Major streets: Wherever a subdivision embraces a major street, as shown on the plan for growth, such major street shall be platted in the general location and of the width called for by the plan for growth. 
(c)  Marginal access streets: Where a subdivision has frontage on a major street, as shown on the plan for growth and required by the plan to have marginal access streets, a marginal access street shall be provided adjacent to and on each side of the major street. Within the right-of-way of the marginal access street, a separation strip at least twenty (20) feet wide shall be provided. Separation strips shall be provided with screen planting to provide protection from the noise and lights of the major street traffic; screen planting shall be so placed that it does not obstruct vision at intersections. 
(d)  Collector streets: Collector streets shall be provided to collect traffic from minor streets and feed it into major streets or to important generators of traffic, such as schools and shopping centers. In general, collector streets shall be located approximately midway between major streets or in the form of a loop or partial loop with the neighborhood. 
(e)  Minor streets: Minor streets shall be so arranged that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. Four-way intersections of minor streets shall be avoided. 
(f)  Closed-end streets: Closed-end streets (cul-de-sacs) shall not be longer than six hundred (600) feet and shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround. Where the closed-end street is expected to be continued in the future into unsubdivided land, the turnaround may be a temporary one. 
(g)  Alleys: Alleys shall be provided in the commercial and industrial districts of subdivisions; the planning commission may, however, waive this requirement where other definite and assured provision is made for service access, including off-street loading and unloading, consistent with and adequate to the uses proposed. Where necessary for safe vehicular movement an alley right-of-way shall be increased in width or the corners cut at its intersection with a street. Closed-end alleys shall be avoided, but if unavoidable, shall be provided with an adequate turnaround as specified for closed-end streets. In general, alleys will not be approved for residential districts of subdivisions. 
(h)  Streets at business centers: In front of schools and in front of areas zoned or designed for commercial or industrial uses, the street width and the roadway width of a minor street, a collector street, or a closed-end street shall be increased on the side or sides on which the land for the school or commercial or industrial use is located by at least fifteen (15) feet to insure the free flow of traffic without interference by vehicles entering or leaving parking areas. (This is not a parking space requirement and shall not affect requirements by the zoning ordinance or otherwise for off-street parking facilities; neither shall fulfillment of this requirement and its acceptance by the planning commission be deemed approval or endorsement of any amendment to the zoning ordinance necessary for such commercial or industrial uses.) 
(i)  Half streets: No new half street shall be platted. Where a tract of land to be subdivided abuts upon an existing half street, the other half of the street shall be platted. 
(j)  Intersections: Street intersections shall be at right angles or nearly so. Where, for topographic or other reasons, an intersection cannot be at right angles, the intersection shall be so designed as to insure safety. There shall be a minimum number of intersections of minor streets with major streets. Street jogs with centerline offsets less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall be avoided. 
(k)  Curvature of streets: The minimum radius of curvature of streets on the centerline shall be: 
Major street ..... 600 feet 
Collector street ..... 300 feet 
Minor street ..... 100 feet 
Closed-end street ..... 100 feet 
Between reversed curves on major streets and collector streets there shall be a tangent at least one hundred (100) feet long. 
(l)  Street grades: Street grades shall conform in general to the terrain and shall be sufficient for adequate surface drainage. 
(m)  Right-of-way widths: The minimum right-of-way widths for streets, alleys and crosswalkways shall be: 
Major street ..... 100 feet 
(Except where a greater or lesser width is called for by the plan for growth) 
Marginal access street ..... 50 feet 
Collector street ..... 80 feet 
Minor street ..... 60 feet 
Closed-end street ..... 60 feet 
Turnaround right-of-way diameter ..... 100 feet 
Alley ..... 20 feet 
Crosswalkway ..... 10 feet 
(n)  Roadway and sidewalk widths: The minimum roadway widths for streets and alleys and the minimum sidewalk widths for streets and crosswalkways shall be: 
Major street. As called for by the plan for growth or otherwise determined by the governing body or agency responsible for construction. 
Marginal access street ..... 20 feet 
Collector street ..... 36 feet 
(If a divided street, two (2) eighteen-foot roadways) 
Minor street ..... 26 feet 
Closed-end street ..... 26 feet 
(Turnaround roadway diameter, eighty (80) feet) 
Alley ..... 20 feet 
Collector street sidewalk ..... 5 feet 
Other sidewalk ..... 4 feet 
(o)  Curb radii: Curb radii shall be not less than twenty (20) feet. Where an angle of intersection of less than sixty (60) degrees is permitted, curb radii shall be increased as necessary to insure safety. 
(Code 1966, § 22-04(B)) 
Cross reference— As to street construction by private interests generally, § 17-30 et seq.  
Sec. 18-9. - Same—Blocks. 
(a)  Size and shape of blocks: The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with consideration of the limitations and opportunities of topography, the provision of building sites suitable to the intended uses and the need for convenient access, circulation, control of and safety from street traffic. In general, block lengths shall not exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet, and block lengths shall not be less than five hundred (500) feet; provided, however, that where site conditions make longer blocks necessary or desirable, such blocks may be as long as one thousand six hundred (1,600) feet. 
(b)  Crosswalkways: Pedestrian crosswalkways may be required across blocks longer than eight hundred (800) feet. Crosswalkways shall also be provided where necessary for convenient access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers and other community facilities. 
(c)  Blocks on major streets: Where the proposed subdivision is adjacent to or contains a major street, the long dimensions of the blocks should be parallel, or approximately parallel, to the major street. 
(d)  Blocks for commercial or industrial use: Blocks intended for commercial or industrial use shall be designed specifically for such use, with consideration of off-street loading and unloading and off-street parking facilities and access thereto. 
(Code 1966, § 22-04(C))  
Sec. 18-10. - Same—Lots. 
(a)  Size and shape of lots: The size, width, depth, shape and orientation of lots and the minimum building setback lines shall be appropriate to the location of the subdivision and the type of development and use contemplated. Every lot shall contain a suitable building site. 
(b)  Minimum dimensions: Lots for residential use shall be at least sixty (60) feet wide at the building setback line and shall contain at least the following areas: 
(1)  Where served by the municipal or an approved private water supply system and sanitary sewerage system ..... 	7,200 square feet 
(2)  Where served by the municipal or an approved private water supply system, but not by the municipal or an approved private sanitary sewerage system ..... 	15,000 square feet 
(3)  Where served by neither the municipal or an approved private water supply system nor sanitary sewerage system ..... 	20,000 square feet 
 
For the purpose of this regulation, individual wells and individual sewerage disposal systems are not considered to be approved private water supply and approved private sanitary sewerage systems. 
(c)  Maximum depth: The maximum depth of any lot, exclusive of unusable land, shall be three and five-tenths (3.5) times the width of the lot at the building setback line. 
(d)  Lot to abut on a street: Every lot shall abut upon a dedicated street for at least twenty-five (25) feet. 
(e)  Corner lots: Corner lots for residential use shall be increased in width over the minimum specified herein so that front yard distance can be provided on both streets, and the building setback line shall be so located. 
(f)  Property lines at corners: Where necessary by reason of curb radii, property lines at street intersection corners shall be arcs having radii of at least ten (10) feet or shall be chords of such arcs. 
(g)  Side lines of lots: Side lines of lots shall be approximately at right angles or radial to the street line. 
(h)  Double-frontage lots: Double-frontage lots will be permitted only where necessary to provide separation of residential development from major streets or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A buffer park strip at least twenty (20) feet wide and across which there shall be no right of access shall be provided along the line of lots abutting such major street or disadvantageous use. 
(Code 1966, § 22-04(D))  
Sec. 18-11. - Same—Public spaces. 
(a)  Parks, recreation areas and school sites: Wherever a subdivision embraces a park, a combination playground and elementary school site, a combination playfield and junior high school site, or a combination athletic field and senior high school site, as shown on the plan for growth, such park recreation area or school site shall be platted in the general location and of the size called for by the plan for growth. 
(b)  Utility easements: Easements for public utilities shall be at least twelve (12) feet wide, six (6) feet on each side of rear or side property lines of lots. The widths of easements shall be increased or they shall be extended, where necessary, to provide space for utility pole bracing or other construction. No new half easement for utilities shall be platted. 
(c)  Drainage easements: Easements for watercourses, drainageways or streams shall conform substantially with the lines of such watercourse and having such further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the purpose. Parallel streets or parkways may be required in connection with open drainageways. 
(Code 1966, § 22-04(E))  
Sec. 18-12. - Improvements—General requirements. 
Street, utility and other improvements shall be installed in each new subdivision in accordance with the standards and requirements specified herein. 
(Code 1966, § 22-05(A))  
Sec. 18-13. - Same—Engineering requirements. 
Improvements required by these regulations shall be made in accordance with the specifications and under the supervision of the city engineer, the director of the parish health unit, the utility companies concerned and other appropriate authorities. 
(Code 1966, § 22-05(B))  
Sec. 18-14. - Same—Required improvements. 
(a)  Monuments: The out-boundary corners of the subdivisions shall be marked with iron pipes one (1) inch in diameter and forty-eight (48) inches long, with twelve (12) inches of the pipe monument above grade; block corners, angle points, points of curves in streets and intermediate points, as required by the city engineer, shall be marked with iron pipes one (1) inch in diameter and thirty (30) inches long; lot corners shall be marked with iron pipes one-half inch in diameter and sixteen (16) inches long. 
(b)  Roadways: Roadways, except roadways of major streets, shall be surfaced for their entire width and shall have roll-type, valley-type, or vertical curb and gutter at each edge. The minimum acceptable all-weather surfacing shall be two (2) inches of hot asphalt on six (6) inches of compacted gravel or equivalent base to provide adequate subsurface drainage. Alleys for commercial and industrial subdivisions shall be surfaced with concrete at least five (5) inches thick. The construction of the roadways of major streets, with marginal access streets provided by the subdivider, shall not be the responsibility of the subdivider. Roadways for major streets without access roads shall be the responsibility of the subdivider for construction of a roadway of equal width as other roadways of the subdivision. 
(c)  Drainage: Necessary facilities for drainage of roadways and for drainage of surface water in the subdivision shall be installed. Surface water shall be emptied into the storm sewer system where such system is reasonably accessible. 
(d)  Sidewalks: Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of streets; provided that where no lot in the subdivision is less than seventy-five (75) feet wide at the building setback line and the average width of all lots is one hundred (100) feet or more at the building setback line, a sidewalk may be provided on one (1) side of the street only. In every case an existing sidewalk shall be continued to the next street intersection. Sidewalks shall be located in the street right-of-way one (1) foot from the property line. Crosswalkways shall be provided with paved walks four (4) feet wide; sidewalks and paved walks of crosswalkways shall be concrete at least four (4) inches thick. 
(e)  Water supply: Where a public water supply is reasonably accessible, as determined by the franchised public water service, the franchised public water service may construct a water supply system with a connection for each lot in the proposed subdivision. 
Where a public water supply is not reasonably accessible, as determined by the franchise public water service, and where the subdivider installs a private water supply system, such system shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements and under the supervision of the city engineer and the parish health officer. 
(f)  Sanitary sewerage: Where a public sanitary sewer is available within three hundred (300) feet, the subdivider shall install a sanitary sewer system with a stub-out for each lot in the proposed subdivision and shall connect such system to the public sanitary sewer. To avoid cutting pavement or roadway when connections are made, stub-outs shall extend from the sewer line to points outside the roadway. 
Where a public sanitary sewer is not reasonably accessible, as determined by the city engineer, and where the subdivider installs a private sanitary sewer system, such private sanitary sewer system shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements and under the supervision of the city engineer, and the director of the parish health unit. 
(g)  Aboveground utilities: Aboveground utilities shall be placed on rear or side property lines of lots along easements provided for this purpose. Adequate street lighting facilities shall be the responsibility of the subdivider. 
(h)  Street signs: Each intersection shall have signs on diagonally opposite corners identifying the streets which form the intersection. Construction and installation of street signs shall be in accordance with the requirements of the city engineer. 
(i)  Fire hydrants: Where a public water supply of adequate size is reasonably accessible, as determined by the planning commission, the subdivider shall install fire hydrants at intervals not to exceed six hundred (600) feet, as measured along the centerline of the street; the waterline supplying one (1) or more fire hydrants shall be at least six (6) inches in size, inside diameter. 
(Code 1966, § 22-05(C))  
Sec. 18-15. - Same—Guarantees of performance. 
(a)  Completion of improvements: The planning commission shall not approve the final plat of any subdivision unless the improvements required by these regulations have been installed in accordance with the standards and specifications of the appropriate officials and agencies and their approval has been certified to the planning commission. 
(b)  Surety bond: In lieu of the completion of required improvements prior to the submission of the final plat for approval, the planning commission may accept a bond in an amount and with surety and conditions satisfactory to it providing for and securing to the municipality, the actual construction and installation of such improvements within a period specified by the commission and expressed in the bond. 
(Code 1966, § 22-05(D))  
Sec. 18-16. - Dedications and reservations—Rights-of-way. 
(a)  Dedications: The rights-of-way for all new crosswalkways and streets, except major streets as shown on the plan for growth and requiring marginal access streets, shall be dedicated for public use; the land required to widen the rights-of-way of any existing streets, including major streets, to the minimum widths called for by these regulations or by the plan for growth shall be similarly dedicated for public use. 
(b)  Reservations: The rights-of-way for a new major street or section thereof where marginal access streets are required may be either dedicated for public use or reserved by the subdivider for future taking by the governing body or other public agency responsible for acquisition of the right-of-way. 
(Code 1966, § 22-06(A))  
Sec. 18-17. - Same—Easements. 
(a)  Utilities: Easement for utilities shall be provided as required herein, together with the right of ingress and egress. 
(b)  Drainage: Easements for drainage shall be provided as required herein, together with the right of ingress and egress. 
(Code 1966, § 22-06(B))  
Sec. 18-18. - Same—Parks; recreation areas; school sites. 
(a)  Proposed sites: Where a proposed park, recreation area or school site shown on the plan for growth is located in whole or in part in a subdivision, the planning commission may require the dedication or reservation of such area within the subdivision in those cases in which the planning commission deems such requirement to be reasonable. In general, the commission will require dedication of parks and recreation areas in a reasonable amount but not to exceed ten (10) percent of the gross area of the tract to be subdivided; the commission will require the reservation by the subdivider for future taking by the school board of school sites, and it shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to negotiate with the school board for purchase of the site; provided, however, that the land for school sites shall not be required to be held in such reserved status for an unreasonable length of time. 
(b)  Large scale development: Where deemed essential by the planning commission, upon consideration of the particular type of development proposed in the subdivision, and especially in large scale neighborhood unit development not anticipated in the plan for growth, the planning commission may require the dedication or reservation of such other areas or sites of a character, extent, and location suitable to the needs created by such development for parks, recreation, schools and other neighborhood purposes. 
(Code 1966, § 22-06(C))  
Sec. 18-19. - Administration—General provisions. 
These subdivision regulations shall be administered by the planning commission. The planning director shall be the officer in charge of such administration. 
(Code 1966, § 22-07(A))  
Sec. 18-20. - Same—Modifications. 
(a)  Hardship: Where the planning commission finds that extraordinary hardships may result from strict compliance with these regulations, it may modify the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured; provided that such modification will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the plan for growth or these regulations. 
(b)  Large scale development: The standards and requirements of these regulations may be modified by the planning commission in the case of a plan and program for a new town, a complete community, or a neighborhood unit, which in the judgment of the planning commission provide adequate public spaces and improvements for the circulation, recreation, light, air and also provide such covenants or other legal provisions as will assure conformity to and achievement of the plan. 
(c)  Conditions. In granting modification, the planning commission may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so modified. 
(Code 1966, § 22-07(B))  
Sec. 18-21. - Same—Appeals. 
The disapproval of a general subdivision plan or final plat may be appealed by the subdivider by filing with the planning commission and with the governing body a written notice of such appeal. Upon receiving notice of appeal, the planning commission shall transmit to the governing body a certified copy of the proceedings in the case upon which the appeal is taken. The governing body may overrule such disapproval by a majority vote of its entire membership. Upon such overruling, the governing body shall notify the planning commission, directing the issuance of a certificate of approval to permit the recording of the plat. 
(Code 1966, § 22-07(C))  
Sec. 18-22. - Same—Enforcement. 
No plat of a subdivision of land lying within the city shall be filed or recorded until it shall have been submitted to and approved by the planning commission and the approval entered in writing on the plat by the secretary of the commission, or, if disapproved, shall have had such disapproval overruled by the governing body provided for in section 18-21; provided, however, that the description by metes and bounds of a parcel of property intended to correct an error may be accepted for filing and recording. 
(Code 1966, § 22-07(D))  
Sec. 18-23. - Same—Penalties. 
Whoever, being the owner or the agent of the owner of any land within the municipality and constituting a subdivision as defined in section 18-1, transfers or sells or agrees to sell such land before a subdivision plat thereof has been approved by the planning commission and filed or recorded in the conveyance records of the parish shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalties set forth under the enabling legislation, R.S., 33:114, that is, a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each lot or parcel so transferred or sold or agreed or negotiated to be sold, and the description of such lot or parcel of land by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties, except for the purpose of correction as provided in section 18-22. The governing body may enjoin such transfer or sale or agreement by suit for injunction brought by a court of competent jurisdiction or may recover the penalty by a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction. In addition, any such sale or transfer shall be illegal and shall not convey title unless and until the plat of such subdivision has been filed and recorded as required by the Act. 
(Code 1966, § 22-07(E))  
Sec. 18-24. - Amendments—Policy. 
These subdivision regulations are based on comprehensive planning studies and on the need for uniform standards of design and construction for subdivisions and improvements to carry out the objective of a sound, stable and desirable development. It is recognized that casual change or amendment to the regulations would be detrimental to the achievement of that objective, and it is therefore declared to be the policy of the planning commission to amend these regulations only when one (1) or more of the following conditions prevail: 
(1)  Error: There is a manifest error in the regulations. 
(2)  Change in conditions: Changed or changing conditions in a particular area, or in the city generally, make a change in the regulations necessary and desirable. 
(Code 1966, § 22-08(A))  
Sec. 18-25. - Same—Procedure. 
Amendments to these subdivision regulations may be requested by any person concerned with or affected by the application of the regulations. A request for amendment shall state the name, address and interest of the person requesting the amendment, the nature and purpose of the amendment requested and the need therefor. 
(Code 1966, § 22-08(B))  
Sec. 18-26. - Interpretation. 
In interpreting and applying the provisions of these regulations, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. Whenever the provisions of these regulations require higher standards than are required in any other applicable statute, ordinance or regulation, the provisions of these regulations shall govern; whenever other applicable statute, ordinance or regulation requires higher standards than the provisions of these regulations, such other applicable statute, ordinance or regulation shall govern. 
(Code 1966, § 22-09)  
Chapter 18.5 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
 
Sec. 18.5-1. - Franchise fee. 
All persons or entities providing cable or video services to the citizens of the City of Bastrop pursuant to a state-issued certificate of franchise authority as provided in R.S. 45:1361 et seq. shall, pursuant to the provisions of R.S. 45:1366, pay the City of Bastrop a franchise fee of up to five (5) percent of the cable or video service provider's gross revenues, as that term is defined by the "Consumer Choice for Television Act of 2008," derived from operations within the city's municipal limits. 
(Ord. No. 08-4179, 9-11-08) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 08-4179, adopted September 11, 2008, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, such ordinance has been added as § 18.5-1 at the editor's discretion.  
Sec. 18.5-2. - Public, educational, governmental access programming support. 
Pursuant to the provisions of R.S. 45:1361 et seq., providers of cable or video services holding a state-issued certificate of franchise authority as provided in R.S. 45:1361 et seq. and operating within the city's municipal limits shall pay to the City of Bastrop an amount equal to one-half (½) percent of the gross revenues, as that term is defined by the "Consumer Choice for Television Act of 2008," derived from operations within the city's municipal limits. 
(Ord. No. 08-4180, 9-11-08) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 08-4180, adopted September 11, 2008, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, such ordinance has been added as § 18.5-2 at the editor's discretion.  
Chapter 19 - TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority, § 5(40). 
Cross reference— Noise from vehicles, § 11-4(b)(1), (5), (7), (10), (12); driving while intoxicated or driving under influence of drugs, § 8-160; reckless driving, § 8-161; hit and run, § 8-162; motor vehicle routes for transportation of explosives and blasting agents, § 9-11, and for hazardous chemicals, § 9-12; fire lanes on private property, § 9-13; litter thrown from vehicle, § 10-24; truck loads causing litter, § 10-25; handing handbills to drivers, § 10-36; obstructing view at intersections, § 17-5; allowing traffic flow at excavations, § 17-21; regulation of vehicles for hire, Ch. 20. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 19-1. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall for the purpose of this chapter have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Alley: Any public thoroughfare or passageway leading from or to a street or other alley. 
Commercial vehicle: Every vehicle designed, maintained, or used primarily for the transportation of property. 
Official traffic-control devices: All signs, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected by authorities of the city for the purpose of directing, warning or regulating traffic. 
(Code 1966, § 23-01) 
Cross reference— Definition of "handicapped person," § 19-44; definition of "parade," § 19-50.  
Sec. 19-2. - State Highway Regulatory Act adopted by reference. 
The provisions of the State Highway Regulatory Act, as set forth and contained in R.S. 32:1 through 32:399, as amended, from time to time, and as authorized by R.S. 32:41(C), all regulations therein contained and orders issued pursuant thereto, are adopted and incorporated herein by reference as if copied and included herein in extenso, and shall be applicable upon all streets and roads within the municipality, except as may be otherwise designated in this Code. 
(Code 1966, § 10-206; Ord. No. 3353, § 1, 5-12-87)  
Sec. 19-3. - General prohibition. 
(a)  No person shall operate or move, nor shall any owner permit to be operated or moved, over any of the streets of this city any vehicle or combination of vehicles that is not constructed or equipped as required by this chapter and by the laws of the state; nor shall any person operate or move or permit to be operated or moved over any of the streets of this city any vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight exceeding the maximum limitations stated in this chapter and the laws of the state or any load exceeding the dimensions, weights or character prescribed by this chapter and by the laws of the state, except upon written permission granted by the chief of police of this city. 
(b)  The limitations of this chapter as to size of vehicles shall not apply to implements of husbandry, nor to vehicles and machinery used solely in building highways and roads, when they are temporarily upon the streets of this city. 
(Code 1966, §§ 23-39, 23-40)  
Sec. 19-4. - Procedure upon arrest. 
Any police officer, upon making an arrest for violation of any provision of this chapter or other traffic ordinance of this city, shall take the name, address and the license number of the offender's motor vehicle and shall issue to the offender in writing, on a form provided by the city, a notice to answer to the charge before the city court at its next session convening after the time of the arrest. The officer, upon receiving either the written promise of the alleged violator to answer as specified in the notice or bond to assure such person's presence shall release such person from custody. The arresting officer shall determine whether a written promise to appear or bond shall be required. 
(Code 1966, § 23-34) 
State Law reference— Uniform traffic citations, R.S. 32:398.1 et seq.  
Sec. 19-5. - Failure to obey notice or summons. 
Any person who wilfully violates such person's written promise to appear shall be punished for such violation regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which such person was originally arrested. 
(Code 1966, § 23-35)  
Sec. 19-6. - Notice of illegally parked vehicle. 
Whenever any motor vehicle without driver is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by laws of this city, the officer finding such vehicle shall take its registration number and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user, and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a notice in writing for the driver to appear before the clerk of the city court within twenty-four (24) hours from the time of giving the notice. A copy of this notice shall be sent to the clerk of the city court. 
(Code 1966, § 23-36) 
Cross reference— Such provisions relating to city hall and police station complex, § 19-69; such provisions relating to Morehouse General Hospital, § 19-89.  
Sec. 19-7. - Presumption in reference to illegal parking. 
If the procedure outlined above is followed, in any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such law or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time of such parking the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred. 
(Code 1966, § 23-37)  
Sec. 19-8. - Leaving the scene. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave the scene of an accident. When confronted with probable danger or when signalled to stop by another person in event of danger or peril, an operator must stop immediately and not proceed until danger is past. In event of collision, injury or accident, an operator must stop such operator's vehicle at the scene of the accident, give such operator's name, address and vehicle license number to the operator of the other vehicle or to the person injured, and render reasonable aid, and shall immediately report the accident to the police department. 
(Code 1966, § 10-205; Ord. No. 3133, § 1, 12-14-82) 
Cross reference— Hit and run, § 8-162. 
State Law reference— Duties of driver involved in an accident, R.S. 32:398.  
Sec. 19-9. - Stacking wood above vehicle railings. 
No person engaged in the business of transporting pulp wood, wood, or other wood products shall permit such pulp wood, wood, or other wood products to be placed or stacked above the retaining walls or railings of such vehicle which is to be operated upon the streets and highways located in the city. 
(Ord. No. 3100, § 1, 3-9-82)  
Sec. 19-10. - Speed limits—Motor vehicles. 
(a)  No person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing. Consistent with the foregoing, every person shall drive at a safe and appropriate speed when approaching and crossing an intersection or railroad grade crossing, when approaching and going around a curve, when approaching a hillcrest, when travelling upon any narrow or winding roadway, and when special hazards exist with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions. 
(b)  No person shall drive a vehicle at a speed greater than fifteen (15) miles per hour on either side of a street on which a schoolhouse is located, or in front of the grounds thereof, or within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the boundaries of such grounds during school hours and for one (1) hour before school takes up and one (1) hour after school is dismissed. 
(c)  Except when a special hazard exists that requires lower speed for compliance with subsection (a) above, no driver shall drive a vehicle in excess of the speed limit posted on that street or road on which the vehicle is being operated. 
(d)  Subject to the restrictions imposed by subsection (a) where there are no signs posted indicating speed limits, the speed limit applicable to that street or road shall be twenty-five (25) miles per hour, and no driver shall drive a vehicle in excess thereof. 
(Code 1966, § 23-95; Ord. No. 87-3354, § 1, 5-12-87) 
Cross reference— Speed limit at city hall and police station complex, § 19-61; speed limit at Morehouse General Hospital, § 19-81. 
State Law reference— Speed limits, R.S. 32:61 et seq.  
Sec. 19-11. - Same—Bicycles. 
No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. 
(Code 1966, § 23-113)  
Sec. 19-12. - One-way streets. 
Upon those streets and parts of streets described below in this section, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction during the indicated hours. The police department shall erect and maintain signs giving notice of such restrictions. The following shall be one-way streets in the city as indicated: 
   Name of street 	Direction 
of 
movement 	Period 
restriction 
operative 
(1)   Jefferson Avenue between intersections with Madison Avenue 	East 	All times 
(2)   Madison Avenue between intersections with Jefferson Avenue 	West 	All times 
 
(3)  That portion of West Pine Street from its intersection with the west right-of-way line of North Washington Street to its intersection with the east right-of-way line of North Vine Street shall be one-way for traffic travelling west. 
(Code 1966, § 23-99; Ord. No. 3281, 8-13-85)  
Sec. 19-13. - Through streets. 
(a)  Except where directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control signal, every driver of a vehicle shall stop such vehicle before entering any intersection of a through street from an intersecting street. Those streets and parts of streets described as follows are hereby declared to be through streets for the purpose of this section: 
   Name of Street 	From 	To 
		
  (1)  South Washington* 	Madison 	City limits on Old Monroe Road 
  (2)  Madison* 		Through city 
  (3)  North Washington* 	Madison 	City limits on Crossett Road 
  (4)  East Cypress 	North Washington 	Odom Street 
  (5)  West Cypress 	North Washington 	Marable Street 
  (6)  North Vine 	Madison 	Cypress 
  (7)  North Franklin 	Madison 	Cypress 
  (8)  South Franklin 	Madison 	Traylor 
  (9)  South Vine 	Madison 	Hickory 
 (10)  West Hickory 	South Washington 	W. Madison 
 (11)  West Jefferson 	Vine 	Marable 
 (12)  East Jefferson 	Franklin 	City Park 
 (13)  West Walnut 	South Washington 	Durham 
 (14)  Durham 	West Walnut 	Cason 
 (15)  Cason 	South Washington 	South Marable 
 (16)  South Marable 	Hickory 	Cason 
 (17)  Jackson 	Newton 	All the way South 
 (18)  Wright 	Newton 	North 
 (19)  North 	South Marable 	Jackson 
 (20)  Boatner 	Cason 	Keller 
 (21)  Traylor 	Over South Franklin 	
 (22)  Commerce 	South Washington intersection with Haggerty 	
 (23)  South Haggerty 	Madison intersection with Commerce 	
 (24)  Bowman 	Commerce 	Daisy 
 (25)  Couch 	Commerce 	Daisy 
 (26)  Daisy 	Commerce 	end of Street 
 (27)  Collinston Road 	City Limits 	South Washington, at intion with Old Monroe Road 
 (28)  Balkum 	South Washington 	end of Street 
 (29)  Division 	To the intersection of McFee 	
 (30)  Cahoon 	South Washington 	McFee 
 (31)  McFee 	White 	Division 
 (32)  White 	Gibbs 	Elm 
 (33)  Snyder 	McFee 	Elm 
 (34)  Thomas 	McFee 	Keller 
 (35)  Sassafras 	Jefferson 	Cahoon 
 (36)  McFee 	White North 	Gurdon Street 
 (37)  Pecan 	Gurdon 	Elm 
 (38)  Gurdon 	Pecan 	White 
 (39)  Taylor 	Sassafras 	McFee 
 (40)  Natchez 	Intersection of Missouri Pacific Railroad and Brisco Avenue 	Elm 
 (41)  Brisco 	Natchez 	Elm 
 (42)  Elm 	East Madison 	Collinston Road 
 (43)  South Odom 	East Jefferson 	Pecan 
 (44)  East Hickory 	Liberty 	South Odom 
 (45)  Lee 	South Haggerty 	end of Street 
 (46)  Henry 	South Haggerty 	end of Street 
 (47)  King 	South Haggerty 	end of Street 
 (48)  Perry 	South Haggerty 	end of Street 
 (49)  Hoover 	South Haggerty 	end of Street 
 (50)  Straight 	West Madison 	Perry Street 
 (51)  Smith 	Madison 	Perry Street 
 (52)  Cox 	Madison 	end of Street 
 (53)  Garfield 	Madison 	end of Street 
 (54)  Cleveland 	Madison 	City limits 
 (55)  North Liberty 	Madison 	Cypress 
 (56)  Freeland 	Madison 	Cypress 
 (57)  North Odom 	Madison 	Collier's Lane 
  	Collier's Lane 	Louisiana Lane 
 (58)  Dalton 	Madison 	Collier's Lane 
 (59)  Todd 	Collier's Lane 	Louisiana Lane 
 (60)  McCreight 	Madison 	City limits 
 (61)  Cooper Lake Road 	Madison 	City limits 
 (62)  Leavell 	McCreight 	Eastwood Drive 
 (63)  Eastwood 	Over Leavell Avenue 	
 (64)  Montgomery 	McCreight 	end of Street 
 (65)  Summerlin Lane 	McCreight 	Donaldson 
 (66)  Donaldson 	Summerlin Lane 	City limits 
 (67)  East Guy 	McCreight 	end of Street 
 (68)  McClure 	McCreight 	end of Street 
 (69)  Cherry Ridge Road 	North Washington 	McCreight and from McCreight City limits 
 (70)  East Carter 	McCreight west 	end of Street 
 (71)  Summerlin Lane 	McCreight 	North Center and from North Center to North Washington 
 (72)  Louisiana Lane 	McCreight 	Spear 
 (73)  Charles 	Over Fox 	
 (74)  Spear 	Collier's Lane 	on past Louisianna Lane 
 (75)  Collier's Lane 	Center 	McCreight 
 (76)  Ogden 	North Washington 	Marable 
 (77)  North Locust 	Cypress 	Ogden 
 (78)  New 	Over Stewart 	
 (79)  Stewart 	Over Wilbur 	
 (80)  Harrington 	North Washington 	Marable 
  	Marable 	Pruitt 
  	Pruitt 	Huey 
 (81)  Broadnax 	North Washington 	Larche Lane 
 (82)  Forest 	North Marable 	Larche Lane 
 (83)  Forest 	Marable 	Pleasant Drive 
 (84)  Haynie 	North Washington 	Parson 
 (85)  Fairfield 	North Washington 	Larche Lane 
 (86)  Highland 	North Washington 	Larche Lane 
  	Larch Lane 	end of Street 
 (87)  Parkhurst 	North Washington 	Larch Lane 
 (88)  Bonner Ferry Road 	North Washington 	City limits 
 (89)  Larch Lane 	Harrington 	Country Club 
 (90)  North Marable 	West Madison 	Van Avenue 
  	Van Avenue 	Forest 
 (91)  Van Avenue 	Larche Lane 	Pleasant Drive 
 (92)  Pleasant Drive 	Van Avenue 	City limits 
 (93)  George 	North Marable 	Huey 
 (94)  Blanche 	Marable 	Clark 
 (95)  Welsh 	North Marable 	Pruitt 
 (96)  Haynes 	North Marable 	Huey 
 (97)  High 	Over Wilbur 	
 (98)  Pruitt 	West Madison 	West Cypress 
  	West Cypress 	Haynes 
  	Haynes 	Van 
 (99)  North Haggerty 	West Madison 	end of Street 
(100)  Parker 	West Madison 	end of Street 
(101)  Huey 	Haynes 	Van 
	Van 	Forest 
	Forest 	end of Street 
(102)  Hood 	Van 	Forest 
	Forest 	Kay 
(103)  Wallace 	Pleasant Drive, north 	Kay 
(104)  George 	Pleasant Drive, west 	end of Street 
(105)  Forest 	Pleasant Drive, west 	end of Street 
(106)  Crouch 	Pleasant Drive, north 	Kay 
(107)  Riis 	Pleasant Drive, north 	Kay 
(108)  Kay 	Huey 	Riis 
 
*Note— See (b) of this section. 
(b)  The streets of Washington and Madison are hereby declared to be "right-of-way" streets and all automobiles or other vehicles must stop before entering or crossing same, with the exception that this section shall not apply to any automobile or other vehicles entering Madison Street at the intersection of same with Washington Street. 
(Code 1966, § 23-100)  
Sec. 19-14. - Commercial vehicle route. 
No person shall operate or move or cause to be operated or moved upon the following streets or parts of streets of the city any commercial vehicle transporting people for hire, or any truck, private or commercial, having a load limit capacity greater than one (1) ton without the written permission of the chief of police: 
(1)  West Hickory Avenue from its intersection with West Madison Avenue to its intersection with the West right-of-way line of South Vine Street. 
(2)  Juanita Street from its intersection with Collinston Road to its intersection with Naff Street. 
(Code 1966, § 23-49; Ord. No. 2850, § 1, 6-14-77)  
Sec. 19-15. - Driving vehicles on sidewalks. 
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary driveway. 
(Code 1966, § 23-107)  
Sec. 19-16. - Riding bicycles on sidewalks. 
No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within the city. 
(Code 1966, § 23-115)  
Sec. 19-17. - Jaywalking. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or pedestrian to cross the street diagonally or "jay-walk" at any street intersection. 
(Code 1966, § 23-121)  
Sec. 19-18. - Railroads—Blocking traffic. 
No directing officer or operator of any railroad train shall direct the operation of or operate the same in such a manner as to prevent the use of any street for purposes of travel for a period of time longer than five (5) minutes, except that this provision shall not apply to trains in motion other than those engaged in switching. 
(Code 1966, § 23-125) 
Charter reference— Authority, § 5(16)  
Sec. 19-19. - Same—Flagging traffic in backing across crossings. 
No directing officer or operator of any railroad train shall direct the operation of or operate the same in backing it or any part of it across any street crossing where automatic warning signals are not provided and working properly without providing for the warning of traffic by placing a flagman at the crossing to warn approaching traffic on the street. 
(Code 1966, § 23-126)  
Sec. 19-20. - Skateboards prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use, operate or ride any skateboards upon a sidewalk or public tennis court in the city. 
(Ord. No. 90-3490, § 1, 6-14-90)  
Sec. 19-20.1. - Inspection sticker required. 
(a)  No person shall drive a vehicle upon the streets of this city, or permit or allow any vehicle owned or under his control to be driven on the streets, unless and until such vehicle bears a current inspection tag showing it to have been inspected and approved as required by the provisions of R.S. 32:1301—32:1310, if such vehicle is required to be so inspected. 
(b)  Whoever violates the provisions of subsection (a) above shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned in jail for not more than six (6) months, or both, in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. No. 90-3517, § 4, 12-13-90) 
Editor's note— Section 4 of Ord. No. 90-3517, adopted Dec. 13, 1990, amended Ch. 19 by adding § 19-20 thereto. Inasmuch as there existed a § 19-20, the editor has included the new provisions as § 19-20.1  
Sec. 19-21. - False certificates. 
(a)  No person shall make, issue or knowingly use any imitation or counterfeit of an official certificate of inspection. 
(b)  No person shall display or cause or permit to be displayed upon any vehicle any certificate of inspection and approval knowing the same to be fictitious or issued for another vehicle or issued without an inspection having been made. 
(c)  Whoever violates the provisions of subsection (a) or (b) above shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned in jail for not more than six (6) months, or both, in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. No. 90-3517, § 5, 12-13-90)  
Sec. 19-22. - Driver's license required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive a motor vehicle within the limits of the city without a driver's license as required by the laws of the state. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive a motor vehicle within the city limits without having his license in his immediate possession at all times and the owner or operator shall display it upon demand of any police officer. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or allow any other person to drive or operate any vehicle owned or controlled by him within the limits of the city, unless and until such person has been issued a license to do so as required by the laws of the state. 
(d)  Whoever violates the provisions of subsection (a), (b) or (c) above shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned in jail for not more than six (6) months, or both, in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. No. 90-3517, § 6, 12-13-90; Ord. No. 91-3554, § 1, 9-12-91)  
Sec. 19-23. - Operating vehicle with suspended or revoked driver's license. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive a motor vehicle within the limits of the city with a driver's license which has been suspended or revoked by the appropriate authorities of the state of his domicile. 
(b)  Whoever violates the provisions of subsection (a) above shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisoned for not more than six (6) months, or both, in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. No. 90-3517, § 7, 12-13-90)  
Sec. 19-24. - Obedience to required traffic control devices displayed by school crossing guards; penalty. 
(a)  The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any school crossing guard displaying an official traffic control device at all times, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle as provided for in Title 32 of the Revised Statutes of the State of Louisiana. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be subject to a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or six (6) months' imprisonment or both. 
(Ord. No. 95-3724, § 1, 9-14-95) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 95-3724, adopted Sep. 14, 1995, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of § 1 of said ordinance as § 19-24 herein was at the editor's discretion.  
Secs. 19-25—19-29. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - POWERS AND DUTIES OF POLICE DEPARTMENT 
 
Sec. 19-30. - Enforcement duties generally. 
It shall be the duty of the police department to enforce the street traffic regulations of the city and all the vehicle laws of the state applicable to street traffic in the city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate accidents and make reports thereon, and to cooperate with the other officers and departments of the city in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions. 
(Code 1966, § 23-02)  
Sec. 19-31. - Enforcement authority generally; fire department officers at fires. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police to enforce all street traffic laws of this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city. 
(b)  Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws, provided that, in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. 
(c)  Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat, or in the immediate vicinity. 
(Code 1966, § 23-08)  
Sec. 19-32. - Administrative and experimental regulations. 
The chief of police is hereby empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of the traffic ordinances of the city and to make and enforce temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect for more than ninety (90) days. 
(Code 1966, § 23-07)  
Sec. 19-33. - Records of traffic violations. 
The police department shall keep a record of all violations of the traffic ordinances in the city, or of the state vehicle laws of which any person has been charged, together with a record of the final disposition of all such alleged offenses. Such records shall be so maintained as to show all types of violations and the total of each. Such records shall accumulate during at least a five-year period and from that time on the records shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent five-year period. All such records and reports shall be public records. 
(Code 1966, § 23-03) 
Cross reference— Reports as to violations at city hall and police station complex, § 19-69; reports as to violations at Morehouse General Hospital, § 19-89. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions as to state, R.S. 32:393.1; reporting to department of public safety, R.S. 32:398(F).  
Sec. 19-34. - Impounding vehicles. 
(a)  Members of the police department are hereby authorized to remove a vehicle from the street or highway to the nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or maintained by the police department, or otherwise maintained by this city under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated: 
(1)  When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct or causeway where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic. 
(2)  When a vehicle upon a street is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic and the persons in charge of the vehicle are by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody and removal. 
(3)  When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street and is so parked illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic. 
(4)  When a vehicle is left unattended upon a street for such a length of time as to make it reasonable to conclude that the vehicle has been abandoned. 
(b)  Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street as authorized in this section and the officer knows or is able to ascertain from the registration records in the vehicle the name and address of the owner thereof, such officer shall immediately give or cause to be given notice in writing to such owner of the fact of such removal and the reasons therefor and the place of which such vehicle has been removed. 
(c)  The owner or operator of a vehicle so impounded shall pay the charges for moving and storing the vehicle upon claiming it. 
(Code 1966, § 23-38) 
Cross reference— Removal of junked vehicles, § 10-43 et seq. 
State Law reference— Impounding of vehicles authorized, R.S. 32:392.  
Sec. 19-35. - Designation of method of identifying funeral processions. 
The police department shall designate a type of pennant or other identifying insignia to be displayed upon, or other method to be employed to identify, the vehicles in funeral processions. 
(Code 1966, § 23-06)  
Sec. 19-36. - Determining intersections where stop required. 
The police department is hereby authorized to determine and designate intersections where particular hazards exist upon other than through streets and to determine whether vehicles shall stop at one (1) or more entrances to any such stop intersection, and shall erect a stop sign at every such place where a stop is required. 
(Code 1966, § 23-102)  
Sec. 19-37. - Designating crosswalks; marking traffic lanes. 
The police department is hereby authorized to designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks, or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway and at such other places as it may deem necessary and to mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as it may deem advisable, consistent with the traffic ordinances of this city. 
(Code 1966, § 23-82)  
Secs. 19-38, 19-39. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING, PARKING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Parking at city hall and police station complex, § 19-60 et seq.; parking at Morehouse General Hospital, § 19-80 et seq. 
 
Sec. 19-40. - Passenger and freight curb loading zone. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during the hours when the regulations applicable to such curb loading zone are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed three (3) minutes. 
(b)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed thirty (30) minutes. 
(Code 1966, § 23-140)  
Sec. 19-41. - Bus stops. 
(a)  The driver of a bus shall not park upon any street in the business district at any place other than at a "bus stop." 
(b)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a "bus stop" when any such "stop" has been officially designated and appropriately signed. 
(Code 1966, § 23-141)  
Sec. 19-42. - No-parking streets. 
No person shall park a vehicle of any nature on the following streets as hereinafter designated: 
(1)  Blanche Street extension from its intersection with Huey Street East to dead end; 
(2)  Smith Street from its intersection with King Street to its intersection with Huey Avenue. 
(Code 1966, § 23-142; Ord. No. 2721, § 1, 7-9-74)  
Sec. 19-43. - No-parking portions of streets. 
No person shall park a vehicle of any nature on the following portions of streets: 
(1)  North side of Collier Lane between Center Street and Freeland Avenue; 
(2)  The North side of Harrington Avenue between North Washington and North Marable. 
(Code 1966, § 23-142A; Ord. No. 2721, § 1, 7-9-74)  
Sec. 19-44. - Handicapped persons—Definition. 
The term "handicapped person" as used herein shall mean any person who has medically recognized impairments that for all practicable purposes confines such person to a wheelchair or causes such person to walk with difficulty or insecurity. 
(Code 1966, § 23-146; Ord. No. 3324, § 1, 8-12-86)  
Sec. 19-45. - Same—Designation of spaces; special stickers. 
The chief of police is hereby authorized to designate parking space locations on city streets and public parking facilities. Signs and/or markings shall be installed in conformance with the state manual on uniform traffic-control devices to indicate spaces for the handicapped. 
(1)  The chief of police is hereby authorized to determine the need for, and to designate, by proper signs and markings, certain parking spaces on public streets and in publicly owned parking facilities which are to be reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles bearing special stickers issued to a handicapped person or vehicles bearing special license plates issued by any state for handicapped persons or for disabled veterans when such vehicle is actually being operated by or for the transportation of a handicapped person. 
(2)  Owners of privately owned parking areas may designate certain spaces within those parking areas to be reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles bearing a special sticker issued to handicapped person or vehicles bearing special license plates issued by any state for handicapped persons or disabled veterans when such vehicle is actually being operated by or for the transportation of a handicapped person. 
(3)  Parking spaces for handicapped persons should be located as close as possible to elevators, ramps, walkways and entrances which are capable of being utilized by handicapped persons. Parking spaces should be located insofar as possible in such a manner that physically handicapped persons are not compelled to walk or wheel behind parked cars to reach entrances, ramps, walkways and/or elevators. 
(4)  The special stickers referred to in subsection (1) of this section shall be entitled "BASTROP SPECIAL VEHICLE IDENTIFICATION." Such sticker shall be of two (2) types: A red sticker shall be of a permanent nature and a green sticker shall be for a temporary period with an expiration date. The special stickers shall be affixed in the lower left-hand corner of the rear window of the vehicle for which it is issued. 
(5)  The special sticker may be obtained from the police department. 
(Code 1966, § 23-147; Ord. No. 3324, § 1, 8-12-86)  
Sec. 19-46. - Same—Penalties. 
(a)  No person shall park any vehicle in a mobility-impaired or handicapped designated parking space unless such person has a license plate or hang tag for the mobility-impaired issued pursuant to R.S. 47:463.4 or a properly displayed special parking card issued pursuant to R.S. 47:463.4.1. 
(b)  The law enforcement officer for the city who encounters a violator shall be authorized to issue a citation or take whatever law enforcement action is deemed necessary or both. Furthermore, when an individual found to be in violation of these provisions refuses a request by a law enforcement officer to move the vehicle found in violation, the officer shall be authorized to have such vehicle towed. 
(c)  The citation shall contain information concerning the nature, date, time, and location of the alleged violation, the state vehicle license plate number, and the make of vehicle. In those cases where a license plate is not visible or legible, the vehicle identification number shall be used in lieu of the state vehicle plate number. The citation shall also contain information advising the person charged of the manner and the time in which he may contest the violation charged in the citation. The citation shall also provide that a failure to timely answer or appear before a court of competent jurisdiction shall be considered a prima facie admission of the violation set forth in the citation, in which the court may assess the appropriate fine or fines and all penalties incidental thereto. 
(d)  The citation issued pursuant to the provisions of this subsection shall be personally served upon the operator of the vehicle by affixing the parking citation to the vehicle in a conspicuous place thereon. The original parking citation shall bear the name or initials and identification number of the issuing officer who shall affirm the truth of the facts set forth therein. An operator of a vehicle who is not the owner, but who uses or operates the vehicle with permission of the owner, expressed or implied, shall be considered the agent of the owner to receive the citation required to be served upon the operator or registered owner of a vehicle in accordance with the provisions of this subsection. When a citation is issued for an alleged violation of the laws governing parking in a mobility-impaired parking space, loading and unloading areas, access aisles, access ramps, and curb cuts, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that a person in whose name the vehicle is registered was the operator of the vehicle when the alleged violation was committed. 
(e)  In the event that the registered owner or operator of a vehicle drives the vehicle away from or in any manner leaves the site of the violation while the issuing officer is preparing the citation, or refuses service of the parking citation and drives away from or in any manner leaves the site of the violation, this fact shall be duly noted on the original and all copies of the parking citation. This original and all copies of a parking citation shall constitute a business record of the law enforcement agency issuing the citation and shall constitute prima facie evidence that the citation was issued and that an attempt at service was made in accordance with the provisions of this subsection. 
(f)  The first violation of the provisions of this subsection shall be punished by a fine of two hundred seventy-five dollars ($275.00). A subsequent violation shall be punished by a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(g)  If the violator is other than an individual, a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be imposed. 
(h)  In addition to such fine, the violator may also be required to pay the towing fee and any storage costs which are incurred. 
(i)  The city shall recognize parking cards or other removable windshield placards and special license plates which have been issued by authorities of other states and countries for the purpose of identifying vehicles permitted to utilize parking spaces reserved for the mobility-impaired. 
(j)  No fine issued pursuant to this section shall be reduced or suspended. 
(Code 1966, § 23-148; Ord. No. 3324, § 1, 8-12-86; Ord. No. 05-4051, 3-10-05)  
Secs. 19-47—19-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PARADES 
 
Sec. 19-50. - Definition. 
As used in this article, the term "parade" shall mean any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or procession of any kind, or any similar display in or upon any street, park or other public place in the city. 
(Code 1966, § 23-22)  
Sec. 19-51. - Hours parading permitted. 
No parade shall be held in the city between the following hours: 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m.; 11:30 a.m. and 1:15 p.m.; 4:40 p.m. and 5:30 p.m.; 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except that the chief of police may authorize a parade during such hours provided sufficient personnel and safety requirements are met. 
(Code 1966, § 23-23; Ord. No. 92-3610, § 1, 11-12-92)  
Sec. 19-52. - Exemption of funeral processions. 
No provision of this article other than section 19-53 shall apply to funeral processions. 
(Code 1966, § 23-24) 
Cross reference— Funeral identification, § 19-35.  
Sec. 19-53. - Permits—required; needed for parades and processions. 
(a)  No funeral procession or parade containing two hundred (200) or more persons or fifty (50) or more vehicles, excepting the armed forces of the United States, the military forces of the state, and the forces of the police and fire departments shall occupy, march, or proceed along any street except in accordance with a permit issued by the chief of police. 
(b)  No person shall engage in, participate in, form or start any parade, unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the chief of police. 
(Code 1966, §§ 23-25, 23-26) 
State Law reference— Parade permits, R.S. 14:326.  
Sec. 19-54. - Same—time for application. 
(a)  In order for a parade to use United States Highway No. 165 between its intersection with Odom Street or Marable Street or Louisiana Highway No. 139 between its intersection with Cypress Avenue on the north and Hickory Avenue on the south must have applied for a parade permit not less than three (3) days, nor more than fourteen (14) days, before the date on which it is to conduct the parade. 
(b)  A person seeking to use any other public street of the city for a parade shall apply for a parade permit not less than twenty-four (24) hours before the time at which the parade will be conducted. 
(Code 1966, § 23-27)  
Sec. 19-55. - Same—Contents of application. 
The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade. 
(2)  If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads of such organization. 
(3)  The date on which the parade is to be conducted. 
(4)  The route to be traveled, and starting and termination points. 
(5)  The hours on which such parade will start and terminate. 
(6)  A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed. 
(7)  Location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade. 
(8)  The time in which such units of the parade will begin to assemble at any such assembly area or areas. 
(Code 1966, § 23-28)  
Sec. 19-56. - Same—Standard for issuance. 
(a)  The chief of police shall issue a permit as provided for hereunder, except when such officer finds that the parade will substantially interfere with the safe and orderly movement of traffic contiguous to its route. 
(b)  The conduct of the parade will require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of this municipality to properly police the line of movement and protect the marchers in the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the city. 
(c)  The conduct of the parade is reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, and provoke disorderly conduct or create disturbance. 
(Code 1966, § 23-29)  
Sec. 19-57. - Same—Fee. 
There shall be paid at the time of filing the application for a parade permit a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) together with such other amount as may be necessary to compensate the police department for required overtime pay for working the parade. 
(Code 1966, § 23-31; Ord. No. 3311, 4-8-86)  
Sec. 19-58. - Marching units. 
Marching units shall contain not more than twenty (20) persons abreast, and there must be an arm's length distance between the side and the front of each marcher. 
(Code 1966, § 23-30)  
Sec. 19-59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - REGULATION AT CITY HALL AND POLICE STATION COMPLEX 
 
Sec. 19-60. - Scope. 
The following rules and regulations shall apply with respect to traffic and parking on the premises of the city hall and police station complex. 
(Ord. No. 2945, § 1, 7-10-79)  
Sec. 19-61. - Speed limit. 
No operator, driver, or person in charge of a motor vehicle shall exceed the speed limit of ten (10) miles per hour upon the premises of the city hall and police station complex. 
(Ord. No. 2945, § 1(1), 7-10-79)  
Sec. 19-62. - Stop at exits. 
No operator, driver, or person in charge of a motor vehicle shall exit from the premises of the city hall and police station complex at its intersections with South Franklin Street or at its intersection with Jefferson Avenue without having come to a full stop in obedience to stop signs controlling such intersections. 
(Ord. No. 2945, § 1(2), 7-10-79)  
Sec. 19-63. - No-parking zones. 
No operator, driver, or person in charge of a motor vehicle shall stop or park such vehicle in the no-parking zones located in front of the two (2) entrances to the complex on the south side thereof, or the two (2) entrance areas on the east side thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2945, § 1(3), 7-10-79)  
Sec. 19-64. - Handicapped parking. 
No operator, driver, or person in charge of a motor vehicle shall stop or park such vehicle at the designated locations for handicapped persons unless such operator, driver, or person in charge of a motor vehicle meets the qualifications of a handicapped person. 
(Ord. No. 2945, § 1(4), 7-10-79)  
Sec. 19-65. - Placement of markers; parking restrictions. 
In authorized two-hour free parking zones, fifteen-minute parking zones, reserved parking zones, and handicapped parking zones, the chief of police shall cause markings to be placed upon wooden blocks in front of the curbs and cause markings to be painted upon the adjacent street for the purpose of designating the parking space and each vehicle shall park within the lines and only in the spaces marked for fifteen-minute parking, two-hour parking, and handicapped parking. No person shall park such vehicle in the reserved parking area unless in the space which has been reserved for such vehicle. No person shall park any vehicle in such a position that the same shall not be entirely within the areas designated by the painted lines. Each space shall be identified numerically. The hours during the day when such parking may be used or between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on any day, Sundays and legal holidays excepted. 
(Ord. No. 2945, § 1(5), 7-10-79)  
Sec. 19-66. - Overtime parking in authorized two-hour parking zone or authorized fifteen-minute parking zone. 
Each vehicle parking in a space within the area designated either as a designated two-hour free parking zone or a designated fifteen-minute free parking zone shall not remain parked in any such parking space beyond the authorized limit and in the event a vehicle remains in the designated space for more than the time allotted then in that event such vehicle shall be considered as parked overtime and such shall constitute a violation of this article and the owner or operator thereof shall be punished as hereinafter set forth. 
(Ord. No. 2945, § 1(6), 7-10-79)  
Sec. 19-67. - Unauthorized parking in a reserved parking zone. 
Each vehicle parking in a reserved parking area without proper authorization shall constitute a violation of this article and the owner or operator thereof shall be punished as hereinafter set forth. 
(Ord. No. 2945, § 1(7), 7-10-79)  
Sec. 19-68. - Unauthorized parking in a no-parking zone. 
Each vehicle parking in a no-parking area without proper authorization shall constitute a violation of this article and the owner or operator thereof shall be punished as hereinafter set forth. 
(Ord. No. 2945, § 1(8), 7-10-79)  
Sec. 19-69. - Procedure for handling of violation of provisions relating to reserved parking, two-hour free parking, fifteen-minute parking, no-parking, and handicapped parking, and the penalties therefor. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the above provisions relating to parking and any person who aids, abets, or assists therein shall, upon conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the police officers of this city, acting in accordance with instructions issued by the governing body, to report: 
(1)  The number of each parking space which indicated that the vehicle occupying the parking space is or has been parked in violation in any of the above provisions. 
(2)  The state license number of such vehicle. 
(3)  The time such vehicle is found parking in violation of any of the above provisions. 
(4)  Any other facts or knowledge which is necessary to a thorough understanding of the circumstances attending such violation. 
(c)  Each such police officer shall also attach to such vehicle a notice to the owner or operator thereof that such vehicle has been parked in violation of a provision of this article and instructing such owner or operator to report to the office of the clerk of the city court in regards to such violation. 
(d)  Each such owner or operator shall, within twenty-four (24) hours of the time when the violation occurred, pay to the clerk of the city court, as a penalty for and in full satisfaction of such violation, the sum of one dollar ($1.00). The failure of such owner or operator to make such payment within such twenty-four (24) hours shall render such owner or operator subject to a fine for contempt of court. 
(Ord. No. 2945, § 1(9), 7-10-79)  
Secs. 19-70—19-79. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - REGULATION AT MOREHOUSE GENERAL HOSPITAL 
 
Sec. 19-80. - Scope. 
The following rules and regulations shall apply with respect to traffic and parking on the premises of Morehouse General Hospital. 
(Ord. No. 2992, 5-20-80)  
Sec. 19-81. - Speed limit. 
No operator, driver, or person in charge of a motor vehicle shall exceed the speed limit of five (5) miles per hour upon the parking area and premises of Morehouse General Hospital. 
(Ord. No. 2992, § 1, 5-20-80)  
Sec. 19-82. - Stop at exits. 
No operator, driver, or person in charge of a motor vehicle shall exit from the premises of Morehouse General Hospital at its intersections with Walnut Street on the east and west side of the existing building of Morehouse General Hospital or at its intersection with Durham Street on the south side of the existing building without having come to a full stop in obedience to the stop signs controlling such intersections. 
(Ord. No. 2992, § 2, 5-20-80)  
Sec. 19-83. - Stopping in the emergency drive. 
No operator, driver, or person in charge of a motor vehicle shall stop or park such vehicle in the emergency drive of Morehouse General Hospital except for the purpose of loading or unloading a patient. 
(Ord. No. 2992, § 3, 5-20-80)  
Sec. 19-84. - Entering the emergency drive. 
No operator, driver, or person in charge of a motor vehicle shall enter the emergency drive of Morehouse General Hospital except from Durham Street. 
(Ord. No. 2992, § 4, 5-20-80)  
Sec. 19-85. - Stopping in area reserved for doctors. 
No operator, driver, or person in charge of a motor vehicle, except authorized doctors, shall stop or park such vehicle in the area reserved for doctors presently located on the southwest corner of Morehouse General Hospital premises. 
(Ord. No. 2992, § 5, 5-20-80)  
Sec. 19-86. - Handicapped parking. 
No operator, driver, or person in charge of a motor vehicle shall stop or park such vehicle at the designated locations for handicapped persons or other such areas as designated by the hospital administrator and chief of police as the need arises unless such operator, driver, or person in charge of a motor vehicle meets the qualifications of the designated parking area. 
(Ord. No. 2992, § 6, 5-20-80)  
Sec. 19-87. - Compliance with signs. 
No operator, driver or person in charge of a motor vehicle shall park such vehicle in any drive, accessway or roadway located on the premises of Morehouse General Hospital except as expressly permitted by signs designating same. 
(Ord. No. 2992, § 7, 5-20-80)  
Sec. 19-88. - Removal of unattended vehicle. 
The chief of police or the chief's designated representatives are authorized, upon request by the hospital administrator of Morehouse General Hospital, to remove any unattended vehicle found parked or stopped where parking is prohibited and are authorized to impound such vehicle until the owner thereof has paid the wrecker fee for the removal of such vehicle from the hospital parking area to the city impoundment area, and paid a reasonable fee for the storage of such vehicle not to exceed three dollars ($3.00) per day. 
(Ord. No. 2992, § 8, 5-20-80)  
Sec. 19-89. - Report of violations; citation; penalties. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the police officers of this city to report: 
(1)  The state license number of such vehicle. 
(2)  The time such vehicle is found parking in violation of any of the provisions of sections 19-83, 19-85, 19-86 and 19-87. 
(3)  Any other facts or knowledge which is necessary to a thorough understanding of the circumstances attending such violation. 
(b)  Each such police officer shall also attach to such vehicle a notice to the owner or operator thereof that such vehicle has been parked in violation of a provision of this article and instructing such owner or operator to report to the office of the clerk of the city court in regard to such violation. Each such owner or operator shall, within twenty-four (24) hours of the time the violation occurred, pay to the clerk of the city court as a penalty for and in full satisfaction of such violation, the sum of three dollars ($3.00). The failure of such owner or operator to make such payment within such twenty-four (24) hours shall render such owner or operator subject to a fine for contempt of court. 
(c)  Any vehicle may be ticketed for such violation for each two (2) hours of such violation as above noted; provided, however, that a maximum of three (3) tickets may be issued in a twenty-four-hour period starting with the time of the first violation thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2992, § 9, 5-20-80)  
Chapter 20 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to regulate taxicabs, § 5(39). 
 
Sec. 20-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Dispatcher's log: A daily record prepared by the taxicab operator (through such operator's dispatcher or other assigned representative) of all trips made by the driver, showing time and place of origin, destination, number of passengers and the amount of fare of each trip. 
Limousine: Any motor vehicle used for the transportation of passengers, except those requiring a litter, for hire between fixed termini, where the destination is not controlled by the passengers. 
Operator's permit: A certificate issued by the city clerk certifying that the holder is authorized to operate a taxicab, fleet of taxicabs, limousine, or fleet of limousines upon the streets of the city. 
Owner, operator: Any person who owns or controls the use of a taxicab. 
Taxicab, taxi, cab: Any motor vehicle used for the transportation of passengers, except those requiring a litter, for hire, not operated on a fixed route, to a destination that is controlled by the passengers. 
(Code 1966, § 23-179; Ord. No. 87-3361, 8-11-87; Ord. No. 87-3380, § 1, 11-10-87)  
Sec. 20-2. - Owner's or operator's permit—Required; rules and regulations; display; renewal. 
(a)  No owner or operator of a taxicab shall permit it to be operated upon the streets of the city without first obtaining a permit therefor from the city clerk or designated representative. 
(b)  The city clerk or designated representative is hereby given authority to promulgate such reasonable rules and regulations as may be necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  The operator's permit issued by the city clerk or designated representative shall be conspicuously affixed or displayed at the taxicab operator's place of business, headquarters or dispatch office. 
(d)  All operators shall renew their permit each year, on or before January thirty-first, by payment of the appropriate fee and filing of application as required by the city clerk or designated representative and in this chapter. 
(Code 1966, § 23-180; Ord. No. 87-3361, 8-11-87)  
Sec. 20-3. - Same—Application. 
Application for permits shall be made to the city clerk upon the forms prescribed by the city clerk and shall include: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or operator of the taxicabs. 
(2)  A description of each taxicab, including the make, model, year of manufacture, Louisiana license number for the current year, motor and chassis number and a statement regarding the length of time the vehicle has been in use. 
(3)  The location and description of the places from which it is intended to operate. 
(Code 1966, § 23-181; Ord. No. 87-3361, 8-11-87)  
Sec. 20-4. - Same—Qualifications. 
In determining whether a permit shall be issued, the city clerk or designated representative shall give due regard to: 
(1)  Proof of financial responsibility and the establishment and maintenance of a bona fide office within the corporate limits from which the service is offered. 
(2)  The experience that the applicant has had in rendering services in the city, the past experience of the applicant in prompt adjustment of claims and in payment of judgments, if any, arising out of the operation of such vehicles. Experience is not a requirement if subsection (1) of this section is met and the financial ability of the applicant to respond in damages is sufficiently demonstrated. 
(3)  That insurance as required by section 20-6 has been secured. 
(4)  The character and condition of the vehicle to be used as determined after inspection as required by this chapter. 
(5)  That the applicant, owner or any partner has not been convicted of a felony under the laws of the United States, this state, or other state or country and has not served any part of a sentence therefor within five (5) years before the date of filing of the application. 
(6)  That the applicant, owner or any partner has not been convicted in this or in any other state or by the United States or any country of prostitution, soliciting for prostitution, pandering, letting premises for prostitution, gambling, illegally dealing in narcotics or any other misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, within two (2) years before the date of filing of the application. 
(7)  That subsections (5) and (6) are complied with and if a violation is found by the police department, then the city clerk or duly authorized representative shall deny or revoke the applicant's permit. 
(8)  That the applicant has or intends to locate such person's place of business, stand or dispatch office within the corporate limits of the city. 
(9)  That all requirements of this chapter and all other applicable laws and ordinances have been complied with. 
(Code 1966, § 23-182; Ord. No. 87-3361, 8-11-87)  
Sec. 20-5. - Same—Denial, suspension or revocation; appeal. 
(a)  Every owner or operator granted a permit under this chapter shall comply with all parish, state and federal laws. Failure to do so will justify the city clerk or duly authorized representative suspending or revoking the permit. 
(b)  The city clerk or duly authorized representative may deny any applicant's permit whenever, in the exercise of reasonable and sound discretion, and after notice and affording the applicant a hearing thereon, it shall be determined that the applicant is not a fit and proper person to have such permit. The applicant may appeal within ten (10) days from such denial to the governing body to determine if such denial is justified. 
(c)  The city clerk or duly authorized representative is hereby given authority to suspend any permit issued under this chapter for failure or refusal to comply with the provisions of this chapter, such suspension to last for a period of not more than thirty (30) days. The city clerk or duly authorized representative is hereby given authority to revoke any permit for failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter; however, the permit may not be revoked unless the holder has received notice and has had an opportunity to present evidence on such holder's behalf. 
(d)  Whenever a person who shall have been issued a permit under this chapter shall be charged in court with a felony or with a violation of this chapter, the city clerk is hereby given authority to suspend the permit pending final disposition of the charges and to revoke same upon conviction thereof. 
(Code 1966, § 23-188; Ord. No. 87-3361, 8-11-87)  
Sec. 20-6. - Insurance. 
(a)  Before any permit is issued hereunder, the applicant shall file with the city clerk or duly authorized representative a certificate of public liability insurance issued by an insurance company qualified to do business in the state which shall contain the following conditions and stipulations: 
(1)  The term of such insurance policy shall be for a minimum of six (6) months. 
(2)  The insurance policy shall provide not less than the following limits of liability: for each accident causing bodily injury (including death at any time resulting therefrom) fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) for each person, thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) for each accident, and twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for property damages sustained in any one (1) accident. 
(3)  Such policy shall by its terms provide that it may not be cancelled except after ten (10) days' written notice thereof to the city clerk. 
(b)  Any owner or operator who fails to secure another policy of liability insurance prior to cancellation of an existing one shall automatically, and without notice of hearing, suffer suspension of the permit until such time as such certificate of policy has been filed with the city clerk or duly authorized representative. 
(c)  Any person who operates a taxicab without having such liability insurance in force shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter and shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(d)  Any person who does not have such liability insurance in force at the time of making application must obtain a written statement from a qualified insurance company, signed by an authorized officer of such company, stating that the applicant will be accepted for liability coverage under the terms of this chapter with respect to each vehicle for which an application has been made, if the application is approved. This subsection does not exempt operators from the requirements of subsection (b) above. 
(Code 1966, § 23-184; Ord. No. 87-3361, 8-11-87; Ord. No. 87-3380, § 2, 11-10-87; Ord. No. 16-4238A, 3-15-16 )  
Sec. 20-7. - Qualifications for taxi drivers. 
Each taxi driver shall certify that such driver meets the following qualifications: 
(1)  Has current vehicle chauffeur's license issued by the state. 
(2)  Has not been convicted of a felony or served any part of a sentence therefor under the laws of the United States, this state or other state or country within five (5) years before the date of the filing of the application. 
(3)  Has not been convicted in this or any other state or by the United States or any country of soliciting for prostitution, pandering, letting premises for prostitution, gambling, illegally dealing in narcotics, driving or operating a vehicle while intoxicated, four (4) or more moving traffic violations, or any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within two (2) years before the date of filing of the application. 
(4)  Is not addicted to the use of intoxicating liquor, does not use any narcotic drugs and is not suffering from any disease or infirmity which might make such person an unsafe or unsatisfactory driver. 
(Code 1966, § 23-183; Ord. No. 87-3361, 8-11-87)  
Sec. 20-8. - Vehicle equipment; inspection. 
Each taxicab authorized by permit under this chapter shall be equipped with a serviceable fire extinguisher and a first aid kit and shall be at all times, when operating, in proper safe mechanical condition, and shall have a current vehicle inspection sticker affixed thereto issued by the state. 
(Code 1966, § 23-185; Ord. No. 87-3361, 8-11-87)  
Sec. 20-9. - Designation of taxicabs and keeping of dispatcher's log. 
(a)  All taxicabs owned by one (1) person or operated under one (1) operator's permit shall have the same identifying design, monogram or insignia. 
(b)  Any operator of a taxicab shall designate the same as a taxicab by displaying the name and dispatch telephone number, and such vehicle shall bear a sign or other device indicating that it is a taxicab for hire and have for-hire taxicab license plates issued by the state. 
(c)  Each operator shall maintain through such operator's dispatcher or an assigned representative a dispatcher's log upon which shall be recorded all trips made each day, showing time and place of origin and destination of each trip and amount of fare. All dispatcher's logs shall be preserved and retained for a period of one (1) year and shall be available upon request by the city clerk, chief of police, or their representatives, or any duly authorized law enforcement officer; and any other person or agency, provided such person or agency has been authorized in writing by the chief of police or the city clerk. 
(d)  Every taxicab operated under this chapter shall have a card posted on the inside of the taxicab in full view of all passengers of the taxicab and enclosed in a frame with a transparent covering showing the unit number and a statement indicating that the rates are prefixed and customers are encouraged to request from the driver an on-the-spot rate check from the operator's dispatcher. The driver shall be issued a receipt upon request. 
(e)  Every taxicab driver shall conspicuously post such person's driver's license in order that the passenger can ascertain that the driver and person pictured on the license are one and the same in order that the passenger can identify the driver if necessary. 
(Code 1966, § 23-186; Ord. No. 87-3361, 8-11-87; Ord. No. 87-3380, § 3, 11-10-87)  
Sec. 20-10. - Designation of limousines. 
Any owner or operator of a limousine service which regularly utilizes the streets within the city shall meet all the requirements of this chapter pertaining to taxicabs except as provided in section 20-9, subsections (a) and (b). 
(1)  Any vehicle operating as a limousine shall have the word "Limousine" displayed conspicuously on each side of the vehicle in either magnetic or painted letters; directly below the word "Limousine" shall appear the operator's permit number in magnetic or painted letters. 
(2)  Every limousine operated under this chapter shall have a rate card posted on the inside of the vehicle, in full view of all passengers of the vehicle, enclosed in a frame with a transparent card showing the unit number and the rates charged by the operator. Upon request, the driver shall issue a receipt upon payment of rate by passenger. 
(Code 1966, § 23-187; Ord. No. 87-3361, 8-11-87)  
Sec. 20-11. - Ambulance service. 
Tubb's Ambulance Service is hereby designated as the first responder for purposes of the Emergency 911 Telephone System in the city and surrounding area and shall be installed and designated as such unless the person requesting such ambulance service specifies in the initial call another ambulance service by name. 
(Ord. No. 96-3742, § 1, 3-21-96) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 96-3742, adopted March 21, 1996, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of § 1 of said ordinance as § 20-11 herein was at the editor's discretion. 


ARTICLE 1. GENERAL 

This page left intentionally blank 
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL 
Sec. 1.1 General Provisions  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .1-1 

1.1.1 Title .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 1-1 
1.1.2 Authority .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1-1 
1.1.3 Applicability .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 1-1 
1.1.4 E.ective Date .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1-1 
1.1.5 Purpose .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1-1 
1.1.6 Intent .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 1-1 
1.1.7 Minimum Requirements .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1-2 
1.1.8 Con.icting Provisions .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 1-2 
1.1.9 Severability .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 1-2 

This page left intentionally blank 
Sec. 1.1 General Provisions 


1.1.1 Title 
This chapter shall be known as the “zoning development code for the City of Bastrop, Louisiana" and may be cited and referred to as “this zoning develop­ment code.” 

1.1.2 Authority 
This zoning development code is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by Louisiana Revised Statute 33:4780.04 et. seq. 

1.1.3 Applicability 
The provisions of this zoning development code apply to the development of all land within the City of Bastrop. No development shall be undertaken without prior authorization pursuant to this zoning development code. 

1.1.4 E.ecO ve Date 
This zoning development code was adopted on December 13,2010, and became e.ective on July 1, 2011. 

1.1.5 Purpose 
A. 	This zoning development code is adopted for the purpose of guiding devel­opment in accordance with the City of Bastrop's  Master Land Use Plan and existing and future needs of the City of Bastrop in order to protect, promote and improve the public health, safety, morals, convenience, order, appear­ance, prosperity and general welfare. 
B. 	The regulations hereby enacted are designed to exercise the full range of authority available to the City of Bastrop under Louisiana law to: 
1. 	
Promote the public health, safety and general welfare, while recogniz­ing the rights of real property owners, by adopting a comprehensive zoning ordinance and providing for administrative procedures and development standards. 

2. 	
Help achieve the goals, objectives and policies of the Master Land Use Plan. 

3. 	
Prevent the overcrowding of land and avoid undue concentration or dispersal of population by creating zoning districts consistent with the 


SEC. 1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 
1.1.6 Intent 
character of each area within the City of Bastrop by adopting an O.cial Zoning Map. 
4. 	
Provide the most bene.cial relationship between the uses of land and buildings and the circulation of automobile tra.  c and pedestri­ans throughout the City of Bastrop, and to secure safety from natural disaster, .re, and other dangers by providing for the proper location of streets, sidewalks, and buildings. 

5. 	
Provide for a range of open spaces through the most e.  cient design and layout of the land. 

6. 	
Carry out such other purposes in the public interest as may be speci.­cally cited in this zoning development code. 



1.1.6 Intent 
This zoning development code is intended to provide a mechanism for imple­menting the following goals: 
A. 	Protecting the natural infrastructure and visual character of the region. 
B. 	Creating a range of housing opportunities and choices. 
C. 	Creating mixed-use, walkable neighborhoods. 
D. 	Encouraging community and stakeholder collaboration. 
E. 	Fostering distinctive, attractive communities with a strong sense of place. 
F. 	Making development decisions predictable, fair and cost e.ective. 
G. 	Mixing land uses. 
H. 	Preserving open space, farmland, natural beauty and critical environmental areas. 
I. 	Providing a variety of transportation choices, and transportation corridors that are planned in coordination with land use. 
J. 	Strengthening and directing development towards existing communities. 
K. 	Taking advantage of compact building design where infrastructure is in place. 
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL 
1.1.7 Minimum Requirements 

1.1.7 Minimum Requirements 
The requirements of this zoning development code shall be considered as the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. 

1.1.8 Con.icO ng Provisions 
A. 	All development must comply with relevant Federal and State regulations. Whenever any provision of this zoning development code imposes a greater requirement or a higher standard than is required in any Federal or State statute or regulation, the provisions of this zoning development code shall govern unless preempted by Federal or State law. 
B. 	It is not the intent of this zoning development code to interfere with or annul any easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties; provided that where this zoning development code imposes a greater restriction upon the use and dimensions of buildings, structures, or land, or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by other ordinanc­es, regulations, or permits, or by easements, covenants, or agreements, the provisions of this zoning development code shall govern, except where expressly quali.ed in this zoning development code. 

1.1.9 Severability 
Should any provision of this zoning development code be decided by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, that decision shall not a.ect the validity of this zon­ing development code other than the part decided to be unconstitutional or invalid. 



ARTICLE 2. CODE COMPONENTS 

This page left intentionally blank 
ARTICLE 2. CODE COMPONENTS 
Sec. 2.1 Code Approach .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .2-1 
2.1.1 Generally .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 2-1 
2.1.2 Context Areas .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 2-1 
2.1.3 Zoning Districts .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 2-1 
2.1.4 Building Types .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  2-1 
Sec. 2.2 Context Areas .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .2-2 
2.2.1 Context Areas Established .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  2-2 
Sec. 2.3 Zoning Districts .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .2-3 
2.3.1 Zoning Districts Established by Context Area .  .  .  . 2-3 
Sec. 2.4 Building Types   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .2-4 
2.4.1 Building Types Established .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 2-4 
Sec. 2.5 Zoning Map .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .2-6 
2.5.1 Zoning Map Incorporated .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 2-6 
2.5.2 O.cial Zoning Map Interpretation .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  2-6 
This page left intentionally blank 
2.1.4 Building Types 
Sec. 2.1 Code Approach 





2.1.1 Generally 
This zoning development code is organized around a hierarchal framework from the city level to the individual building site. The three organizing devices are: 
1. 
Context Areas; 

2. 
Zoning Districts; and 

3.
 Building Types 



2.1.2 Context Areas 
A. Context Areas 
Context areas are derived from the existing and desired characteristics of the City of Bastrop. The context areas are distinguished from one another by their overall physical and functional characteristics including but not limited to: 
1. 
General character; 

2. 
Regional growth areas; 

3.
 Zoning districts; 

4. 
Building type, placement, height and coverage; 

5. 
Street, alley, and block patterns; and 

6. 
Parking and mobility options. 


B. Context Area Map 
The boundaries of the context areas are established and shown on the "City of Bastrop Context Area Map" and may be cited and referred to as the "O.cial Context Area Map". The O.cial Context Area Map is hereby made part of this zoning development code. All notations, references and other information shown shall have the same force and e.ect as if fully set forth or described in this zoning development code. The Context Area Map must be properly at­tested and kept on .le by the Administrator. 

2.1.3 Zoning Districts 
This zoning development code further details each context area by identifying a number of zoning districts permitted within each context area. The zoning districts are intended to be strategically applied to create development patterns and a built envi­ronment that is complementary of the characteristics of the respective context area. 

2.1.4 Building Types 
This zoning development code also uses building types to explain how buildings and structures relate to their lots, surrounding buildings and structures, street and alley rights-of-way, and the overall public realm. Each context area contains a menu of illustrated building forms and associated standards that control mass, scale, height, and other physical characteristics of buildings appropriate to each context area. 
2.2.1 Context Areas Established 
Sec. 2.2 Context Areas 


2.2.1 Context Areas Established 
Context areas are used to establish the character of existing or proposed neighborhoods. Each context area sets standards for development appropriate to the type of neighborhood anticipated. This zoning development code is organized around the four context areas established below. 

Suburban 
Suburban consists of low-density, primarily residential areas typically located outside the urban core of a city.  Single-family detached housing is predominant with some opportunities for at­tached housing. Commercial activity is typically concen­trated in nodes and corridors along major roadways. 
Urban 
Urban consists of medium density areas typically located adjacent to the center of a city.  Diverse housing types are present such as single-family houses, attached houses and apartments. Com­mercial activity is concentrat­ed along major roadways and at neighborhood nodes and may be of a mixed use type. 
Center 
Center is typically the highest density, highest activity area of a city with the greatest variety of uses. Often it encompasses a city's down­town. Civic, cultural, com­mercial, retail and o.  ce uses are often present. Attached buildings frequently form a continuous street wall. 
Special 
Special consists of large scale civic, institutional, heavy industrial and conser­vation areas which do not .t easily into other contexts. These uses may occur within other context areas in smaller concentrations. 

ARTICLE 2. CODE COMPONENTS 
2.3.1 Zoning Districts Established by Context Area 
Sec. 2.3 Zoning Districts 


2.3.1 Zoning Districts Established by Context Area 
Zoning districts re.ne the context areas and carry out the intent and provisions of this zoning development code. The fol­lowing zoning districts have been established and are applied to property as set forth on the O.  cial Zoning Map, estab­lished in Sec. 2.5, Zoning Map.  Zoning districts are allowed only in the context areas shown in the table below.  
CONTEXTS: 
Suburban (S-) 
Urban (U-) 

Residential Districts  
Single-Family (-RS-) Two-Family (-RT-) Multifamily (-RM-) Mixed Use Districts Residential Mixed Use (-RMX-)  S-RS-15 S-RS-10 S-RS-6 S-RM-2  U-RS-3 U-RT-2  C-RT-2  


U-RMX-2  C-RMX-2  
Mixed Use (-MX-) Main Street (-MS-) Commercial/Industrial Districts Commercial Corridor (-CC-) Light Industrial (-LI-) Heavy Industrial (-HI-) Special Purpose Districts Community (-CD-) Conservation (-CON-) Planned Development (-PD-) Planned Industrial Development (-PID-)  S-CC-2 S-LI S-HI S-CD S-PD  U-MX-2 U-MX-3  C-MX-2 C-MX-3 C-MS-3  

U-LI  C-LI  
SP-HI  

U-CD  C-CD  SP-CD  
U-PD  C-PD  SP-CON  
SP-PID  

2.4.1 Building Types Established 
Sec. 2.4 Building Types 
2.4.1 Building Types Established 
Building types are used to explain how buildings and structures relate to their lots, surrounding buildings, streets, alleys, and the overall public realm. The following building types 
have been established to allow for regulation of form based on the various context areas and zoning districts. 

Single-Family House A building type contain- Side Yard House A building type contain- Attached House A building type containing  Apartment House A building type with up to  
ing one principal dwelling unit typically located on a single lot with private  ing one principal dwelling unit typically located on a single lot with private yards  two principal dwelling units on a single lot with private yards on all four sides. Each  four attached dwelling units consolidated into a single structure on a single lot. An  
yards on all four sides. A single-family house may also include modular or  on three sides. A side yard house is located on one side lot line, with the equivalent  unit has its own external en­trance. Units can be located on separate .oors, side by  apartment house contains internal common walls, and looks like a large single  
manufactured homes.  of the two side yards of a single-family house located on the other side. Also  side, or back-to-back. Often called a duplex.  family house with a single primary entrance. Dwelling units may be situated either  
called a zero lot line house.  wholly or partially over or under other dwelling units.  

Row House 
A building type with three or more attached structures. Each structure shares a common side wall. Each structure may contain up to two principal dwelling units which may be stacked vertically. Each unit has its own external street facing entrance. 
Apartment 
A building type containing three or more dwelling units consolidated into a single structure. An apartment contains internal common walls. Dwelling units within a building may be situated either wholly or partially over or under other dwelling units. The building may share a common en­trance. Primary entrances are prominent and street-facing. 
2.4.1 Building Types Established 

General Shopfront  Large Format Shopfront  Workshop  
A building type intended for  A building type intended  A building type intended  
ground . oor commercial  primarily for large format  primarily for industrial,  
uses and in multi-story build­ single-story retail. Store- manufacturing and employ­ 
ings, depending on the zoning  front windows are provided  ment uses. To the extent  
district, may include upper- to encourage interaction  possible building entrances  
story residential or o.ces  between the pedestrian  should face the street.  
uses. Storefront windows are  and the ground story space.  Ground . oor transparency  
provided on the ground .oor  Primary entrances are  is limited due to the in­ 
to encourage interaction be- prominent and street fac­ tensive nature of the work  
tween the pedestrian and the  ing.  inside. May include bay  
ground story space. Primary  doors for vehicles.  
entrances are prominent and  
street facing and are spaced  
at regular intervals along the  
street edge.  

Civic  Open Lot  
A building type containing  An open lot is designed to  
community or public uses  accommodate open space or  
that serve the surrounding  natural areas worthy of pre­ 
community. Civic buildings  servation. An open lot is in- 
are usually sited adjoining or  tended primarily to provide for  
surrounded by civic spaces  public or private open space.  
or they provide a visual land- Open lots may also be used to  
mark by being placed at the  accommodate retreats, equestrian  
axial termination of a street.  centers and other uses with large  
areas of open space and a modest  
percentage of building coverage.  

SEC. 2.5 ZONING MAP 
2.5.1 Zoning Map Incorporated 
Sec. 2.5 Zoning Map 





2.5.1 Zoning Map Incorporated 
The boundaries of the zoning districts are established and shown on the "City of Bastrop Zoning District Map" and may be cited and referred to as the "O.  cial Zoning Map". The O.cial Zoning Map is hereby made part of this zoning development code. All notations, references and other information shown shall have the same force and e.ect as if fully set forth or described in this zoning development code. The O.cial Zoning Map must be properly attested and kept on .le by the Administrator. 

2.5.2 O.cial Zoning Map InterpretaOon 
A. 	In the event that any uncertainty exists with respect to the intended boundaries as shown on the O.cial Zoning Map, the Administrator is authorized to inter­pret the O.  cial Zoning Map. 
B. 	Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any district shown on the Of­.cial Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply: 
1. 	
The boundaries are the center lines of the streets, alleys, waterways and rights-of-way, unless otherwise indicated. Where designation of a boundary line on the O.cial Zoning Map coincides with the location of a street, alley, waterway or right-of-way, the center line of the street, alley, water way or right-of-way shall be construed to be the boundary of such district. 

2. 	
Where the boundaries do not coincide with the location of streets, alleys, waterways and rights-of-way but do coincide with parcel or lot lines, such parcel or lot lines shall be construed to be the boundaries. 

3. 	
Where the boundaries do not coincide with the location of streets, alleys, waterways, rights-of-way, parcel or lot lines, the boundary shall be deter­mined by the use of the scale shown on the O.  cial Zoning Map. 

4. 	
In any property split into more than one zoning district, the lines on the O.­cial Zoning Map shall be determined by use of the scale shown on the O.cial Zoning Map. 


C. 	Upon dispute of the Administrator’s interpretation, the applicant may ap­peal the decision to the Board of Adjustment as set forth in 16.2.6, Appeal of Administrative Decision. 



ARTICLE 3. SUBURBAN 

This page left intentionally blank 
ARTICLE 3. SUBURBAN 
Sec. 3.1 Suburban Context  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .3-1 

3.1.1 General Character .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  3-1 
3.1.2 Zoning Districts .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 3-1 
3.1.3 Building Type and Dimensions.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  3-1 
3.1.4 Block Patterns .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  3-1 
3.1.5 Parking .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 3-1 
Sec. 3.2 Zoning Districts .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .3-2 

3.2.1 Suburban Residential Single-Family (S-RS-15, -10, -6) . . 3-2 
3.2.2 Suburban Residential Multifamily (S-RM-2) .  .  .  .  . 3-2 
3.2.3 Suburban Commercial Corridor (S-CC-2) .  .  .  .  .  .  . 3-2 
3.2.4 Suburban Light Industrial (S-LI) .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  3-2 
3.2.5 Suburban Heavy Industrial (S-HI) .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  3-2 
3.2.6 Suburban Community (S-CD) .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  3-2 
3.2.7 Suburban Planned Development (S-PD) .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  3-2 
Sec. 3.3 Allowed Uses .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .3-3 

3.3.1 General Provisions .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  3-3 
3.3.2 Allowed Use Table .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  3-3 

Sec. 3.4 Building Types.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .3-7 
3.4.1 Single-Family House .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 3-8 
3.4.2 Side Yard House .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .3-10 
3.4.3 Attached House .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .3-12 
3.4.4 Apartment House .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .3-14 
3.4.5 Row House .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .3-16 
3.4.6 Apartment  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .3-18 
3.4.7 General Shopfront   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .3-20 
3.4.8 Large Format Shopfront .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .3-22 
3.4.9 Workshop .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .3-24 
3.4.10 Civic  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .3-26 
3.4.11 Open Lot .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .3-28 
Sec. 3.5 Special Development Standards   .  .  . 3-30 
3.5.1 Suburban Planned Development (S-PD) .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .3-30 




CROSS-REFERENCE GUIDE 


Use Provisions Rules For All Building Types Overlay Districts Parking, Site Access, and O. -Street Loading Landscaping and Screening Outdoor Lighting Outdoor Storage and Display Signs Supplementary Regulations Administration 
Article 7 
Article 8 
Article 9 
Article 10 
Article 11 
Article 12 
Article 13 
Article 14 
Article 15 
Article 16 

3.1.5 Parking 


3.1.1 General Character 
The Suburban context consists of low-density, primarily residential areas, typi­cally located outside the urban core of a city. Single-family detached housing is predominant with some opportunities for multifamily attached housing. Com­mercial activity may be concentrated in nodes or along major roadways. Larger lot sizes allow most buildings to have prominent front and back yards. 

3.1.2 Zoning Districts 
The Suburban context allows for a wide variety of residential, commercial and special purpose districts at Suburban intensities. 

3.1.3 Building Type and Dimensions 
Residential buildings are between one and two stories in height. Residences typically have landscaped front setbacks and building coverage of the lot is relatively low. Commercial structures are also between one and two stories in height. Commercial buildings may be built to the street or setback deep enough to allow for a mix of landscaping and parking. 

3.1.4 Block Pa.erns 
Block shapes and sizes vary signi.cantly within this context, often unrelated to form or use. The typical block pattern includes attached sidewalks, street and surface parking, and generous landscaping between the street and building fac­es. Residential access is typically a direct connection to a street facing garage or carport. Commercial access is typically a shared drive to a surface parking lot. Alleys are atypical but are encouraged in new development. 


3.1.5 Parking 
Parking is provided on-street and on surface lots. Limited surface parking is permitted between the building and the street but parking is primarily located to the side and rear of buildings. 
SEC. 3.2 ZONING DISTRICTS 
3.2.1 Suburban ResidenOal Single-Family (S-RS-15, -10, -6) 
Sec. 3.2 Zoning Districts 
The following zoning districts are established to carry out the provisions of this zoning development code and may be used within the Suburban Context as ap­plied to property as set forth on the O.  cial Zoning Map. 



3.2.1 Suburban ResidenOal Single-Family (S-RS-15, -10, -6) 
A. 	The Suburban Residential Single-Family districts are intended to accommo­date single-family detached houses on individual lots. These districts should be applied in areas where the land-use pattern is predominately single-family residential or where such land use pattern is desired in the future. 
B. 	Three S-RS districts are allowed in the Suburban Context: S-RS-15, S-RS-10, and S-RS-6. The S-RS districts di.er primarily as to the minimum lot size al­lowed for a single-family house within the district. 

1. 	
The S-RS-15 district generally requires a minimum lot size of 15,000 square feet. 

2. 	
The S-RS-10 district generally requires a minimum lot size of 10,000 square feet. 


3. 	
The S-RS-6 district generally requires a minimum lot size of 6,000 square feet. 



3.2.2 Suburban ResidenO al MulO family (S-RM-2) 
The Suburban Residential Multifamily district is intended to accommodate existing or proposed development where the land-use pattern is a mix of single-family, two-family and multifamily housing. The S-RM-2 district is not intended to provide for large areas exclusively dominated by multifamily but provide for neighborhoods that successfully integrate single-family, two-family and multi­family together. The S-RM-2 district allows buildings up to two stories in height. 


3.2.3 Suburban Commercial Corridor (S-CC-2) 

The Suburban Commercial Corridor district is intended to balance the need for safe, active, and pedestrian-scaled, diverse areas with the need for limited parking be­tween buildings and the street. While the S-CC-2 district allows buildings to be built to the street edge, the district addresses development opportunities along auto-domi­nated corridors where it is infeasible or impractical to require buildings to be built to the street edge. The S-CC-2 district is intended to be located within convenient travel­ing distance from the multiple neighborhoods they are intended to serve. The S-CC-2 district allows buildings with up to two stories in height. 
3-2 	| City of Bastrop 
ARTICLE 3. SUBURBAN 


3.2.4 Suburban Light Industrial (S-LI) 
The Suburban Light Industrial district is intended to accommodate light manu­facturing, research and development, limited warehousing, wholesale and upper story residential uses. Development should be operated in a relatively clean and quiet manner, and should not be obnoxious to nearby residential or commercial uses. Buildings may be either pulled up to the street or setback to allow some parking between the building and the street. The S-LI district allows buildings up to 3 stories in height. 

3.2.5 Suburban Heavy Industrial (S-HI) 
The Suburban Heavy Industrial district is intended to accommodate higher-impact manufacturing and industrial uses, including extractive and waste-related uses, that by their nature create a nuisance, and which are not properly associat­ed with or are compatible with nearby residential or commercial neighborhoods, unless properly scaled, screened, and bu.ered. The S-HI district allows buildings up to 3 stories in height. 

3.2.6 Suburban Community (S-CD) 
The Suburban Community district  is intended to provide for civic and institution­al uses that do not readily assimilate into neighborhoods of residential or mixed use building types. The S-CD district is also intended to accommodate the active and recreational needs of residents and to promote recreational uses that are compatible with surrounding land uses, and to protect natural resources. 

3.2.7 Suburban Planned Development (S-PD) 
The Suburban Planned Development district provides .exibility in development in exchange for a more desirable use of the land, a more coherent and coordi­nated development, and a better physical environment than would be pos­sible under one of the other Suburban context base zoning districts. Planned developments are intended as a tool to allow innovative and imaginative design that will promote amenities beyond those expected in conventional suburban developments and conservation of open space and natural areas. Planned developments within the Suburban Context may remain consistent with the established suburban pattern or may be more urban in design. 
Sec. 3.3 Allowed Uses 
3.3.1 General Provisions 
A.	 Use Categories 
1. 	
In order to regulate use, categories of uses have been established. 

2. 	
Use categories provide a systematic basis for assigning land uses to ap­propriate categories with other, similar uses. 

3. 	
Use categories classify land uses and activities based on common functional, product, or physical characteristics. Characteristics include the type and amount of activity, the hours of operation, the type of cus­tomers or residents, how goods or services are sold or delivered, likely impact on surrounding properties, and site conditions. 


B. Principal Uses 
Allowed principal uses by district are listed in the Allowed Use Table below. Principal uses are grouped into use categories outlined in Sec. 7.2, Use Categories. The uses listed are not an exhaustive list. When a proposed use is not identi.ed on the allowed use table or in Article 7, Use Provisions, the Administrator may determine that the proposed use is su.  ciently similar to an identi. ed use. 
C. Accessory Uses 
Accessory uses are allowed in conjunction with an allowed principal use as set forth in Sec. 7.8, Accessory Uses . 
D.	 Temporary Uses 
Temporary uses are allowed as set forth in Sec. 7.9, Temporary Uses . 
SEC. 3.3 ALLOWED USES 
3.3.2 Allowed Use Table 


3.3.2 Allowed Use Table 
The allowed use table establishes the uses allowed within each district and any conditions or use standards associated with each use. The allowed use table key is set forth below. 
A. 	Allowed by Right (.) 
Indicates a use is allowed by right in the respective district subject to any use standard. Such use is also subject to all other applicable requirements of this zoning development code. 

B. Approved Concept Plan (¼) 
Indicates a use may be permitted in the respective district only where approved by the Bastrop City Council as part of an approved concept plan in accordance with Sec. 16.2.12, Planned Development. Unless otherwise modi.ed by the Bastrop City Council, uses allowed as part of an approved concept plan are subject to all other applicable requirements of this zoning development code, including all applicable use standards. 

C. Special Use Permit (.) 
Indicates a use may be allowed in the respective district only where approved by the Bastrop Planning Commission in accordance with Sec. 16.2.9, Special Use Permit. Special use permits are subject to all other applicable requirements of this zoning development code, including all applicable use standards. 

D.	 Blank Cell 
A blank cell indicates that a use is not allowed in the respective district. 

E. Use Standard 
Indicates a cross-reference to any associated use standard established in Sec. 7.3, Residential Use Standards, through Sec. 7.7,Open Use Standards. Where no cross-reference is shown, no additional use standard applies. 
3.3.2 Allowed Use Table 


Residential Use Categories All household living: Detached living  •  •  •  •  •  7.3.1  
Attached living  
- Attached house  •  •  •  7.3.2  
- Row house  •  •  •  
Multifamily living  
- Apartment house  •  •  •  7.3.3  
- Apartment  •  •  •  
Upper-story living  •  •  •  7.3.4  
Manufactured home park  •  •  7.3.5  
All group living  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  7.3.6  
All social service  •  •  •  

Public Use Categories All civic  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  7.4.1  
All parks & open space  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  7.4.2  
All minor utilities  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  7.4.3  
All major utilities  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  7.4.4  

Commerce Use Categories All commercial parking  •  •  •  
All day care  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  7.5.1  
All indoor recreation except as listed below:  •  •  •  7.5.2  
Sexually oriented business  •  •  •  7.5.2A  
All medical  •  •  •  
All o.  ce  •  •  •  •  •  7.5.3  
All outdoor recreation, except as listed below:  •  •  •  7.5.4  
Campground, travel trailer park, RV park  •  •  7.5.4B  
Horse stable, riding academy equestrian center  •  •  •  7.5.4C  
Hunting and . shing preserve  •  7.5.4D  
All overnight lodging except as listed below: Bed and breakfast  •  •  •  •  • •  •  • •  
All passenger terminal  •  •  •  
All personal service, except as listed below:  •  •  •  •  7.5.5  
All animal care  •  •  •  •  7.5.5A  

.

KEY: • Allowed by right • May be allowed by Bastrop City Council as part of an approved concept plan Allowed by special use permit Blank cell: Not allowed 
3.3.2 Allowed Use Table 


Commerce Use Categories (continued) All restaurant/bar  •  •  •  •  •  7.5.6  
All retail sales except as listed below:  •  •  7.5.7  
Art studio/gallery  •  •  •  •  7.5.7A  
Convenience store w/ gas  •  •  •  •  7.5.7B  
Convenience store w/o gas  •  •  •  •  •  7.5.7C  
Corner store  •  •  •  •  •  7.5.7D  
Dry cleaning  •  •  •  •  7.5.7E  
All vehicle sales All water-oriented sales and service  •  •  •  7.5.8  
•  •  •  

Industrial Use Categories All heavy industrial  •  7.6.1  
All light industrial  •  •  •  •  
All research & development  •  •  •  •  
All self-service storage  •  •  •  7.6.2  
All vehicle service  •  •  •  7.6.3  
All warehouse & distribution  •  •  
All waste-related service except as listed below:  •  •  7.6.4  
Land.ll  •  7.6.4A  
Recycling facility  •  •  •  •  
All wholesale trade  •  •  

Open Use Categories All agriculture, except as listed below:  •  •  •  7.7.1  
Agricultural airstrip  
All resource extraction  •  •  •  

KEY: • Allowed by right • May be allowed by Bastrop City Council as part of an approved concept plan • Allowed by special use permit Blank cell: Not allowed 
This page left intentionally blank 

SUBURBAN  Single-Family House  Side Yard House  Attached House  Apartment House  Row House  Apartment General Shopfront Large ForShop mat front Workshop Civic  Open Lot  
Residential Districts  
Single-Family-15 (S-RS-15)  •  •  •  
Single-Family-10 (S-RS-10)  •  •  •  
Single-Family -6 (S-RS-6)  •  •  •  •  •  
Multifamily-2 (S-RM-2)  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  

Commercial/Industrial Districts 
.

Commercial Corridor-2 (S-CC-2) ...• .• 
Light Industrial (S-LI) • • ..• 
Heavy Industrial (S-HI) • • ..• 
Special Purpose Districts 
Community (S-CD) .• 
Planned Development (S-PD) • ¼¼¼¼¼• • ¼¼• 
.

KEY: • Allowed by right • May be allowed by Bastrop City Council as part of an approved concept plan Allowed by special use permit Blank cell = Not allowed 
3.4.1 Single-Family House 

3.4.1 Single-Family House 

A building type containing one principal dwelling unit typically located on a single lot with private yards on all four sides. A single-family house may also include modular or manu­
factured homes. See Sec. 7.3, Residential Use Standards. 


SITE S-RS-15 S-RS-10 S-RS-6 S-RM-2 Lot 

A Area (min sf) 15,000 10,000 6,000 4,000 
B Width (min) 75' 55' 45' 35' 
Principal Structure Setbacks 

C Front (min) 30' 20' 20' 15' 
D Side, interior (min) 10' 5' 5' 3' 
E Side, street (min) 15' 10' 10' 10' 
F Rear (min) 30' 20' 20' 20' 
Accessory Structure Setbacks 

G Side, interior (min) 10' 5' 5' 3' 
H Side, street (min) 15' 10' 10' 10' Rear, common lot line 

10'5' 5' 5'
(min) 

I Rear, alley (min) 3' or 20' 3' or 20' 3' or 20' 3' or 20' 

Open Space 

J Building coverage (max) 40% 40% 45% 65% 
3.4.1 Single-Family House 
BUILDING FORM S-RS-15 S-RS-10 S-RS-6 S-RM-2 Principal Structure 

K Stories (max) 2 2 2 2 
K Height (max) 40' 40' 35' 35' 
L Ground story elevation (min) 18" 18" 18" 18" 
Accessory Structures 

M Stories (max) 2 2 2 2 
M Height (max) 30' 30' 30' 30' 
Building Entrance 

Street facing entrance yes yes yes yesrequired 


3.4.2 Side Yard House 


3.4.2 Side Yard House 

A building type containing one principal dwelling unit typically located on a single lot with private yards on three sides. A side yard house is located on one side of a lot, with the equivalent of the two side yards of a single-family house on the other side. Also called a zero lot line house. A side yard house may also include modular or 
manufactured homes. See Sec. 7.3, Residential Use Standards. 


SITE S-RS-6 S-RM-2 Lot 

A Area (min sf) 6,000 4,000 
B Width (min) 45' 35' 
Principal Structure Setbacks 

C Front (min) 20' 15' 
D Side, interior (min) 0' 0' 
E Side, street (min) 10' 10' 
E Side, total (min) 15' 10' 
F Rear (min) 20' 20' 
Accessory Structure Setbacks 

G Side, interior (min) 0' 0' 
H Side, street (min) 10' 10' 

H Side, total (min) 10' 6' 

I Rear, common lot line (min) 5' 5' 

I Rear, alley (min) 3' or 20' 3' or 20' Open Space 

J Building coverage (max) 45% 65% 
3.4.2 Side Yard House 
BUILDING FORM S-RS-6 S-RM-2 Principal Structure 

K Stories (max) 2 2 
K Height (max) 35' 35' 
L Ground story elevation (min) 18" 18" 
Accessory Structures 

M Stories (max) 2 2 
M Height (max) 30' 30' 
Building Entrance 
Street facing entrance

N yes yes
required 


3.4.3 A. ached House 


3.4.3 A. ached House 

A building type containing two principal dwelling units on a single lot with private yards on all four sides, often called a duplex. Each unit has its own external entrance. 
Units can be located on separate .oors, side by side, or back-to-back.  Often called a duplex. 

SITE S-RS-6* S-RM-2 Lot 

A Area (min sf) 1o,000 8,000 
B Width (min) 55' 45' 
Principal Structure Setbacks 

C Front (min) 20' 15' 
D Side, interior (min) 5' 3' 
E Side, street (min) 10' 10' 
F Rear (min) 20' 20' 
Accessory Structure Setbacks 

G Side, interior (min) 5' 3' 

H Side, street (min) 10' 10' 

I Rear, common lot line (min) 5' 5' 

I Rear, alley (min) 3' or 20' 3' or 20' 

Open Space 

J Building coverage (max) 55% 55% 
* Allowed by Special Use Permit 
3.4.3 A. ached House 
BUILDING FORM S-RS-6* S-RM-2 Principal Structure 

K Stories (max) 2 2 
K Height (max) 35' 35' 
L Ground story elevation (min) 18" 18" 
Accessory Structures 

M Stories (max) 2 2 
M Height (max) 30' 30' 
Building Entrance 

Street facing entrance yes yesrequired 
* Allowed by Special Use Permit 


3.4.4 Apartment House 


3.4.4 Apartment House 

A building type with up to four attached dwelling units consolidated into a single structure on a single lot. An apartment house typically contains internal common walls. The building looks like a large single-family house with a single primary entrance. Dwelling units may be situated either wholly or partially over or under other dwelling units. 

SITE S-RM-2 S-CC-2* Lot 

A Area (min sf) 8,000 8,000 
B Width (min) 45' 45' 
Principal Structure Setbacks 

C Front (min) 15' 15' 
D Side, interior (min) 3' 3' 
E Side, street (min) 10' 10' 
F Rear (min) 20' 20' 
Accessory Structure Setbacks 

G Side, interior (min) 3' 3' 

H Side, street (min) 10' 10' 

I Rear, common lot line (min) 5' 5' 

I Rear, alley (min) 3' or 20' 3' or 20' 

Open Space 

J Building coverage (max) 55% 55% 
* Allowed by Special Use Permit 
3.4.4 Apartment House 
BUILDING FORM S-RM-2 S-CC-2* Principal Structure 

K Stories (max) 2 2 
K Height (max) 35' 35' 
L Ground story elevation (min) 18" 18" 
Accessory Structures 

M Stories (max) 2 2 
M Height (max) 30' 30' 
Building Entrance 

Street facing entrance yes yesrequired 
* Allowed by Special Use Permit 


3.4.5 Row House 


3.4.5 Row House 

A building type consisting of three or more attached structures. Each structure shares a common side wall. Each structure may contain up to two principal dwelling 
units which may be stacked vertically. Each unit has its own external street facing entrance. 

SITE S-RM-2 S-CC-2 Lot 

A Area (min sf) 1,800 1,500 
B Width, interior lot (min) / Width, end lot (min) 20'/26' 20'/26' 
Principal Structure Setbacks 

C Primary street (min) 5' 5' 
D Side street (min) 10' 10' 
Side interior, interior lot (min) / 


E 0' / 0' or 10' 0' / 0' or 10' 
Side interior, end lot (min) 
F Rear, common lot line (min) 20' 20' 
F Rear, alley (min) 3' or 20' 3' or 20' 
Build-to 

G Primary street build-to (min/max) 5' / 15' 5' / 15' Building width in primary build-to 
H Side street and end lot (min)65% 70%        Interior lot (min) 100% 100% 
I Side street build-to (min/max) 10' / 20' 10' / 20' 
J Building width in side build-to (min) 30% 30% 
Parking Location 

K Primary street setback (min) 30' 30' 
L Side street setback (min) 10' 10' 
M Setback abutting a RS-, RT- district (min) 5' 5' 
M Setback abutting any other district (min) 0' or 5' 0' or 5' 
N Setback abutting alley (min) 0' 0' 
Open Space 

O Building coverage (max) 70% 75% 
3.4.5 Row House 
BUILDING FORM S-RM-2 S-CC-2 Principal Structure 

P Stories (max) 2 2 
P Height (max) 35' 35' 
Q Ground story elevation (min) 18" 18" 
T Attached building length (max) 150' 200' 
Accessory Structures 

R Stories (max) 2 2 
R Height (max) 30' 30' 
Building Entrance 
Street facing entrance

S yes yes
required 


3.4.6 Apartment 


3.4.6 Apartment 

A building type containing three or more dwelling units consolidated into a single structure. An apartment contains internal common walls. Dwelling units within a building may be situated either wholly or partially over or under other dwelling units. The building may share a common entrance, with primary entrances prominent 
and street facing. Exterior individual entrances may also be provided with entrances prominant and primarily street facing. 

SITE S-RM-2 S-CC-2 Lot 

A Area (min sf) 22,500 20,000 

B Width (min) 125' 100' 
Principal Structure Setbacks 


C Primary street (min) 15' 15' 

D Side street (min) 15' 5' 

E Setback abutting a RS-, RT- district (min) 15' 30' 

E Setback abutting any other district (min) 0' or 10' 0' or 10' 

F Setback abutting alley (min) 20' 20' 

Build-to 

G Primary street build-to (min/max) 15' / 35' 15' / 80' 
H Building width in primary build-to (min) 65% 60% 
I Side street build-to (min/max) 15' / 35' 5' / 40' 
J Building width in side build-to (min) 30% 50% 
Parking Location 

K Primary street setback (min) 25' 15' 

L Side street setback (min) 10' 10' 
M Setback abutting a RS-, RT- district (min) 15' 30' 
M Setback abutting any other district (min) 0' or 10' 0' or 10' 
N Setback abutting alley (min) 0' 0' Open Space 

O Building coverage (max) 60% 65% 
3.4.6 Apartment 
BUILDING FORM S-RM-2 S-CC-2 Principal Structure 

P Stories (max) 2 2 
P Height (max) 35' 35' 
Q Ground story elevation (min) 18" 18" X Building length (max) 150' 225' 
Transparency 

R Ground story (min) 40% 30% 
S Upper story (min) 30% 20% 
T Blank wall area (max) 30' 40' 
Building Entrance 

U Street facing entrance required yes yes 
V Street facing entrance spacing (min) 100' 100' 


ARTICLE 3. SUBURBAN 
3.4.7 General Shopfront 


3.4.7 General Shopfront 

A building type primarily intended for ground .oor commercial uses, with upper-story residential or o.ces uses in multi-story buildings. Storefront windows are provided on the ground .oor to encourage interaction between the pedestrian and the ground story space. Primary entrances are prominent and street facing and are 
spaced at regular intervals along the street edge. 


SITE S-CC-2 S-LI S-HI Lot 

A Area (min sf) 7,500 7,500 10,000 
B Width (min) 75' 75' 80' Principal Structure Setbacks 

C Primary street (min) 0' 0' 0' 
D Side street (min) 0' 0' 0' 
E Setback abutting a RS-, RT- district (min) 20' 35' 35' 
E Setback abutting any other district (min) 0' or 5' 10' 10' 
F Setback abutting alley (min) 5' 5' 5' 
Build-to 

G Primary street build-to (min/max) 0' / 80' 0' / 80' 0' / 80' 
H Building width in primary build-to (min) 60% 60% 60% 
I Side street build-to (min/max) 0' / 80' 0' / 80' 0' / 80' 
J Building width in side build-to (min) 30% n/a n/a 
Parking Location 

K Primary street setback (min) 10' 10' 10' 
L Side street setback (min) 10' 10' 10' 
M Setback abutting a RS-, RT- district (min) 10' 10' 10' 
M Setback abutting any other district (min) 0' or 5' 10' 10' 
N Setback abutting alley (min) 0' 0' 0' 
Open Space 

O Building coverage (max) 65% 65% 60% 
3.4.7 General Shopfront 
BUILDING FORM S-CC-2 S-LI S-HI Principal Structure 

P Stories (max) 2 3 3 
P Height (max) 35' 50' 50' Ground story elevation (min)/ 

0"/12' 0"/12' 0"/12'
Ground story .oor height (min) 

X Building length (max) 200' 40' 40' 

Transparency 

R Ground story (min)t 50% 40% 40% 
S Upper story (min) 20% 20% 20% 
T Blank wall area (max) 30' 40' 40' 
Building Entrance 

U Street facing entrance required yes yes yes 
V Street facing entrance spacing 100' 175' 175' 
t For predominantly retail uses a 65% ground story 
transparency is encouraged. 



3.4.8 Large Format Shopfront 


3.4.8 Large Format Shopfront 

A building type intended primarily for large format single-story retail. Storefront windows are provided to encourage interaction between the pedestrian and the 
ground story space. Primary entrances are prominent and street facing. 


SITE S-CC-2 S-LI S-HI Lot 

A Area (min sf) 22,500 22,500 22,500 
B Width (min) 125' 125' 125' Principal Structure Setbacks 

C Primary street (min) 0' 0' 0' 
D Side street (min) 0' 0' 0' 
E Setback abutting a RS-, RT- district (min) 30' 35' 35' 
E Setback abutting any other district (min) 0' or 5' 10' 10' 
F Setback abutting alley (min) 5' 5' 5' 
Build-to 

G Primary street build-to (min/max) 0' / 80' 0' / 80' 0' / 80' 
H Building width in primary build-to (min) 60% 60% 60% 
I Side street build-to (min/max) 0' / 80' 0' / 80' 0' / 80' 
J Building width in side build-to (min) 30% n/a n/a 
Parking Location 

K Primary street setback (min) 10' 10' 10' 
L Side street setback (min) 10' 10' 10' 
M Setback abutting a RS-, RT- district (min) 30' 30' 30' 
M Setback abutting any other district (min) 0' or 5' 10' 10' 
N Setback abutting alley (min) 5' 5' 5' 
Open Space 

O Building coverage (max) 65% 65% 60% 
3.4.8 Large Format Shopfront 
BUILDING FORM S-CC-2 S-LI S-HI Principal Structure 

P Stories (max) 1 1 1 
P Height (max) 25' 25' 25' 
Q Ground story elevation (min) 0" 0" 0" 
R Ground story .oor height (min) 15' 15' 15' 
X Building length (max) 300' 300' 300' 
Transparency 

S Ground story (min) 35% 35% 35% 
T Blank wall area (max) 50' 50' 50' 
Building Entrance 

U Street facing entrance required yes yes yes 
V Street facing entrance spacing 175' 175' 175' 


3.4.9 Workshop 


3.4.9 Workshop 

A building type intended primarily for industrial, manufacturing and employment uses. To the extent possible building entrances should face the street. Ground .oor 
transparency is limited due the intensive nature of the work inside. May include bay doors for vehicles. 

SITE S-LI S-HI Lot 

A Area (min sf) 22,500 22,500 
B Width (min) 125' 125' Principal Structure Setbacks 

C Primary street (min) 0' 0' 
D Side street (min) 0' 0' 
E Setback abutting a RS-, RT- district (min) 35' 35' 
E Setback abutting any other district (min) 10' 10' 
F Setback abutting alley (min) 5' 5' 
Build-to 

G Primary street build-to (min/max) 0' / 80' 0' / 120' 
H Building width in primary build-to (min) 50% 50% 
I Side street build-to (min/max) 0' / 80' 0' / 120' 
J Building width in side build-to (min) n/a n/a 
Parking Location 

K Primary street setback (min) 10' 10' 
L Side street setback (min) 10' 10' 
M Setback abutting a RS-, RT- district (min) 20' 20' 
M Setback abutting any other district (min) 10' 10' 
N Setback abutting alley (min) 0' 0' 
Open Space 

O Building coverage (max) 65% 60% 
3.4.9 Workshop 
BUILDING FORM S-LI S-HI Principal Structure 

P Stories (max) 3 3 
P Height (max) 50' 50' Ground story elevation (min)/ 

Q 0"/12' 0"/12'
Ground story .oor height (min) 
Transparency 

R Ground story (min) 30% 30% 
S Blank wall area (max) 50' 60' 
Building Entrance 

T Street facing entrance required yes no 


3.4.10 Civic 


3.4.10 Civic 

A building type containing community or public uses that serve the surrounding community. Typically, civic buildings are sited adjoining or surrounded by civic spaces 
or they provide a visual landmark by being placed at the axial termination of a street. 

SITE All Districts Lot 

A Area (min sf) 7,500 
B Width (min) 75' 
Principal Structure Setbacks 

C Front (min) 15' 

D Side, street (min) 10' 

E Side, interior (min) 10' 

F Rear (min) 20' 
Parking Location 

G Street setback (min) 15' 
H Setback abutting a RS-, RT- district (min) 10' 
H Setback abutting any other district (min) 10' 
I Rear setback (min) 20' 
Open Space 

J Building coverage (max) 50% 
3.4.10 Civic 
BUILDING FORM All Districts Principal Structure 

K Stories (max) 3 
K Height (max) 50' 


3.4.11 Open Lot 


3.4.11 Open Lot 

An open lot is designed to accommodate open space or natural areas worthy of preservation. An open lot is intended primarily to provide for public or private open 
space. Open lots may also be used to accommodate uses with large areas of open space and a modest percentage of building coverage. 

SITE All Districts Lot 

A Area (min sf) 2,000 
B Width (min) 20' 
Principal Structure Setbacks 

C Front (min) 10' 

D Side, interior (min) 10' 

E Side, street (min) 10' 

F Rear (min) 10' 
Parking Location 

G Street setback (min) 10' 
H Setback abutting a RS-, RT- district (min) 10' 
H Setback abutting any other district (min) 10' 
I Rear setback (min) 10' 
Open Space 

J Building coverage (max) 5% 
3.4.11 Open Lot 
BUILDING FORM All Districts Principal Structure 

K Stories (max) n/a 
K Height (max) 35' 


3.5.1 Suburban Planned Development (S-PD) 
Sec. 3.5 Special Development Standards 

3.5.1 Suburban Planned Development (S-PD) 
A.	 General Provisions 
1. 	The Bastrop City Council may approve a suburban planned development subject to the following standards and the process in 16.2.12, Proce­dures, Planned Development. The suburban planned development is intended to facilitate the use of innovative techniques of land develop­ment and site design concepts that achieve a high level of environmen­tal sensitivity, energy e.ciency, aesthetics, quality development and other community goals by: 
a. 	
Reducing or eliminating the in.exibility that may result from strict application of building type standards and permitted uses; and 

b. 	
Promoting quality urban design and environmentally sensitive development by allowing development to take advantage of special site characteristics, locations and land uses; and 

c. 	
Requiring compliance with development standards that re. ect the high level of public investment in adjoining lands. 


2. 	Each application for approval of a suburban planned development shall include a statement by the applicant describing: 
a. 	
How the proposed development departs from the otherwise appli­cable standards of this zoning development code; and 

b. 	
How the proposed development is an improvement over what would be required under otherwise applicable development regulations. 


B. Minimum Size 
No suburban planned development less than 4 acres in size is allowed. 
C. Maximum Allowed ResidenO al Density 
No suburban planned development may exceed a gross residential density of 40 dwelling units per acre. 
3-30 | City of Bastrop 
ARTICLE 3. SUBURBAN 

D.	 Allowed DeviaOons 
Unless otherwise expressly approved by the Bastrop City Council as part of the approved rezoning and concept plan, all suburban planned develop­ments shall be subject to all applicable standards of this zoning develop­ment code. In order to approve modi.cations of otherwise applicable standards, the Bastrop City Council must . nd that: 
1. 	
Requested deviations from applicable building type standards, allowed uses, or other development standards that otherwise would apply are justi.ed by the compensating bene.ts of the planned unit develop­ment; and 

2. 	
The suburban planned development includes adequate provisions for all necessary services including but not limited to utility service, waste water service, and emergency vehicle access. 










ARTICLE 4. URBAN 

This page left intentionally blank 
ARTICLE 4. URBAN 
Sec. 4.1 Urban Context  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .4-1 
4.1.1 General Character  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 4-1 
4.1.2 Zoning Districts .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  4-1 
4.1.3 Building Type and Dimensions   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 4-1 
4.1.4 Block Patterns .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 4-1 
4.1.5 Parking .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 4-1 
Sec. 4.2 Zoning Districts .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .4-2 
4.2.1 Urban Residential Single-Family (U-RS-3).  .  .  .  .  .  .  4-2 
4.2.2 Urban Residential Two-Family (U-RT-2) .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  4-2 
4.2.3 Urban Residential Mixed Use (U-RMX-2) .  .  .  .  .  .  . 4-2 
4.2.4 Urban Mixed Use (U-MX-2, -3) .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 4-2 
4.2.5 Urban Light Industrial (U-IL).  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  4-2 
4.2.6 Urban Community (U-CD) .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  4-2 
4.2.7 Urban Planned Development (U-PD) .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 4-2 
Sec. 4.3 Allowed Uses .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .4-3 
4.3.1 General Provisions .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 4-3 
4.3.2 Allowed Use Table .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  4-3 
Sec. 4.4 Building Types   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .4-7 
4.4.1 Single-Family House .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 4-8 
4.4.2 Side Yard House .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .4-10 
4.4.3 Attached House .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .4-12 
4.4.4 Apartment House .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .4-14 
4.4.5 Row House .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  4-16 
4.4.6 Apartment .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .4-18 
4.4.7 General Shopfront .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 4-20 
4.4.8 Workshop .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  4-22 
4.4.9 Civic .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  4-24 
4.4.10 Open Lot .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 4-26 
Sec. 4.5 Special Development Standards .  .  .  . 4-28 
4.5.1 Urban Planned Development (U-PD) .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 4-28 



CROSS-REFERENCE GUIDE 

Use Provisions Rules For All Building Types Overlay Districts Parking, Site Access, and O. -Street Loading Landscaping and Screening Outdoor Lighting Outdoor Storage and Display Signs Supplementary Regulations Administration 
Article 7 
Article 8 
Article 9 
Article 10 
Article 11 
Article 12 
Article 13 
Article 14 
Article 15 
Article 16 

4.1.5 Parking 

4.1.1 General Character 
The Urban Context consists of medium-density areas typically located adjacent to the center of a city.  Diverse housing types are present such as single-family detached, attached housing such as row houses, and multifamily apartments. Commercial activity is concentrated along major roadways and at neighbor­hood nodes and is encouraged to be mixed use. Urban generally serves as a transition between Suburban and Center context areas. 

4.1.2 Zoning Districts 
The Urban Context allows for a variety of residential and mixed use, and com­mercial districts at urban intensities. Special purpose districts include commu­nity (U-CD) and the urban planned development (U-PD). 

4.1.3 Building Type and Dimensions 
Residential buildings are between one and two stories in height and mixed use/ commercial buildings are between one to three stories in height. Residential buildings are close to the street with small-scale yards de.ned either by low fences or hedges. Mixed use/commercial buildings typically have either build-to requirements with parking at the rear and side of the building. Building coverage of the lot is relatively high for both residential, mixed use, and commercial uses. 

4.1.4 Block Pa.erns 
The typical block pattern includes sidewalks, street trees, street and surface parking, and limited landscaping in the minimal front setbacks. Residential and commercial access is typically via an alley or shared service drive to a surface parking lot. Alleys and service drives are consistently present. 

4.1.5 Parking 
Parking is provided on-street and on surface lots. Limited surface parking is allowed between the building and the street but almost all parking is located to the side and rear of buildings. 
SEC. 4.2 ZONING DISTRICTS 
4.2.1 Urban ResidenOal Single-Family (U-RS-3) 
Sec. 4.2 Zoning Districts 
The following zoning districts are established to carry out the provisions of this zoning development code and may be used within the Urban Context as applied to property as set forth on the O.  cial Zoning Map. 
4.2.1 Urban ResidenOal Single-Family (U-RS-3) 
The Urban Residential Single-Family district is intended to accommodate single-family detached houses on individual lots. This district should be applied in areas where the land-use pattern is predominately single-family residential or where such land use pattern is desired in the future. The U-RS-3 district generally re­quires a minimum lot size of 3,000 square feet. Vehicular access is encouraged to be taken from a rear alley in the U-RS-3 district. 

4.2.2 Urban ResidenOal Two-Family (U-RT-2) 
The Urban Residential Two-Family district is intended to accommodate existing or proposed development where the land-use pattern is predominately a mix of single-family and two-family housing. The U-RT-2 district is not intended to provide for large areas exclusively dominated by two-family attached housing but provide for neighborhoods that successfully integrate single-family and two-family housing together. 

4.2.3 Urban ResidenOal Mixed Use (U-RMX-2) 
The Urban Residential Mixed Use district is intended to promote safe, active, and pedestrian-scaled, mixed use, diverse neighborhoods. The U-RMX-2 district is intended to enhance the convenience, ease and enjoyment of walking, shopping and public gathering spaces. This district is intended to accommodate both ground .oor nonresidential and residential uses, however, upper stories are reserved ex­clusively for residential uses. The U-RMX-2 district allows buildings with up to two stories in height and is typically embedded within a residential neighborhood. 

4.2.4 Urban Mixed Use (U-MX-2, -3) 
A. 	The Urban Mixed Use districts are intended to promote safe, active, and pedestrian-scaled, mixed use, diverse neighborhoods. The U-MX districts are intended to enhance the convenience, ease and enjoyment of walking, shopping and public gathering spaces. The U-MX districts are applied to key corridors and retail streets within a neighborhood, but may also have broader application at the neighborhood scale. Although buildings can be used exclu­
4-2 	| City of Bastrop 
ARTICLE 4. URBAN 
sively for residential or nonresidential uses, the vertical mixing of uses (. oor­
to-.oor) is strongly encouraged. The U-MX-2 district is typically embedded 
within a residential neighborhood. 
B. 	Two U-MX districts are permitted in the Urban context: U-MX-2; and U-MX-3. The U-MX districts vary primarily on the maximum number of stories permitted within the district. The U-MX-2 district allows buildings with up to two stories in height. The U-MX-3 district allows buildings with up to three stories in height. 

4.2.5 Urban Light Industrial (U-LI) 
The Urban Light Industrial district is intended to accommodate light manufacturing, research and development, warehousing, wholesale and upper story residential uses. Buildings may either be pulled up to the street or setback to allow some parking between the building and the street. The U-LI district allows buildings up to three stories. Development should be operated in a relatively clean and quiet manner, and should not be obnoxious to nearby residential or commercial uses. 

4.2.6 Urban Community (U-CD) 
The Urban Community district  is intended to provide for civic and institutional uses that do not readily assimilate into neighborhoods of residential or mixed use building types. The U-CD district is also intended to accommodate the active and recreational needs of residents and to promote recreational uses that are compatible with surrounding land uses. 

4.2.7 Urban Planned Development (U-PD) 
The Urban Planned Development district provides .exibility in development in exchange for a more desirable use of the land, a more coherent and coordinated development, and a better physical environment than would be possible under one of the other Urban Context base zoning districts. Planned developments are intended as a tool to allow innovative and imaginative design that will promote amenities beyond those expected in conventional urban developments and the conservation of open space and natural areas. Planned developments within the Urban Context should remain consistent with the established urban pattern and remain urban in their design. 
Sec. 4.3 Allowed Uses 
4.3.1 General Provisions 
A.	 Use Categories 
1. 	
In order to regulate use, categories of uses have been established. 

2. 	
Use categories provide a systematic basis for assigning land uses to ap­propriate categories with other, similar uses. 

3. 	
Use categories classify land uses and activities based on common func­tional, product, or physical characteristics. Characteristics include the type and amount of activity, the hours of operation, the type of cus­tomers or residents, how goods or services are sold or delivered, likely impact on surrounding properties, and site conditions. 


B. Principal Uses 
Allowed principal uses by district are listed in the Allowed Use Table below. Principal uses are grouped into use categories outlined in Sec. 7.2, Use Categories. The uses listed are not an exhaustive list. When a proposed use is not identi.ed on the allowed use table or in Article 7, Use Provisions, the Administrator may determine that the proposed use is su.  ciently similar to an identi. ed use. 
C. Accessory Uses 
Accessory uses are allowed in conjunction with an allowed principal use as set forth in Sec. 7.8, Accessory Uses . 
D.	 Temporary Uses 
Temporary uses are allowed as set forth in Sec. 7.9, Temporary Uses . 
SEC. 4.3 ALLOWED USES 
4.3.2 Allowed Use Table 

4.3.2 Allowed Use Table 
The allowed use table establishes the uses allowed within each district and any conditions or use standards associated with each use. The allowed use table key is set forth below. 
A. 	Allowed by Right (.) 
Indicates a use allowed by right in the respective district subject to any use standard. Such use is also subject to all other applicable requirements of this zoning development code. 
B. Approved Concept Plan (¼) 
Indicates a use may be allowed in the respective district only where ap­proved by the Bastrop City Council as part of an approved concept plan in accordance with Sec. 16.2.12, Planned Development. Unless otherwise modi.ed by the Bastrop City Council, uses allowed as part of an approved concept plan are subject to all other applicable requirements of this zoning development code, including all applicable use standards. 
C. Special Use Permit (.) 
Indicates a use may be allowed in the respective district only where approved by the Bastrop Planning Commission in accordance with Sec. 16.2.9, Special Use Permit. Special use permits are subject to all other applicable requirements of this zoning development code, including all applicable use standards. 
D.	 Blank Cell 
A blank cell indicates that a use is not allowed in the respective district. 
E. Use Standard 
A cross-reference to any associated use standard established in Sec. 7.3, Residential Use Standards, through Sec. 7.7, Open Use Standards. Where no cross-reference is shown, no additional use standard applies. 
4.3.2 Allowed Use Table 
ALLOWED USE TABLE 


Residential Use Categories All household living:  
Detached living  •  •  •  7.3.1  
Attached living - Attached house - Row house  • •  •  •  •  • •  7.3.2  
Multifamily living - Apartment House - Apartment  •  •  • •  • •  • •  7.3.3  
Upper-story living  •  •  •  •  •  7.3.4  
Manufactured home park  7.3.5  
All group living  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  7.3.6  
All social service  •  •  •  •  •  

Public Use Categories All civic  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  7.4.1  
All parks & open space  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  7.4.2  
All minor utilities  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  7.4.3  
All major utilities  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  7.4.4  

Commerce Use Categories All commercial parking  •  •  •  •  
All day care  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  7.5.1  
All indoor recreation except as listed below:  •  •  •  •  •  7.5.2  
Sexually oriented business  •  7.5.2.A  
All medical  •  •  •  •  •  
All o.  ce  •  •  •  •  •  
All outdoor recreation, except as listed below:  •  •  •  •  7.5.4  
Campground, travel trailer park, RV park  •  7.5.4.B  
Horse stable, riding academy equestrian center  •  •  •  •  7.5.4.C  
Hunting and . shing preserve  •  7.5.4.D  
All overnight lodging except as listed below: Bed and breakfast  •  •  • •  • •  • •  •  • •  
All passenger terminal  •  •  •  •  •  
All personal service, except as listed below:  •  •  •  •  •  7.5.5  
All animal care  •  •  •  •  •  7.5.5.A  

.
KEY: • Allowed by right • May be allowed by Bastrop City Council as part of an approved concept plan Allowed by special use permit Blank cell: Not allowed 
4.3.2 Allowed Use Table 
ALLOWED USE TABLE 


Commerce Use Categories (continued) All restaurant/bar  •  •  •  •  •  7.5.6  
All retail sales, except as listed below:  •  •  •  •  7.5.7  
Art studio/gallery  •  •  •  •  •  7.5.7.A  
Convenience store w/ gas  •  •  •  •  7.5.7.B  
Convenience store w/o gas  •  •  •  •  •  7.5.7.C  
Corner store  •  •  •  7.6.7.D  
Dry cleaning  •  •  •  •  •  7.5.7.E  
All vehicle sales All water-oriented sales and service  •  •  •  •  7.5.8  
•  •  •  

Industrial Use Categories All heavy industrial  
All light industrial  •  •  •  •  
All research & development  •  •  •  •  
All self-service storage  •  •  •  7.6.2  
All vehicle service  •  •  •  7.6.3  
All warehouse & distribution  •  
All waste-related service except as listed below:  •  7.6.4  
Land.ll  
Recycling facility  •  •  
All wholesale trade  •  

Open Use Categories All agriculture, except as listed below:  •  •  7.7.1  
Agricultural airstrip  
All resource extraction  •  •  

KEY: • Allowed by right • May be allowed by Bastrop City Council as part of an approved concept plan • Allowed by special use permit Blank cell: Not allowed 
This page left intentionally blank 
ARTICLE 4. URBAN 

Single-Side Yard Attached Apartment Row General
URBAN 
Family House House House House House Apartment Shopfront Workshop Civic Open Lot 
Residential Districts 
Single-Family-3 (U-RS-3) ..• .• 
Two-Family-2 (U-RT-2) ..• .• 

Mixed Use Districts 
Residential Mixed Use-2 (U-RMX-2) ...• .• Mixed Use-2 (U-MX-2) ...• .• Mixed Use-3 (U-MX-3) ...• .• 
Commercial / Industrial Districts 
Light Industrial (U-LI) ..• • 
Special Purpose Districts  
Community (U-CD)  •  •  
Planned Development (U-PD)  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  

.
KEY: • Allowed by right • May be allowed by Bastrop City Council as part of an approved concept plan Allowed by special use permit Blank cell = Not allowed 
4.4.1 Single-Family House 
4.4.1 Single-Family House 
A building type containing one principal dwelling unit typically located on a single lot with private yards on all four sides. A single-family house may also include modular or 
manufactured homes. See Sec. 7.3 for Residential Use Standards.  

SITE U-RS-3 U-RT-2 Lot 

A Area (min sf) 3,000 2,500 
B Width (min) 30' 25' 
Principal Structure Setbacks 

C Front (min) 10' 10' 

D Side, interior (min) 3' 3' 

E Side, street (min) 8' 6' 

F Rear, common lot line (min) 12' 10' 

F Rear, alley (min) 3' or 15' 3' or 15' 

Accessory Structure Setbacks 

G Side, interior (min) 3' 3' 

H Side, street (min) 8' 6' 

I Rear, common lot line (min) 5' 5' 

I Rear, alley (min) 3' or 15' 3' or 15' 

Open Space 

J Building coverage (max) 70% 75% 
4.4.1 Single-Family House 
BUILDING FORM  U-RS-3  U-RT-2  
K Stories (max) Principal Structure  2  2  
K Height (max)  35'  35'  
L Ground story elevation (min)  18"  18"  
M Stories (max) Accessory Structures  2  2  
M Height (max) Building Entrance  30'  30'  
N Street facing entrance required  yes  yes  


4.4.2 Side Yard House 

4.4.2 Side Yard House 
A building type containing one principal dwelling unit typically located on a single lot with private yards on three sides. A side yard house is located on one side lot line, with the equivalent of the two side yards of a single-family house located on the other side. Also called a zero lot line house.  A side yard house may also include 
modular or manufactured homes. See Sec. 7.3, Residential Use Standards. 

SITE U-RS-3 U-RT-2 Lot 

A Area (min sf) 3,000 2,500 
B Width (min) 30' 25' 
Principal Structure Setbacks 

C Front (min) 10' 10' 
D Side, interior (min) 0' 0' 
E Side, street (min) 10' 10' 
E Side, total (min) 10' 10' 
F Rear, common lot line (min) 12' 10' 
F Rear, alley (min) 3' or 15' 3' or 15' 
Accessory Structure Setbacks 

G Side, interior (min) 0' 0' 
H Side, street (min) 10' 10' 
H Side, total (min) 10' 6' 
I Rear, common lot line (min) 5' 5' 

I Rear, alley (min) 3' or 15' 3' or 15' Open Space 

J Building coverage (max) 70% 75% 
4.4.2 Side Yard House 
BUILDING FORM U-RS-3 U-RT-2 Principal Structure 

K Stories (max) 2 2 
K Height (max) 35' 35' 
L Ground story elevation (min) 18" 18" 
Accessory Structures 

M Stories (max) 2 2 
M Height (max) 30' 30' 
Building Entrance 
Street facing entrance

N yes yes
required 

4.4.3 A. ached House 

4.4.3 A. ached House 
A building type containing two principal dwelling units on a single lot with private yards on all four sides. Each unit has its own external entrance. Units can be located 
on separate .oors, side by side, or back-to-back.  Often called a duplex. 

SITE U-RS-3 U-RT-2 Lot 

A Area (min sf) 5,000 5,000 
B Width (min) 40' 40' 
Principal Structure Setbacks 

C Front (min) 10' 10' 

D Side, interior (min) 3' 3' 

E Side, street (min) 8' 6' 

F Rear, common lot line (min) 12' 10' 

F Rear, alley (min) 3' or 15' 3' or 15' 

Accessory Structure Setbacks 

G Side, interior (min) 3' 3' 

H Side, street (min) 8' 6' 

I Rear, common lot line (min) 5' 5' 

I Rear, alley (min) 3' or 15' 3' or 15' 

Open Space 

J Building coverage (max) 65% 65% 
4.4.3 A. ached House 
BUILDING FORM U-RS-3 U-RT-2 Principal Structure 

K Stories (max) 2 2 
K Height (max) 35' 35' 
L Ground story elevation (min) 18" 18" 
Accessory Structures 

M Stories (max) 2 2 
M Height (max) 30' 30' 
Building Entrance 

Street facing entrance yes yesrequired 

4.4.4 Apartment House 

4.4.4 Apartment House 
A building type with up to four attached dwelling units consolidated into a single structure on a single lot. An apartment house typically contains internal common walls. The building looks like a large single-family house with a single primary entrance. Dwelling units may be situated either wholly or partially over or under other 
dwelling units. 

U-RMX-2 SITE U-RT-2* U-MX-2 U-MX-3 
Lot 

A Area (min sf) 8,000 8,000 8,000 
B Width (min) 45' 45' 45' 
Principal Structure Setbacks 

C Front (min) 10' 10' 10' 

D Side, interior (min) 5' 5' 5' 

E Side, street (min) 10' 10' 10' 

F Rear, common lot line (min) 10' 10' 10' 

F Rear, alley (min) 3' or 15' 3' or 15' 3' or 15' 

Accessory Structure Setbacks 

G Side, interior (min) 3' 3' 3' 

H Side, street (min) 10' 10' 10' 

I Rear, common lot line (min) 5' 5' 5' 

I Rear, alley (min) 3' or 15' 3' or 15' 3' or 15' 

Open Space 

J Building coverage (max) 65% 65% 65% 
* Allowed by Special Use Permit 
4.4.4 Apartment House 
U-RMX-2 BUILDING FORM U-RT-2* U-MX-2 U-MX-3 
Principal Structure 

K Stories (max) 2 2 3 
K Height (max) 35' 35' 45' 
L Ground story elevation (min) 18" 18" 18" 
Accessory Structures 

M Stories (max) 2 2 2 
M Height (max) 30' 30' 30' 
Building Entrance 

Street facing entrance yes yes yesrequired 
* Allowed by Special Use Permit 

4.4.5 Row House 

4.4.5 Row House 
A building type consisting of three or more attached structures. Each structure shares a common side wall. Each structure may contain up to two principal dwelling 
units which may be stacked vertically. Each unit has its own external street facing entrance. 

U-RMX-2 SITE U-RT-2* U-MX-2 U-MX-3 
Lot 

A Area (min sf) 1,400 1,400 1,400 
B Width, interior lot (min) / Width, end lot (min) 18'/24' 18'/24' 18'/24' 
Principal Structure Setbacks 

C Primary street (min) 5' 5' 5' 
D Side street (min) 10' 10' 10' 
Side interior, interior lot (min) / 0' / 0' or 0' / 0' or 0' / 0' or

E 
Side interior, end lot (min) 10' 10' 10' 

F Rear, common lot line (min) 10' 10' 10' 
F Rear, alley (min) 3' or 15' 3' or 15' 3' or 15' 
Build-to 

G Primary street build-to (min/max) 5' / 15' 5' / 15' 5' / 15' Building width in primary build-to 
H Side street and end lot (min)75% 75% 75%        Interior lot (min) 100% 100% 100% 

I Side street build-to (min/max) 10' / 20' 10' / 20' 10' / 20' 
J Building width in side build-to (min) 50% 50% 50% 
Parking Location 

K Primary street setback (min) 30' 30' 30' 

L Side street setback (min) 10' 10' 10' 
M Setback abutting a RS-, RT- district (min) 5' 5' 5' 
M Setback abutting any other district (min) 0' or 5' 0' or 5' 0' or 5' 
N Setback abutting alley (min) 0' 0' 0' Open Space 

O Building coverage (max) 80% 80% 80% 
* Allowed by Special Use Permit 
4.4.5 Row House 
U-RMX-2 
BUILDING FORM 
U-RT-2* U-MX-2 U-MX-3 Principal Structure 

P Stories (max) 2 2 3 
P Height (max) 35' 35' 45' 
Q Ground story elevation (min) 24" 24" 24" 
T Building length (max) 150' 150' 200' 
Accessory Structures 

R Stories (max) 2 2 2 
R Height (max) 30' 30' 30' 
Building Entrance 
Street facing entrance

S yes yes yes
required 
* Allowed by Special Use Permit 

4.4.6 Apartment 

4.4.6 Apartment 
A building type containing three or more dwelling units consolidated into a single structure. An apartment contains internal common walls. Dwelling units within a building may be situated either wholly or partially over or under other dwelling units. The building may share a common entrance, with primary entrances prominent 
and street facing. Exterior individual entrances may also be provided with entrances prominent and primarily street facing. 

U-RMX-2 SITE U-MX-2 U-MX-3 
Lot 

A Area (min sf) 10,000 10,000 

B Width (min) 55' 55' 
Principal Structure Setbacks 


C Primary street (min) 5' 5' 

D Side street (min) 5' 5' 

E Setback abutting a RS-, RT- district (min) 20' 30' 

E Setback abutting any other district (min) 0' or 10' 0' or 10' 

F Setback abutting alley (min) 5' 5' 

Build-to 

G Primary street build-to (min/max) 5' / 15' 5' / 15' 
H Building width in primary build-to (min) 75% 75% 
I Side street build-to (min/max) 5' / 15' 5' / 15' 
J Building width in side build-to (min) 50% 50% 
Parking Location 

K Primary street setback (min) 15' 15' 

L Side street setback (min) 10' 10' 
M Setback abutting a RS-, RT- district (min) 20' 20' 
M Setback abutting any other district (min) 0' or 5' 0' or 5' 
N Setback abutting alley (min) 0' 0' Open Space 

O Building coverage (max) 70% 70% 
BUILDING FORM  U-RMX-2 U-MX-2  U-MX-3  
P Stories (max) Principal Structure  2  3  
P Height (max)  35'  45'  
Q Ground story elevation (min)  18"  18"  
X Building length (max)  150'  200'  
R Ground story (min) Transparency  40%  40%  
S Upper story (min)  30%  30%  
T Blank wall area (max)  30'  30'  
U Street facing entrance required Building Entrance  yes  yes  
V Street facing entrance spacing (min)  100'  100'  

4.4.6 Apartment 

4.4.7 General Shopfront 

4.4.7 General Shopfront 
A building type primarily intended for ground .oor commercial uses, with upper-story residential or o.ces uses in multi-story buildings. Storefront windows are provided on the ground .oor to encourage interaction between the pedestrian and the ground story space. Primary entrances are prominent and street facing and are 
spaced at regular intervals along the street edge. 

U-RMX-2 SITE U-MX-2 U-MX-3 U-LI 
Lot 

A Area (min sf) 6,500 6,500 6,500 
B Width (min) 65' 65' 65' Principal Structure Setbacks 

C Primary street (min) 0' 0' 0' 
D Side street (min) 0' 0' 0' 
E Setback abutting a RS-, RT- district (min) 15' 15' 20' 
E Setback abutting any other district (min) 0' or 5' 0' or 5' 10' 
F Setback abutting alley (min) 5' 5' 5' 
Build-to 

G Primary street build-to (min/max) 0' / 15' 0' / 15' 0' / 80' 
H Building width in primary build-to (min) 65% 65% 60% 
I Side street build-to (min/max) 0' / 15' 0' / 15' 0' / 80' 
J Building width in side build-to (min) 30% 30% n/a 
Parking Location 

K Primary street setback (min) 10' 10' 10' 
L Side street setback (min) 10' 10' 10' 
M Setback abutting a RS-, RT- district (min) 10' 10' 10' 
M Setback abutting any other district (min) 0' or 5' 0' or 5' 10' 
N Setback abutting alley (min) 0' 0' 0' 
Open Space 

O Building coverage (max) 70% 70% 70% 
4.4.7 General Shopfront 
BUILDING FORM  U-RMX-2 U-MX-2  U-MX-3  U-LI  
P Stories (max) Principal Structure  2  3  3  
P Height (max)  35'  45'  50'  
Q Ground story elevation (min)/ Ground story .oor height (min)  0"/12'  0"/12'  0"/12'  
X Building length (max)  150'  200'  300'  
R Ground story (min)t Transparency  50%  50%  40%  
S Upper story (min)  20%  20%  20%  
T Blank wall area (max)  30'  30'  30'  
U Street facing entrance required Building Entrance  yes  yes  yes  
V Street facing entrance spacing  100'  100'  100'  

t For predominantly retail uses a 65% ground story transparency is encouraged. 

4.4.8 Workshop 

4.4.8 Workshop 
A building type intended primarily for industrial, manufacturing and employment uses. To the extent possible building entrances should face the street. Ground .oor 
transparency is limited due the intensive nature of the work inside. May include bay doors for vehicles. 

SITE U-LI Lot 

A Area (min sf) 15,000 
B Width (min) 75' Principal Structure Setbacks 

C Primary street (min) 0' 
D Side street (min) 0' 
E Setback abutting a RS-, RT- district (min) 35' 
E Setback abutting any other district (min) 10' 
F Setback abutting alley (min) 5' 
Build-to 

G Primary street build-to (min/max) 0' / 80' 
H Building width in primary build-to (min) 50% 
I Side street build-to (min/max) 0' / 80' 
J Building width in side build-to (min) n/a 
Parking Location 

K Primary street setback (min) 10' 
L Side street setback (min) 10' 
M Setback abutting a RS-, RT- district (min) 20' 
M Setback abutting any other district (min) 10' 
N Setback abutting alley (min) 0' 
Open Space 

O Building coverage (max) 65% 
4.4.8 Workshop 
BUILDING FORM U-LI Principal Structure 

P Stories (max) 3 
P Height (max) 50' Ground story elevation (min)/ 

Q 0"/12'
Ground story .oor height (min) 
Transparency 

R Ground story (min) 30% 
S Blank wall area (max) 50' 
Building Entrance 

T Street facing entrance required yes 

4.4.9 Civic 

4.4.9 Civic 
A building type containing community or public uses that serve the surrounding community. Typically, Civic buildings are sited adjoining or surrounded by civic spaces 
or they provide a visual landmark by being placed at the axial termination of a street. 

SITE All Districts Lot 

A Area (min sf) 6,000 
B Width (min) 45' 
Principal Structure Setbacks 

C Front (min) 5' 

D Side, street (min) 10' 

E Side, interior (min) 5' 

F Rear (min) 15' 
Parking Location 

G Street setback (min) 5' 
H Setback abutting a RS-, RT- district (min) 10' 
H Setback abutting any other district (min) 5' 

I Rear setback (min) 15' Open Space 

J Building coverage (max) 60% 
4.4.9 Civic 
BUILDING FORM All Districts Principal Structure 

K Stories (max) 3 
K Height (max) 50' 

4.4.10 Open Lot 

4.4.10 Open Lot 
An open lot is designed to accommodate open space or natural areas worthy of preservation. An open lot is intended primarily to provide for public or private open 
space. Open lots may also be used to accommodate uses with large areas of open space and a modest percentage of building coverage. 

SITE All Districts Lot 

A Area (min sf) 2,000 
B Width (min) 20' 
Principal Structure Setbacks 

C Front (min) 10' 

D Side, interior (min) 10' 

E Side, street (min) 10' 

F Rear (min) 10' 
Parking Location 

G Street setback (min) 10' 
H Setback abutting a RS-, RT- district (min) 10' 
H Setback abutting any other district (min) 10' 
I Rear setback (min) 10' 
Open Space 

J Building coverage (max) 5% 
4.4.10 Open Lot 
BUILDING FORM All Districts Principal Structure 

K Stories (max) n/a 
K Height (max) 35' 

SEC. 4.5 SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
4.5.1 Urban Planned Development (U-PD) 
Sec. 4.5 Special Development Standards 
4.5.1 Urban Planned Development (U-PD) 
A.	 General Provisions 
1. 	The Bastrop City Council may approve an urban planned develop­ment subject to the following standards and the process in 16.2.12, Procedures, Planned Development. The urban planned development is intended to facilitate the use of innovative techniques of land develop­ment and site design concepts that achieve a high level of environmen­tal sensitivity, energy e.ciency, aesthetics, quality development and other community goals by: 
a. 	
Reducing or eliminating the in.exibility that may result from strict application of building type standards and permitted uses; 

b. 	
Promoting quality urban design and environmentally sensitive development by allowing development to take advantage of special site characteristics, locations and land uses; and 

c. 	
Requiring compliance with development standards that re. ect the high level of public investment in adjoining lands. 


2. 	Each application for approval of an urban planned development shall include a statement by the applicant describing: 
a. 	
How the proposed development departs from the otherwise appli­cable standards of this zoning development code; and 

b. 	
How the proposed development is an improvement over what would be required under otherwise applicable development regula­tions. 


B. Minimum Size 
No urban planned development less than 2 acres in size is allowed. 
C. Maximum Allowed ResidenO al Density 
No urban planned development may exceed a gross residential density of 100 dwelling units per acre. 
4-28 | City of Bastrop 
ARTICLE 4. URBAN 
D.	 Allowed DeviaOons 
Unless otherwise expressly approved by the Bastrop City Council as part of the approved rezoning and concept plan, all urban planned developments shall be subject to all applicable standards of this zoning development code. In order to approve modi.cations of otherwise applicable standards, the Bastrop City Council must . nd that: 
1. 	
Requested deviations from applicable building type standards, allowed uses, or other development standards that otherwise would apply are justi.ed by the compensating bene.ts of the planned unit develop­ment; and 

2. 	
The urban planned development includes adequate provisions for all necessary services including but not limited to utility service, wastewa­ter service, and emergency vehicle access. 










ARTICLE 5. CENTER 

This page left intentionally blank 
ARTICLE 5. CENTER 
Sec. 5.1 Center Context .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .5-1 
5.1.1 General Character  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 5-1 
5.1.2 Zoning Districts .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 5-1 
5.1.3 Building Type and Dimensions .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 5-1 
5.1.4 Block Patterns .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 5-1 
5.1.5 Parking .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 5-1 
Sec. 5.2 Zoning Districts .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .5-2 
5.2.1 Center Residential Two-Family (C-RT-2) .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  5-2 
5.2.2 Center Residential Mixed Use (C-RMX-2) .  .  .  .  .  .  .  5-2 
5.2.3 Center Mixed Use (C-MX-2, -3) .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 5-2 
5.2.4 Center Main Street (C-MS-3) .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 5-2 
5.2.5 Center Light Industrial (C-LI) .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 5-2 
5.2.6 Center Community (C-CD) .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  5-2 
5.2.7 Center Planned Development (C-PD) .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 5-2 
Sec. 5.3 Allowed Uses .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .5-3 
5.3.1 General Provisions .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  5-3 
5.3.2 Allowed Use Table .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  5-3 
Sec. 5.4 Building Types.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .5-7 
5.4.1 Single-Family House .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 5-8 
5.4.2 Side Yard House .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .5-10 
5.4.3 Attached House .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .5-12 
5.4.4 Apartment House .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .5-14 
5.4.5 Row House .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .5-16 
5.4.6 Apartment .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .5-18 
5.4.7 General Shopfront   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .5-20 
5.4.8 Workshop .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .5-22 
5.4.9 Civic .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  5-24 
5.4.10 Open Lot .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 5-26 
Sec. 5.5 Special Development Standards .  .  .  . 5-28 
5.5.1 Center Planned Development (C-PD) .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 5-28 



CROSS-REFERENCE GUIDE 

Use Provisions Rules For All Building Types Overlay Districts Parking, Site Access, and O. -Street Loading Landscaping and Screening Outdoor Lighting Outdoor Storage and Display Signs Supplementary Regulations Administration 
Article 7 
Article 8 
Article 9 
Article 10 
Article 11 
Article 12 
Article 13 
Article 14 
Article 15 
Article 16 

5.1.5 Parking 


5.1.1 General Character 
The Center context area is typically the highest density, highest activity area of a city or town with the greatest variety of uses, and mixed use building types. Often it encompasses a city's downtown. Civic, cultural, commercial, retail and offi  ce uses are often present. Attached buildings form a continuous street wall. There is substantial pedestrian activity. 

5.1.2 Zoning Districts 
The Center context allows for a wide variety of residential attached housing, mixed use, main street, and commercial districts at downtown intensities, as well as some light industrial. Special purpose districts include community (C-CD) and the center planned development (C-PD). 

5.1.3 Building Type and Dimensions 
Buildings are one to three stories in height. Setbacks are shallow and buildings are generally built to the street, although there may be room for outdoor seating, planters or other street furniture between the building and sidewalk. Building coverage on the lot is relatively high. 

5.1.4 Block Pa.erns 
Streets and rights-of-way are relatively narrow. A regular pattern of small-sized blocks are framed by a grid of streets. Alleys or service drives are consistently present. Blocks include sidewalks and street trees are located in tree lawns or grates. Building access is typically via an alley or shared service drive to a rear surface parking lot or parking structure. 

5.1.5 Parking 
Parking is provided in structures, on-street and in surface lots. Surface park­ing is located to the rear of buildings. Streets accommodate a high level of pedestrian usage. 
SEC. 5.2 ZONING DISTRICTS 
5.2.1 Center ResidenOal Two-Family (C-RT-2) 
Sec. 5.2 Zoning Districts 
The following zoning districts are established to carry out the provisions of this zoning development code and may be used within the Center context areas as applied to property as set forth on the Offi  cial Zoning Map. 


5.2.1 Center ResidenOal Two-Family (C-RT-2) 
The Center Residential Two-Family district is intended to accommodate existing or proposed development where the land-use pattern is predominately attached two-family and row housing, with some single family housing.  The C-RT-2 district is intended to provide for neighborhoods that successfully integrate two-family housing and single-family together. 

5.2.2 Center ResidenOal Mixed Use (C-RMX-2) 
The Center Residential Mixed Use district is intended to promote safe, active, and pedestrian-scaled, mixed use, diverse neighborhoods. The C-RMX-2 district is in­tended to enhance the convenience, ease and enjoyment of walking, shopping and public gathering spaces. This district is intended to accommodate both ground floor nonresidential and residential uses, however, upper stories are reserved exclusively for residential uses.  The C-RMX-2 district allows buildings with up to two stories in height. 

5.2.3 Center Mixed Use (C-MX-2, -3) 
A. 	The Center Mixed Use districts are intended to promote safe, active, and pedestrian-scaled, mixed use, diverse neighborhoods. The C-MX districts are intended to enhance the convenience, ease and enjoyment of walk­ing, shopping and public gathering spaces. Although buildings can be used exclusively for residential or nonresidential uses, the vertical mixing of uses (. oor-to-.oor) is strongly encouraged. 
B. 	Two C-MX districts are permitted in the Center context: C-MX-2 and C-MX-3. The C-MX districts vary primarily on the maximum number of stories permitted within the district. 
1. 
The C-MX-2 district allows buildings with up to two stories in height. 

2. 
The C-MX-3 district allows buildings with up to three stories in height. 



5.2.4 Center Main Street (C-MS-3) 
The Center Main Street district is intended to promote safe, active, and pedestrian-scaled mixed use streets. The C-MS district is intended to enhance the convenience, ease and enjoyment of walking, shopping and public gathering spaces.  This district 
5-2 	| City of Bastrop 
ARTICLE 5 CENTER 
is intended to accommodate a vertical mixing of uses, however, the ground floor is reserved exclusively for nonresidential uses.   These districts are typically applied in a linear fashion along entire block faces. In all cases, the C-MS district should be applied where a higher degree of walkability and pedestrian activity is desired. The C-MS-3 district allows buildings with up to three stories in height. 

5.2.5 Center Light Industrial (C-LI) 
The Center Light Industrial district is intended to accommodate light manufacturing, research and development, warehousing, wholesale and upper story residential uses. Buildings are pulled up to the street. The C-LI district allows buildings up to three sto­ries in height. Development should be operated in a relatively clean and quiet manner, and should not be obnoxious to nearby residential or commercial uses. 

5.2.6 Center Community (C-CD) 
The Center Community district  is intended to provide for civic and institutional uses that do not readily assimilate into neighborhoods of residential or mixed use building types. The C-CD district is also intended to accommodate the active and recreational needs of residents and to promote recreational uses that are compatible with sur­rounding land uses. 


5.2.7 Center Planned Development (C-PD) 
The Center Planned Development district provides flexibility in development in exchange for a more desirable use of the land, a more coherent and coordinated development, and a better physical environment than would be possible under one of the other Center context base zoning districts. Planned developments are intended as a tool to allow innovative and imaginative design that will promote amenities beyond those expected in conventional center developments. Planned developments within the Center context should contribute to the existing core of the community or be used to establish a new core or town center. Center planned developments should mirror traditional downtowns in their design. 
Sec. 5.3 Allowed Uses 
5.3.1 General Provisions 
A.	 Use Categories 
1. 	
In order to regulate use, categories of uses have been established. 

2. 	
Use categories provide a systematic basis for assigning land uses to ap­propriate categories with other, similar uses. 

3. 	
Use categories classify land uses and activities based on common functional, product, or physical characteristics. Characteristics include the type and amount of activity, the hours of operation, the type of cus­tomers or residents, how goods or services are sold or delivered, likely impact on surrounding properties, and site conditions. 


B. Principal Uses 
Allowed principal uses by district are listed in the Allowed Use Table below. Principal uses are grouped into use categories outlined in Sec. 7.2, Use Categories. The uses listed are not an exhaustive list. When a proposed use is not identi.ed on the allowed use table or in Article 7, Use Provisions, the Administrator may determine that the proposed use is su.  ciently similar to an identi. ed use. 
C. Accessory Uses 
Accessory uses are allowed in conjunction with an allowed principal use as 
set forth in Sec. 7.8, Accessory Uses . 
D.	 Temporary Uses 
Temporary uses are allowed as set forth in Sec. 7.9, Temporary Uses . 


5.3.2 Allowed Use Table 
The allowed use table establishes the uses allowed within each district and any condi­tions or use standards associated with each use. The allowed use table key is set forth below. 
SEC. 5.3 ALLOWED USES 
5.3.2 Allowed Use Table 
E. Allowed by Right (.) 
Indicates a use allowed by right in the respective district subject to any use standard. Such use is also subject to all other applicable requirements of this zoning development code. 
F. 	Approved Concept Plan (.) 
Indicates a use may be allowed in the respective district only where ap­proved by the Bastrop City Council as part of an approved concept plan in accordance with Sec. 16.2.12, Planned Development. Unless otherwise modi.ed by the Bastrop City Council, uses allowed as part of an approved concept plan are subject to all other applicable requirements of this zoning development code; including all applicable use standards. 
G. Special Use Permit (.) 
Indicates a use may be allowed in the respective district only where approved by the Bastrop Planning Commission in accordance with Sec. 16.2.9, Special Use Permit. Special use permits are subject to all other applicable requirements of this zoning development code, including all applicable use standards. 
H. Blank Cell 
A blank cell indicates that a use is not allowed in the respective district. 
I. Use Standard 
A cross-reference to any associated use standard established in Sec. 7.3, Residential Use Standards, through Sec. 7.7,Open Use Standards. Where no cross-reference is shown, no additional use standard applies. 
5.3.2 Allowed Use Table 
ALLOWED USE TABLE 



Residential Use Categories All household living:  
Detached living  •  7.3.1  
Attached living - Attached house - Row house  . .  .  .  .  •  7.3.2  
Multifamily living - Apartment house - Apartment  .  • .  .  .  •  7.3.3  
Upper-story living  .  .  .  .  .  •  7.3.4  
Manufactured home park  7.3.5  
All group living  •  .  .  .  .  •  •  7.3.6  
All social service  •  .  .  .  •  

Public Use Categories All civic  •  •  .  .  •  .  .  •  7.4.1  
All parks & open space  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  •  7.4.2  
All minor utilities  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  •  7.4.3  
All major utilities  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  7.4.4  

Commerce Use Categories All commercial parking  •  •  •  •  .  •  
All day care  •  .  .  .  .  .  .  •  7.5.1  
All indoor recreation except as listed below:  •  .  .  .  .  •  7.5.2  
Sexually oriented business  •  7.5.2.A  
All medical  .  .  .  .  .  •  
All o.  ce  .  .  .  .  .  •  
All outdoor recreation, except as listed below:  •  •  7.5.4  
Campground, travel trailer park, RV park  •  7.5.4.B  
Horse stable, riding academy equestrian center  •  •  7.5.4.C  
Hunting and . shing preserve  •  7.5.4.D  
All overnight lodging except as listed below: Bed and breakfast  •  • .  . .  . .  . .  .  • •  
All passenger terminal  •  .  .  •  .  •  
All personal service, except as listed below:  .  .  .  .  •  •  7.5.5  

.

KEY: • Allowed by right • May be allowed by Bastrop City Council as part of an approved concept plan Allowed by special use permit Blank cell: Not allowed 
5.3.2 Allowed Use Table 
ALLOWED USE TABLE 
All animal care 

C-RT-2  C-RMX-2 .  C-MX-2 .  C-MX-3  C-MS-3  C-LI •  C-CD  C-PD •  Use Standard 7.5.5.A 
.  .  

Commerce Use Categories (continued) All restaurant/bar  .  .  .  .  •  •  7.5.6  
All retail sales, except as listed below:  .  .  .  .  •  7.5.7  
Art studio/gallery  .  .  .  .  .  •  7.5.7.A  
Convenience store with gas  .  .  .  •  7.5.7.B  
Convenience store without gas  .  .  .  .  .  •  7.5.7.C  
Corner store  •  •  7.5.7.D  
Dry cleaning  .  .  .  .  •  •  7.5.7.E  
All vehicle sales All water-oriented sales and service  •  •  •  .  7.5.8  
.  .  .  

Industrial Use Categories All heavy industrial  7.6.1  
All light industrial  .  .  .  •  
All research & development  .  .  •  .  •  
All self-service storage  •  •  .  7.6.2  
All vehicle service  •  •  •  .  7.6.3  
All warehouse & distribution  .  
All waste-related service except as listed below:  •  7.6.4  
Land.ll  
Recycling facility  •  •  .  •  
All wholesale trade  .  

Open Use Categories All agriculture, except as listed below:  •  7.7.1  
Agricultural airstrip  
• Allowed by right • May be allowed by BAll resource extractionKEY:  astrop City Co uncil as part of  an approved  concept plan  . Allo wed by special  use permit  Blank cell:  Not allowed  

This page left intentionally blank 
Sec. 5.4 Building Types 


Single-Family Side Yard Attached Apartment Row General
CENTER 

House House House House House Apartment Shopfront Workshop Civic Open Lot 
Residential Districts 
..

Residential Two Family-2 (C-RT-2) ... 
Mixed Use Districts 

.
Residential Mixed Use-2 (C-RMX-2) ... .. Mixed Use-2 (C-MX-2) ... .. Mixed Use-3 (C-MX-3) ... .. Main Street-3 (C-MS-3) . .. 
Commercial / Industrial Districts 

Light Industrial (C-LI) ... . 
Special Purpose Districts 

Community (C-CD) .. 
Planned Development (C-PD) ...• • • 

.

KEY: • Allowed by right • May be allowed by Bastop City Council as part of an approved concept plan Allowed by special use permit Blank cell = Not allowed 

5.4.1 Single-Family House 

5.4.1 Single-Family House 

A building type containing one principal dwelling unit typically located on a single lot with private yards on all four sides. A single-family house may also include modular or manufactured 
homes. See Sec. 7.3 for Residential Use Standards.  
SITE C-RT-2* Lot 

A Area (min sf) 2,500 
B Width (min) 25' 
Principal Structure Setbacks 

C Front (min) 10' 

D Side, interior (min) 3' 

E Side, street (min) 6' 

F Rear, common lot line (min) 10' 

F Rear, alley (min) 3' or 15' 

Accessory Structure Setbacks 

G Side, interior (min) 3' 

H Side, street (min) 6' 

I Rear, common lot line (min) 5' 

I Rear, alley (min) 3' or 15' 

Open Space 

J Building coverage (max) 75% 
* Allowed by Special Use Permit 


5.4.1 Single-Family Homes 
BUILDING FORM C-RT-2* Principal Structure 

K Stories (max) 2 
K Height (max) 35' 
L Ground story elevation (min) 18" 
Accessory Structures 

M Stories (max) 2 
M Height (max) 30' 
Building Entrance 
Street facing entrance

N 
yesrequired 
* Allowed by Special Use Permit 



5.4.2 Side Yard House 


5.4.2 Side Yard House 

A building type containing one principal dwelling unit typically located on a single lot with private yards on three sides. A side yard house is located on one side lot line, with the equivalent of the two side yards of a single-family house located on the other side.  Also called a zero lot line house.  A side yard house may also include modular or manufactured 
SITE C-RT-2* Lot 

A Area (min sf) 2,500 
B Width (min) 25' 
Principal Structure Setbacks 

C Front (min) 10' 

D Side, interior (min) 0' 

E Side, street (min) 10' 

E Side, total (min) 10' 

F Rear, common lot line (min) 10' 

F Rear, alley (min) 3' or 15' 

Accessory Structure Setbacks 

G Side, interior (min) 0' 

H Side, street (min) 10' 

H Side, total (min) 6' 

I Rear, common lot line (min) 5' 

I Rear, alley (min) 3' or 15' 

Open Space 

J Building coverage (max) 75% 
* Allowed by Special Use Permit 
5.4.2 Side Yard House 
BUILDING FORM C-RT-2* Principal Structure 

K Stories (max) 2 
K Height (max) 35' 
L Ground story elevation (min) 18" 
Accessory Structures 

M Stories (max) 2 
M Height (max) 30' 
Building Entrance 
Street facing entrance

N 
yesrequired 
* Allowed by Special Use Permit 


5.4.3 A. ached House 


5.4.3 A. ached House 

A building type containing two principal dwelling units on a single lot with private yards on all four sides. Each unit has its own external entrance. Units can be located on separate 
floors, side by side, or back-to-back.  Often called a duplex. 


SITE C-RT-2 Lot 

A Area (min sf) 5,000 
B Width (min) 40' 
Principal Structure Setbacks 

C Front (min) 10' 
D Side, interior (min) 3' 
E Side, street (min) 6' 
F Rear, common lot line (min) 10' 
F Rear, alley (min) 10' 
Accessory Structure Setbacks 

G Side, interior (min) 3' 

H Side, street (min) 6' 

I Rear, common lot line (min) 5' 

I Rear, alley (min) 3' or 15' 

Open Space 

J Building coverage (max) 65% 
5.4.3 A. ached House 
BUILDING FORM C-RT-2 Principal Structure 

K Stories (max) 2 
K Height (max) 35' 
L Ground story elevation (min) 18" 
Accessory Structures 

M Stories (max) 2 
M Height (max) 30' 
Building Entrance 

Street facing entrance yesrequired 


ARTICLE 5. CENTER 
5.4.4 Apartment House 


5.4.4 Apartment House 

A building type with up to four attached dwelling units consolidated into a single structure on a single lot. An apartment house typically contains internal common walls. The build­ing looks like a large single-family house with a single primary entrance. Dwelling units may be situated either wholly or partially over or under other dwelling units. An accessory structure for an apartment building is allowed with a Special Use Permit, as it is found to contribute of the designated zoning district. Siting and design for an accessory structure 

shall be consistent with the standards set for the primary structure. 2 
(Ord. No. 12-4209, § 1, 6-14-12) 
SITE C-RT-2 C-RMX-2* Lot 

A Area (min sf) 8,000 8,000 
B Width (min) 45' 45' 
Principal Structure Setbacks 

C Front (min) 10' 10' 

D Side, interior (min) 5' 5' 

E Side, street (min) 10' 10' 

F Rear, common lot line (min) 10' 10' 

F Rear, alley (min) 3' or 15' 3' or 15' 

Accessory Structure Setbacks 

G Side, interior (min) 3' 3' 

H Side, street (min) 10' 10' 

I Rear, common lot line (min) 5' 5' 

I Rear, alley (min) 3' or 15' 3' or 15' 

Open Space 

J Building coverage (max) 65% 65% 
* Allowed by Special Use Permit 

5.4.4 Apartment House 
BUILDING FORM  C-RT-2  C-RMX-2*  
K Stories (max) Principal Structure  2  2  
K Height (max)  35'  35'  
L Ground story elevation (min)  18"  18"  
M Stories (max) Accessory Structures  2  2  
M Height (max) Building Entrance  30'  30'  
N Street facing entrance required  yes  yes  
* Allowed by Special Use Permit  



5.4.5 Row House 


5.4.5 Row House 

A building type consisting of three or more attached structures. Each structure shares a common side wall.  Each structure may contain up to two principal dwelling units which may be stacked vertically. Each unit has its own external street facing entrance. 

5.4.5 Row House 
BUILDING FORM  C-RT-2  C-RMX-2 C-MX-2  C-MX-3  
P Stories (max) Principal Structure  2  2  3  
P Height (max)  35'  35'  45'  
Q Ground story elevation (min)  24"  24"  24"  
T Attached building length (max)  150'  150'  200'  
R Stories (max) Accessory Structures  2  2  2  
R Height (max)  30'  30'  30'  
S Street facing entrance required Building Entrance  yes  yes  yes  



5.4.6 Apartment 


5.4.6 Apartment 

A building type containing three or more dwelling units consolidated into a single structure. An apartment contains internal common walls. Dwelling units within a building may be situated either wholly or partially over or under other dwelling units. The building often shares a common entrance, with primary entrances prominent and primarily street facing.  

C-RMX-2 SITE C-MX-2 C-MX-3 
Lot 

A Area (min sf) 8,000 8,000 
B Width (min) 50' 50' Principal Structure Setbacks 

C Primary street (min) 0' 0' 
D Side street (min) 0' 0' 
E Setback abutting a RS-, RT- district (min) 15' 15' 
E Setback abutting any other district (min) 0' or 5' 0' or 5' 
F Setback abutting alley (min) 5' 5' 
Build-to 

G Primary street build-to (min/max) 0' / 10' 0' / 10' 
H Building width in primary build-to (min) 80% 80% 
I Side street build-to (min/max) 0' / 10' 0' / 10' 
J Building width in side build-to (min) 60% 60% 
Parking Location 

K Primary street setback (min) 10' 10' 

L Side street setback (min) 10' 10' 
M Setback abutting a RS-, RT- district (min) 10' 10' 
M Setback abutting any other district (min) 0' or 5' 0' or 5' 
N Setback abutting alley (min) 0' 0' Open Space 

O Building coverage (max) 85% 85% 
5.4.6 Apartment 
BUILDING FORM  C-RMX-2 C-MX-2  C-MX-3  
P Stories (min/max) Principal Structure  1/2  2/3  
P Height (max)  35'  45'  
Q Ground story elevation (min)  18"  18"  
X Building length (max)  150'  200'  
R Ground story (min) Transparency  40%  40%  
S Upper story (min)  30%  30%  
T Blank wall area (max)  30'  30'  
U Street facing entrance required Building Entrance  yes  yes  
V Street facing entrance spacing (min)  100'  100'  



5.4.7 General Shopfront 


5.4.7 General Shopfront 

A building type primarily intended for ground floor commercial uses, with upper-story residential or offices uses in multi-story buildings. Storefront windows are provided on the ground floor to encourage interaction between the pedestrian and the ground story space. Primary entrances are prominent and street facing and are spaced at regular intervals along the street edge. An accessory structure for a General Shopfront building is allowed with a Special Use Permit, as it is found to contribute of the designated zoning district. Sit­ing and design for an accessory structure shall be consistent with the standards set for the primary structure. 2 

C-RMX-2 SITE C-MX-2 C-MX-3 C-MS-3 C-LI 
Lot 

A Area (min sf) 4,000 4,000 2,500 4,000 
B Width (min) 40' 40' 25' 40' Principal Structure Setbacks 

C Primary street (min) 0' 0' 0' 0' 
D Side street (min) 0' 0' 0' 0' 
E Setback abutting a RS-, RT- district (min) 15' 15' 15' 20' 
E Setback abutting any other district (min) 0' or 5' 0' or 5' 0' or 5' 10' 
F Setback abutting alley (min) 5' 5' 5' 5' 
Build-to 

G Primary street build-to (min/max) 0' / 10' 0' / 10' 0' / 10' 0' / 10' 
H Building width in primary build-to (min) 80% 80% 85% 80% 
I Side street build-to (min/max) 0' / 10' 0' / 10' 0' / 10' 0' / 10' 
J Building width in side build-to (min) 60% 60% 60% 60% 
Parking Location 

K Primary street setback (min) 10' 10' 10' 10' 
L Side street setback (min) 10' 10' 10' 10' 
M Setback abutting a RS-, RT- district (min) 10' 10' 10' 10' 
M Setback abutting any other district (min) 0' or 5' 0' or 5' 0' or 5' 10' 
N Setback abutting alley (min) 0' 0' 0' 0' 
Open Space 

O Building coverage (max) 85% 85% 90% 80% 

5.4.7 General Shopfront 
BUILDING FORM  C-RMX-2 C-MX-3  C-MX-3  C-MS-3  C-LI  
P Stories (max) Principal Structure  2  3  3  3  
P Height (max)  35'  45'  50'  50'  
Q Ground story elevation (min)/ Ground story .oor height (min)  0"/12'  0"/12'  0"/12'  0"/12'  
X Building length (max)  150'  200'  250'  250'  
R Ground story (min) Transparency  50%  50%  65%  50%  
S Upper story (min)  30%  30%  40%  30%  
T Blank wall area (max)  30'  30'  30'  30'  
U Street facing entrance required Building Entrance  yes  yes  yes  yes  
V Street facing entrance spacing  100'  100'  100'  100'  

t For predominantly retail uses a 65% ground story transparency is encouraged. 


5.4.8 Workshop 


5.4.8 Workshop 

A building type intended primarily for industrial, manufacturing and employment uses.  To the extent possible building entrances should face the street. Ground floor transparency is limited due the intensive nature of the work inside. May include bay doors for vehicles. An accessory structure for a Workshop building is allowed with a Special Use Permit, as it is found to contribute of the designated zoning district. Siting and design for an accessory structured shall be consistent with the standards set for the primary structure.2 
(Ord. No. 12-4209, §1, 6-14-12) 
SITE C-LI Lot 

A Area (min sf) 4,000 
B Width (min) 40' 
Principal Structure Setbacks 

C Primary street (min) 0' 

D Side street (min) 0' 

E Setback abutting a RS-, RT- district (min) 20' 

E Setback abutting any other district (min) 10' 

F Setback abutting alley (min) 5' 
Build-to 

G Primary street build-to (min/max) 0' / 10' 
H Building width in primary build-to (min) 80% 
I Side street build-to (min/max) 0' / 10' 
J Building width in side build-to (min) 50% 
Parking Location 

K Primary street setback (min) 10' 
L Side street setback (min) 10' 
M Setback abutting a RS-, RT- district (min) 10' 
M Setback abutting any other district (min) 10' 
N Setback abutting alley (min) 0' 
Open Space 

O Building coverage (max) 80% 




5.4.8 Workshop 
BUILDING FORM C-LI Principal Structure 

P Stories (max) 3 
P Height (max) 50' Ground story elevation (min)/ 

Q 0"/12'
Ground story .oor height (min) 
Transparency 

R Ground story (min) 40% 
S Blank wall area (max) 50' 
Building Entrance 

T Street facing entrance required yes 


5.4.9 Civic 


5.4.9 Civic 

A building type containing community or public uses that serve the surrounding community. Typically, Civic buildings are sited adjoining or surrounded by civic spaces or they pro­vide a visual landmark by being placed at the axial termination of a street. An accessory structure for a Civic building is allowed with a Special Use Permit, as it is found to contribute  of 
the designated zoning district. Siting and design for an accessory structure shall be consistent with the standards set for the primary structure.2 (Ord. No. 12-4209, §1, 6-14-12) 

SITE All Districts Lot 

A Area (min sf) 4,000 
B Width (min) 40' 
Principal Structure Setbacks 

C Front (min) 5' 

D Side, street (min) 10' 

E Side, interior (min) 0' or 5' 

F Rear (min) 10' 
Parking Location 

G Street setback (min) 5' 
H Setback abutting a RS-, RT- district (min) 10' 
H Setback abutting any other district (min) 0' or 5' 

I Setback abutting alley (min) 0' 
Open Space 

J Building coverage (max) 85% 

5.4.9 Civic 
BUILDING FORM All Districts Principal Structure 

K Stories (max) 3 
K Height (max) 50' 


5.4.10 Open Lot 


5.4.10 Open Lot 

An open lot is designed to accommodate open space or natural areas worthy of preservation. An open lot is intended primarily to provide for public or private open space. Open 

space lots may also be used to accommodate uses with large areas of open space and a modest percentage of building coverage. 
SITE All Districts Lot 

A Area (min sf) 2,000 
B Width (min) 20' 
Principal Structure Setbacks 

C Front (min) 10' 
D Side, interior (min) 10' 
E Side, street (min) 10' 
F Rear (min) 10' 
Parking Location 

G Street setback (min) 10' 
H Setback abutting a RS-, RT- district (min) 10' 
H Setback abutting any other district (min) 10' 
I Setback abutting alley (min) 0' 
Open Space 

J Building coverage (max) 10% 

5.4.10 Open Lot 
BUILDING FORM All Districts Principal Structure 

K Stories (max) n/a 
K Height (max) 35' 


SEC. 5.5 SPECIAL DEVELOPEMENT STANDARDS 
5.5.1 Center Planned Development (C-PD) 
Sec. 5.5 Special Development Standards 





5.5.1 Center Planned Development (C-PD) 
A.	 General Provisions 
1. 	The Bastrop City Council may approve a center planned development subject to the following standards and the process in 16.2.12 Proce­dures, Planned Development. The center planned development is intended to facilitate the use of innovative techniques of land develop­ment and site design concepts that achieve a high level of environmen­tal sensitivity, energy e.ciency, aesthetics, quality development and other community goals by: 
a. 	
Reducing or eliminating the in.exibility that may result from strict application of building type standards and permitted uses; 

b. 	
Promoting quality urban design and environmentally sensitive development by allowing development to take advantage of special site characteristics, locations and land uses; and 

c. 	
Requiring compliance with development standards that re. ect the high level of public investment in adjoining lands. 


2. 	Each application for approval of a center planned development shall include a statement by the applicant describing: 
a. 	
How the proposed development departs from the otherwise appli­cable standards of this zoning development code; and 

b. 	
How the proposed development is an improvement over what would be required under otherwise applicable development regula­tions. 


B. Minimum Size 
No center planned development less than 25,000 ft2 in size is allowed. 
C. Maximum Allowed ResidenO al Density 
No center planned development may exceed a gross residential density of 200 dwelling units per acre. 
5-28 | City of Bastrop
 ARTICLE 5. CENTER 
D.	 Allowed DeviaOons 
Unless otherwise expressly approved by the Bastrop City Council as part of the approved rezoning and concept plan, all center planned developments shall be subject to all applicable standards of this zoning development code. In order to approve modi.cations of otherwise applicable standards, the Bastrop City Council must . nd that: 
1. 	
Requested deviations from applicable building type standards, allowed uses, or other development standards that otherwise would apply are justi.ed by the compensating bene.ts of the planned unit develop­ment; and 

2. 	
The center planned development includes adequate provisions for all necessary services including but not limited to utility service, wastewa­ter service, and emergency vehicle access. 







ARTICLE 6. SPECIAL 

This page left intentionally blank 
2 | City of Bastrop 
ARTICLE 6. SPECIAL 
Sec. 6.1 Special Context .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .6-1 
6.1.1 General Character .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  6-1 
6.1.2 Zoning Districts .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  6-1 
6.1.3 Building Type and Dimensions .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 6-1 
6.1.4 Block Patterns .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  6-1 
6.1.5 Parking .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 6-1 
Sec. 6.2 Zoning Districts .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .6-2 
6.2.1 Special Community (SP-CD) .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  6-2 
6.2.2 Special Heavy Industrial (SP-HI) .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 6-2 
6.2.3 Special Planned Industrial Development (SP-PID) .  . 6-2 
Sec. 6.3 Allowed Uses  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .6-3 
6.3.1 General Provisions .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 6-3 
6.3.2 Allowed Use Table .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  6-3 
Sec. 6.4 Building Types.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .6-7 
6.4.1 General Shopfront .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 6-8 
6.4.2 Large Format Shopfront .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .6-10 
6.4.3 Workshop .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .6-12 
6.4.4 Civic .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  6-14 
6.4.5 Open Lot .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  6-16 
Sec. 6.5 Special Development Standards .  .  .  . 6-18 
6.5.1 Special Planned Industrial Development (SP-PID) .  .6-18 
Zoning Development Code | 3 

4 | City of Bastrop 

CROSS-REFERENCE GUIDE 


Use Provisions Rules For All Building Types Overlay Districts Parking, Site Access, and O. -Street Loading Landscaping and Screening Outdoor Lighting Outdoor Storage and Display Signs Supplementary Regulations Administration 
Article 7 
Article 8 
Article 9 
Article 10 
Article 11 
Article 12 
Article 13 
Article 14 
Article 15 
Article 16 

SEC. 6.1 SPECIAL CONTEXT 

ARTICLE 6. SPECIAL 
6.1.5 Parking 


6.1.1 General Character  6.1.5 Parking  
The Special context consists of large scale civic, institutional, and heavy indus- Parking may be provided on-street and in large surface lots. Civic and insti­ 
trial areas. Typically, these uses take up large lots or extensive tracts of land.  tutional uses may have structured parking as well.  
They typically have multiple buildings in a form that does not .t easily into  
other contexts. Certain uses such as heavy industrial should be well separated  
or bu.ered from adjacent contexts in order to protect more sensitive uses. In  
smaller scale occurrences uses typically considered as Special context may be  
embedded in other context areas.  
6.1.2 Zoning Districts  
The Special context allows for two types of large scale districts: the community  
(SP-CD) district addresses civic and institutional type areas, while the heavy  
industrial (SP-HI) district addresses major industry areas.  
6.1.3 Building Type and Dimensions  
Buildings may be between one to three stories in height. Buildings may be  
pulled up to the street but are often set back far from the street. Lot coverage  
will be variable.  
6.1.4 Block Pa.erns  
Uses within the Special context typically have larger blocks and a loose network  
of wide connected streets. Uses typically take vehicular access from the street.  

Zoning Development Code | 6-1 


SEC. 6.2 ZONING DISTRICTS 
6.2.1 Special Community (SP-CD) 
Sec. 6.2 Zoning Districts 
The following zoning districts are established to carry out the provisions of this zoning development code and may be used within the Special context areas. The zoning districts within the Special context areas di.er from zoning districts within the other context areas in that due to their size, function, or other characteristics are unable to .t the character of the Suburban, Urban, or Center context areas. 


6.2.1 Special Community (SP-CD) 
The Special Community district  is intended to provide for large scale civic and institutional campuses, organized by master plans, that do not readily assimi­late into neighborhoods. The SP-CD district is also intended to accommodate large scale active and recreational needs of residents and to promote large scale recreational uses that may not be compatible in other zoning districts. 

6.2.2 Special Heavy Industrial (SP-HI) 
The Special  Heavy Industrial district is intended to accommodate high-impact manufacturing and industrial uses, including extractive and waste-related uses, that are either large scale or contain uses that by their nature create a nuisance, and which are not properly associated with or are compatible with neighborhoods. 


6.2.3 Special Planned Industrial Development (SP-PID) 
The Special Planned Industrial Development district is intended to provide .exibility in the development of high intensity light and heavy industrial em­ployment centers or campus settings through a concept plan approved by the governing body. The SP-PID provides .exibility in development in exchange for a more desirable use of the land, a more coherent and coordinated develop­ment, reduced impact on surrounding properties and a better environment than would be possible under one of the Light Industrial or Heavy Industrial zoning districts. The SP-PID is intended as a tool to allow greater protection of surrounding land uses while encouraging innovative designs that will promote amenities beyond those expected in conventional industrial developments. 

6-2 | City of Bastrop 
ARTICLE 6. SPECIAL 

ARTICLE 6. SPECIAL 
Sec. 6.3 Allowed Uses 



6.3.1 General Provisions 
A.	 Use Categories 
1. 	
In order to regulate use, categories of uses have been established. 

2. 	
Use categories provide a systematic basis for assigning land uses to ap­propriate categories with other, similar uses. 

3. 	
Use categories classify land uses and activities based on common functional, product, or physical characteristics. Characteristics include the type and amount of activity, the hours of operation, the type of cus­tomers or residents, how goods or services are sold or delivered, likely impact on surrounding properties, and site conditions. 


B. Principal Uses 
Allowed principal uses by district are listed in the Allowed Use Table below. Principal uses are grouped into use categories outlined in Sec. 7.2, Use Cat­egories. The uses listed are not an exhaustive list. When a proposed use is not identi.ed on the permitted use table or in Article 7, Use Provisions, the Administrator may determine that the proposed use is su.  ciently similar to an identi. ed use. 
C. Accessory Uses 
Accessory uses are allowed in conjunction with an allowed principal use as 
set forth in Sec. 7.8, Accessory Uses . 
D.	 Temporary Uses 
Temporary uses are allowed as set forth in Sec. 7.9, Temporary Uses . 


6.3.2 Allowed Use Table 
The allowed use table establishes the uses allowed within each district and any conditions or use standards associated with each use. The allowed use table key is set forth below. 
SEC. 6.3 ALLOWED USES 
6.3.2 Allowed Use Table 

A. 	Allowed by Right (.) 
Indicates a use is allowed by right in the respective district subject to any use standard. Such use is also subject to all other applicable requirements of this zoning development code. 
B. Approved Concept Plan (¼) 
Indicates a use may be allowed in the respective district only where ap­proved by the Bastrop City Council as part of an approved concept plan in accordance with 16.2.12, Planned Development. Unless otherwise modi.ed by the Bastrop City Council, uses allowed as part of an approved concept plan are subject to all other applicable requirements of this zoning develop­ment code, including all applicable use standards. 
C. Special Use Permit (.) 
Indicates a use may be allowed in the respective district only where approved by the Bastrop Planning Commission in accordance with 16.2.9, Special Use Permit. Special use permits are subject to all other applicable requirements of this zoning development code, including all applicable use standards. 
D.	 Blank Cell 
A blank cell indicates that a use is not allowed in the respective district. 
E. Use Standard 
A cross-reference to any associated use standard established in Sec. 7.3, Residential Use Standards, through Sec. 7.7,Open Use Standards. Where no cross-reference is shown, no additional use standard applies. 
Zoning Development Code | 6-3 

SEC. 6.3 ALLOWED USES 
ARTICLE 6. SPECIAL 

6.3.2 Allowed Use Table 
ALLOWED USE TABLE 


SP-CD  SP-HI  SP-PID  Use Standard  

Residential Use Categories All household living:  
Detached living  
Attached living  
Multifamily living  
Upper-story living  •  7.3.4  
Manufactured home park  
All group living  •  7.3.5  
All social service  •  

Public Use Categories All civic  •  •  •  7.4.1  
All parks & open space  •  •  •  7.4.2  
All minor utilities  •  •  •  7.4.3  
All major utilities  •  •  •  7.4.4  

Commerce Use Categories All commercial parking  •  •  
All day care  •  7.5.1  
All indoor recreation except as listed below:  
Sexually oriented business  •  7.5.2.A  
All medical  •  
All o.  ce  •  •  
All outdoor recreation, except as listed below:  •  7.5.4  
Campground, travel trailer park, RV park  •  7.5.4.B  
Horse stable, riding academy equestrian center  •  7.5.4.C  
Hunting and . shing preserve  •  7.5.4.D  
All overnight lodging except as listed below: Bed and breakfast  •  
All passenger terminal  •  •  •  
All personal service, except as listed below:  •  •  7.5.5  
All animal care  •  •  7.5.5.A  

May be allowed by the Bastrop City Council as part 
KEY: • Allowed by right • 
of an approved concept plan 
• 

Allowed by special use permit Blank Cell = Not Allowed 
6-4 | City of Bastrop 
SEC. 6.3 ALLOWED USES 


ARTICLE 6. SPECIAL 
6.3.2 Allowed Use Table 
ALLOWED USE TABLE 


SP-CD  SP-HI  SP-PID  Use Standard  

Commerce Use Categories (continued) All restaurant/bar  •  •  •  7.5.6  
All retail sales except as listed below:  
Art studio/gallery  
Convenience store w/ gas  •  •  7.5.7.B  
Convenience store w/o gas  •  •  7.5.7.C  
Dry cleaning  •  7.5.7.E  
All vehicle sales All water-oriented sales and service  • •  • •  7.5.8  

Industrial Use Categories All heavy industrial  •  •  •  7.6.1  
All light industrial  •  •  •  
All research & development  •  •  •  
All self-service storage  •  •  7.6.2  
All vehicle service  •  •  7.6.3  
All warehouse & distribution  •  •  
All waste-related service except as listed below:  •  •  7.6.4  
Land.ll  •  •  7.6.4.A  
Recycling facility  •  •  
All wholesale trade  •  •  

Open Use Categories All agriculture, except as listed below:  •  •  •  7.7.1  
Agricultural airstrip  •  •  •  
Resource extraction  •  •  •  

May be allowed by the Bastrop City Council as part 
KEY: • Allowed by right • 

of an approved concept plan 
• 

Allowed by special use permit Blank Cell = Not Allowed 
Zoning Development Code | 6-5 

This page left intentionally blank 
6-6 | City of Bastrop 
SEC. 6.4 BUILDING TYPES 

ARTICLE 6. SPECIAL 

Single-Side Yard Attached Row Apartment General Large Format



SPECIAL PURPOSE .SP. 

Family House House House House House Apartment Shopfront Shopfront Workshop Civic Open Lot 
Community (SP-CD)  •  •  
Heavy Industrial (SP-HI)  •  •  •  •  •  
Planned Industrial Development (SP-PID)  •  •  •  •  •  

.

KEY: • Allowed by right • May be allowed by Bastop City Council as part of an approved concept plan Allowed by special use permit Blank cell = Not allowed 
Zoning Development Code | 6-7 
ARTICLE 6. SPECIAL 

6.4.1 General Shopfront 
6.4.1 General Shopfront 

A building type primarily intended for ground .oor commercial uses with upper-story residential or o.ces uses in multi-story buildings. Storefront windows are provided on the ground .oor to encourage interaction between the pedestrian and the ground story space. Primary entrances are prominent and street facing and are 
spaced at regular intervals along the street edge. 


SITE SP-HI Lot 

A Area (min sf) 22,500 
B Width (min) 150' Principal Structure Setbacks 

C Primary street (min) 15' 
D Side street (min) 15' 
E Setback abutting a RS-, RT- district (min) 35' 
E Setback abutting any other district (min) 25' 
F Setback abutting alley (min) 60' 
Build-to 

G Primary street build-to (min/max) 15' / 180' 

H Building width in primary build-to (min) 50% 

I Side street build-to (min/max) 15' / 180' 

J Building width in side build-to (min) n/a 

Parking Location 

K Primary street setback (min) 15' 
L Side street setback (min) 15' 
M Setback abutting a RS-, RT- district (min) 40' 
M Setback abutting any other district (min) 30' 
N Setback abutting alley (min) 0' 
Open Space 

O Building coverage (max) 60% 

6-8 | City of Bastrop 
ARTICLE 6. SPECIAL 
6.4.1 General Shopfront 
BUILDING FORM SP-HI Principal Structure 

P Stories (max) 3 
P Height (max) 50' Ground story elevation (min)/ 

0"/12'
Ground story .oor height (min) 

X Building length (max) n/a 

Transparency 

R Ground story (min) 30% 
S Upper story (min) 20% 
T Blank wall area (max) 60' 
Building Entrance 

U Street facing entrance required no 
V Street facing entrance spacing n/a 


Zoning Development Code | 6-9 
ARTICLE 6. SPECIAL 

6.4.2 Large Format Shopfront 

6.4.2 Large Format Shopfront 

A building type intended primarily for large format single-story retail. Storefront windows are provided to encourage interaction between the pedestrian and the 
ground story space. Primary entrances are prominent and street facing. 


SITE SP-HI Lot 

A Area (min sf) 22,500 
B Width (min) 150' Principal Structure Setbacks 

C Primary street (min) 15' 
D Side street (min) 15' 
E Setback abutting a RS-, RT- district (min) 35' 
E Setback abutting any other district (min) 25' 
F Setback abutting alley (min) 60' 
Build-to 

G Primary street build-to (min/max) 15' / 180' 

H Building width in primary build-to (min) 50% 

I Side street build-to (min/max) 15' / 180' 

J Building width in side build-to (min) n/a 

Parking Location 

K Primary street setback (min) 15' 
L Side street setback (min) 15' 
M Setback abutting a RS-, RT- district (min) 40' 
M Setback abutting any other district (min) 30' 
N Setback abutting alley (min) 0' 
Open Space 

O Building coverage (max) 60% 

6-10 | City of Bastrop 
ARTICLE 6. SPECIAL 
6.4.2 Large Format Shopfront 
BUILDING FORM SP-HI Principal Structure 

P Stories (max) 1 
P Height (max) 25' 
Q Ground story elevation (min) 0" 
R Ground story .oor height (min) 15' 
X Building length (max) 300' 
Transparency 

S Ground story (min) 30% 
T Blank wall area (max) 60' 
Building Entrance 

U Street facing entrance required no 
V Street facing entrance spacing n/a 


Zoning Development Code | 6-11 
ARTICLE 6. SPECIAL 

6.4.3 Workshop 

6.4.3 Workshop 

A building type intended primarily for industrial, manufacturing and employment uses. To the extent possible building entrances should face the street. Ground .oor 
transparency is limited due the intensive nature of the work inside. May include bay doors for vehicles. 

SITE SP-HI Lot 

A Area (min sf) 2 acre 
B Width (min) 200' Principal Structure Setbacks 

C Primary street (min) 60' 
D Side street (min) 45' 
E Setback abutting another lot (min) 25' 
F Rear setback (min) 5' 
Build-to 

G Primary street build-to (min/max) 60' / 180' 

H Building width in primary build-to (min) 50% 

I Side street build-to (min/max) 45' / 180' 

J Building width in side build-to (min) 30% 

Parking Location 

K Primary street setback (min) 15' 
L Side street setback (min) 15' 
M Setback abutting another lot (min) 40' 
N Setback abutting alley (min) 0' 
Open Space 

O Building coverage (max) 60% 

6-12 | City of Bastrop 
ARTICLE 6. SPECIAL 
6.4.3 Workshop 
BUILDING FORM SP-HI Principal Structure 

P Stories (max) 5 
P Height (max) 70' 
Q Ground story elevation (min) 0" 
Transparency 

R Ground story (min) 30% 
S Blank wall area (max) 60' 
Building Entrance 

T Street facing entrance required no 


Zoning Development Code | 6-13 
ARTICLE 6. SPECIAL 

6.4.4 Civic 

6.4.4 Civic 

A building type containing community or public uses that serve the surrounding community. Typically, civic buildings are sited adjoining or surrounded by civic spaces 
or they provide a visual landmark by being placed at the axial termination of a street. 

SITE All Districts Lot 

A Area (min sf) 2 acre 
B Width (min) 200' 
Principal Structure Setbacks 

C Front (min) 50' 

D Side, street (min) 50' 

E Side, interior (min) 30' 

F Rear (min) 50' 
Parking Location 

G Street setback (min) 50' 
H Side interior setback (min) 30' 

I Rear setback (min) 20' Open Space 

J Building coverage (max) 30% 

6-14 | City of Bastrop 
SEC. 6.4 BUILDING TYPES 

ARTICLE 6. SPECIAL 
6.4.4 Civic 
BUILDING FORM All Districts Principal Structure 

K Stories (max) 3 
K Height (max) 50' 


Zoning Development Code | 6-15 
ARTICLE 6. SPECIAL 

6.4.5 Open Lot 

6.4.5 Open Lot 

An open lot is designed to accommodate open space or natural areas worthy of preservation. An open lot is intended primarily to provide for public or private open 
space. Open space lots may also be used to accommodate uses with large areas of open space and a modest percentage of building coverage. 

SITE All Districts Lot 

A Area (min sf) 2 acres 
B Width (min) 200' 
Principal Structure Setbacks 

C Front (min) 75' 

D Side, street (min) 75' 

E Side, interior (min) 50' 

F Rear (min) 50' 
Parking Location 

G Street setback (min) 75' 
H Side interior setback (min) 50' 

I Rear setback (min) 50' Open Space 

J Building coverage (max) 2% 

6-16 | City of Bastrop 
SEC. 6.4 BUILDING TYPES 

ARTICLE 6. SPECIAL 
6.4.5 Open Lot 
BUILDING FORM All Districts Principal Structure 

K Stories (max) n/a 
K Height (max) 35' 


Zoning Development Code | 6-17 


SEC. 6.5 SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
6.5.1 Special Planned Industrial Development (SP-PID) 
Sec. 6.5 Special Development Standards 




6.5.1 Special Planned Industrial Development (SP-PID) 
A.	 General Provisions 
1. 	The Bastrop City Council may approve a special planned industrial de­velopment subject to the following standards and the process in 16.2.12 Procedures, Planned Development. The special planned industrial development is intended to facilitate the use of innovative techniques of land development and site design concepts that achieve a high level of environmental sensitivity, energy e.ciency, aesthetics, quality develop­ment and other community goals by: 
a. 	
Reducing or eliminating the in.exibility that may result from strict application of building type standards and permitted uses; and 

b. 	
Promoting quality urban design and environmentally sensitive development by allowing development to take advantage of special site characteristics, locations and land uses; and 

c. 	
Requiring compliance with development standards that re. ect the high level of investment in adjoining lands. 


2. 	Each application for approval of a special planned industrial develop­ment shall include a statement by the applicant describing: 
a. 	
How the proposed development departs from the otherwise appli­cable standards of this zoning development code; and 

b. 	
How the proposed development is an improvement over what would be required under otherwise applicable development regulations. 


B. Minimum Size 
No special planned industrial development less than 20 acres in size is allowed. 
C. Allowed DeviaOons 
Unless otherwise expressly approved by the Bastrop City Council as part of the approved rezoning and concept plan, all planned industrial develop­ments shall be subject to all applicable standards of this zoning develop­

6-18 | City of Bastrop 
ARTICLE 6. SPECIAL 

ment code. In order to approve modi.cations of otherwise applicable stan­dards, the Bastrop City Council must . nd that: 
1. 	
Requested deviations from applicable building type standards, uses, or other development standards that otherwise would apply are justi.ed by the compensating bene.ts of the planned unit development; 

2. 	
The planned industrial development includes adequate provisions for all necessary services including but not limited to utility service, wastewa­ter service, and emergency vehicle access. 





ARTICLE 7. USE PROVISIONS 

This page left intentionally blank 
ARTICLE 7. USE PROVISIONS 
Sec. 7.1 General Provisions  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .7-1 
7.1.1 Use Categories .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  7-1 
7.1.2 Principal Uses .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 7-1 
7.1.3 Accessory Uses .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  7-1 
7.1.4 Temporary Uses .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  7-1 
7.1.5 Uses Not Listed .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 7-1 
Sec. 7.2 Use Categories  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .7-2 
7.2.1 Residential Use Categories .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  7-2 
7.2.2 Public Use Categories .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 7-2 
7.2.3 Commerce Use Categories .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  7-3 
7.2.4 Industrial Use Categories .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 7-5 
7.2.5 Open Use Categories  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 7-7 
Sec. 7.3 ResidenOal Use Standards .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .7-8 
7.3.1 Detached Living .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  7-8 
7.3.2 Attached Living .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 7-8 
7.3.3 Multifamily Living .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  7-8 
7.3.4 Upper Story Living .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 7-8 
7.3.5 Manufactured Home Park .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  7-8 
7.3.6 Group Living .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 7-9 
7.3.7 Mobile Homes .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  7-9 
Sec. 7.4 Public Use Standards .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .7-9 
7.4.1 Civic .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 7-9 
7.4.2 Parks and Open Space  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .7-10 
7.4.3 Minor Utilities  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .7-10 
7.4.4 Major Utilities  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .7-11 
Supp. No. 1 
Sec. 7.5 Commerce Use Standards .  .  .  .  .  .  . 7-13 
7.5.1 Day Care  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .7-13 
7.5.2 Indoor Recreation .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .7-13 
7.5.3 O.ce  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .7-14 
7.5.4 Outdoor Recreation .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .7-14 
7.5.5 Personal Service .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .7-15 
7.5.6 Restaurant/Bar .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .7-15 
7.5.7 Retail Sales .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .7-16 
7.5.8 Vehicle Sales .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 7-17 
Sec. 7.6 Industrial Use Standards .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 7-18 
7.6.1 Heavy Industrial .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .7-18 
7.6.2 Self-service Storage .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .7-19 
7.6.3 Vehicle Service .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .7-19 
7.6.4 Waste Related Services .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .7-19 
Sec. 7.7 Open Use Standards .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 7-21 
7.7.1 Agriculture  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .7-21 
Sec. 7.8 Accessory Uses .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 7-21 
7.8.1 General  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .7-21 
7.8.2 Home Occupations .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .7-22 
7.8.3 Accessory Dwellings Units .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .7-23 
7.8.4 Drive-Through Facilities  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .7-23 
7.8.5 Keeping of Livestock in Residential Districts  .  .  .  .  . 7-23 
Sec. 7.9 Temporary Uses .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 7-24 
7.9.1 Temporary Uses Exempt from Permit  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .7-24 
7.9.2 Temporary Use Permit Required  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .7-24 
7.9.3 Mobile Home or Trailer for Temporary Use  .  .  .  .  .  .7-25 
7.9.4 Real Estate Development Projects .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .7-25 
This page left intentionally blank 
Sec. 7.1 General Provisions 




7.1.1 Use Categories 
A. 	Use categories provide a systematic basis for assigning land uses to appro­priate development types. Use categories classify land uses and activities based on common functional, product, or physical characteristics. 
B. 	In order to regulate uses more e.ciently, categories of uses have been established. 
C. 	Characteristics include the type and amount of activity, the hours of opera­tion, the type of customers or residents, how goods or services are sold or delivered, likely impact on surrounding properties, and site conditions. 

7.1.2 Principal Uses 
Principal uses are grouped into categories of uses. The use categories used in the Allowed Use Tables for each context are listed in Sec. 7.2, Use Categories. The example uses listed are not an exhaustive list. The Administrator has the responsibility for cat­egorizing uses. 

7.1.3 Accessory Uses 
Accessory uses are allowed in conjunction with an allowed principal use as set forth in Sec. 7.8, Accessory Uses. 

7.1.4 Temporary Uses 
Temporary uses are allowed as set forth in Sec. 7.9, Temporary Uses. 

7.1.5 Uses Not Listed 
A. 	The Administrator is responsible for categorizing all uses. If a proposed use is not listed in a use category, but is similar to a listed use, the Administrator may place the proposed use under that use category. 
B. 	When determining whether a proposed use is similar to a listed use in Sec. 7.2, Use Categories, the Administrator will consider the following criteria: 
1. 	
The actual or projected characteristics of the proposed use; 

2. 	
The relative amount of site area or .oor area and equipment devoted to the proposed use; 


SEC. 7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 
7.1.5 Uses Not Listed 
3. 	
Relative amounts of sales; 

4. 	
The customer type; 

5. 	
The relative number of employees; 

6. 	
Hours of operation; 

7. 	
Building and site arrangement; 

8. 	
Types of vehicles used and their parking requirements; 

9. 	
The number of vehicle trips generated; 

10.
 Signs; 

11. 
How the proposed use is advertised; 

12. 
The likely impact on surrounding properties; and 

13. 
Whether the activity is likely to be independent of the other activities on the site. 



SEC. 7.2 USE CATEGORIES 
7.2.1 ResidenOal Use Categories 

Sec. 7.2 Use Categories 
7.2.1 ResidenOal Use Categories 
A. Household Living 
Residential occupancy of a dwelling unit by a household on a monthly or longer basis in structures with self-contained dwelling units, including kitchens. 

Example Uses: 
Detached living (Example: Single-Family House and Side Yard House) 
Attached living (Example: Attached House and Row House) 
Multifamily living (Example: Apartment House and Apartment) 
Upper story residential 
Manufactured home parks 


B. Group Living 
Residential occupancy of a structure by a group of people that does not meet the de.nition of household living. Tenancy is usually arranged on a monthly or longer basis. Generally, group living facilities have a common eating area for residents, and residents may receive care or training. 
Example Uses: 
Assisted living facility Boarding house, rooming house, lodging house Congregate care facility Fraternity, sorority, dormitory Group residential facility for more than eight mentally handicapped depen­
dent persons 
Hospice 
Monastery, convent 
Nursing or care home 
Single room occupancy 


C. Social Service 
Uses that primarily provide treatment of those with psychiatric, alcohol, or drug problems, and transient housing related to social service programs. 

7-2 | City of Bastrop 
ARTICLE 7. USE PROVISIONS 


Example Uses: 
Adult rehabilitation center Group shelter Overnight general purpose shelter Rehabilitative clinic Social service facility, soup kitchen, transient lodging, homeless shelter Transitional home, halfway house 


7.2.2 Public Use Categories 
A. Civic 
Places of public assembly that provide ongoing life safety, educational and cultural services to the general public, as well as meeting areas for religious practice. 
Example Uses: 
College, community college, university 
Convention center 
Museum, library 
Places of worship including church, mosque, synagogue, temple 
Police, .re, EMS station, substation 
Post o.  ce 
Public or private (K-12) school 
Neighborhood arts center 


B. Parks & Open Space 
Uses focusing on public gathering areas for passive or active outdoor recre­ation, and having few structures. 
Example Uses: 
Botanical garden, nature preserve, recreational trail Cemetery, mausoleum, columbarium, memorial park Square, green, plaza, neighborhood park, tot lot, community garden, farm­ers market, neighborhood recreational .elds, skate park 

C. UOliOes 
Public or private infrastructure serving a limited area with no on-site 
personnel (minor utility) or serving the general community with on-site 
personnel (major utility). 
Example Uses: 
Minor utilities, including on-site stormwater retention or detention facility, neighborhood-serving telephone exchange/switching center, gas/electric/ telephone/cable transmission lines, amateur radio operator tower (65 feet or less), stealth wireless communication device, water and wastewater pump station or lift station, gas gates, reservoir, control structure, drain­age well, water supply water well. 
Major utilities, including aeration facility, electrical substation, electric or gas generation plant, .lter bed, railroad right-of-way, non-stealth wire­less communication towers and facilities, transmission towers, waste treatment plant, water pumping facility, water tower or tank. 


7.2.3 Commerce Use Categories 
A. Commercial Parking 
Facilities that provide parking not accessory to a principal use, for which a fee may or may not be charged. 
Example Uses: 
Short- and long-term fee parking facility 
Park-and-ride facility 
Motor vehicle parking lot 
Surface parking lot 

B. Day Care 
Uses providing care, protection, and supervision of children or adults on a 
regular basis away from their primary residence. Care is typically provided 
to a given individual for fewer than 18 hours each day, although the facility 
may be open 24 hours each day. 
Example Uses: 
Adult day care center 
Day care center for children 
Nursery school, preschool 
SEC. 7.2 USE CATEGORIES 
7.2.3 Commerce Use Categories 
Recreational program, before- and after-school 
Small group child care center 


C. Indoor RecreaOon 
Generally commercial uses, varying in size, providing daily or regularly scheduled recreation-oriented activities in an indoor setting. 
Example Uses: 
Amusement center, game arcade, children’s amusement center 
Amusement arcade 
Athletic, tennis, swim or health club, exercise salon 
Billiard hall, pool hall 
Bingo parlor 
Bowling alley 
Club or lodge, membership club 
Dance hall 
Dance, martial arts, music studio or classroom 
Gymnastic facility, indoor sports academy 
Motor track 
Movie or other theater 
Sexually Oriented Business 
Skating rink 


D. Medical 
Uses providing medical or surgical care to patients. Some uses may o.er overnight care. 
Example Uses: 
Ambulatory surgical center 
Blood plasma donation center, medical or dental laboratory 
Hospital, urgent care or emergency medical o.ce 
Medical, dental o.ce or chiropractor, medical practitioner 
Medical clinic 
Medical day care 


E. O.ce 
Activities conducted in an o.ce setting and generally focusing on business, professional or . nancial services. 

SEC. 7.2 USE CATEGORIES 
7.2.3 Commerce Use Categories 
Example Uses: 
O.ces including advertising, business management consulting, data pro­cessing, collection agency, real estate or insurance agent, professional service such as lawyer, accountant, bookkeeper, engineer, architect, sales o.  ce, travel agency 
Financial services such as lender, investment or brokerage house, bank, call 
center, bail bonds 
Counseling in an o.  ce setting 
City, county, state, government o.  ce 
Radio, TV or recording studio, utility o.  ce 
Trade, vocational, business school 


F. Outdoor RecreaOon 
Generally commercial uses, varying in size, providing daily or regularly scheduled recreation-oriented activities. Such activities may take place wholly outdoors or within a number of outdoor structures. 
Example Uses: 
Drive-in theater Campground, travel trailer park, recreational vehicle park Executive par three golf course Extreme sports such as paintball, BMX or skateboarding facility Golf course, country club, clubhouse Outdoor entertainment activity such as batting cage, golf driving range, 
mini-amusement park, miniature golf facility, water park 
Hunting and . shing preserves 
Horse stable, riding academy, equestrian center 
Outdoor shooting range 
Sports academy for active recreational or competitive sports 
Stadium, arena, commercial amphitheater 


G. Overnight Lodging 
Accommodations arranged for short term stays of less than 30 days for rent or lease. 


Example Uses: 
Apartment hotel Hotel, motel, inn, extended-stay facility, bed and breakfast, youth hostel Tourist home 

7-4 | City of Bastrop 
ARTICLE 7. USE PROVISIONS 

H. Passenger Terminal 
Public or commercial facilities for the takeo. and landing of airplanes and helicopters, and facilities for bus, taxi or limo service. 
Example Uses: 
Airport, heliport 
Bus passenger terminal, multi-modal facility 
Rail station or stop 
Taxi dispatch center, limousine service 


I. Personal Service 
Facilities involved in providing personal services or repair services to the general public. 
Example Uses: 
Animal care (animal grooming, animal hospital, veterinary clinic, pet clinic, 
animal boarding place, animal shelter, kennel, doggy day care) Laundromat, Funeral home, funeral parlor, mortuary, undertaking establishment, com­
mercial wedding chapel Hair, nail, tanning, massage therapy and personal care service, barber, beauty shop Photocopy, blueprint, package shipping and quick-sign service, printing and publishing, security service Tattoo/body piercing shop, palmist, psychic, medium, fortune telling, mas­sage therapy Appliance, bicycle, canvas product , clock, computer, jewelry, musical in­strument, o.ce equipment, radio, shoe, television or watch repair Taxidermist, tailor, milliner, upholsterer, locksmith 

J. Restaurant/Bar 
Establishments that prepare and sell food or drink for on- or o.-premise consumption. 
Example Uses: 
Bar, tavern, cocktail lounge, nightclub, brew pub 
Eating and drinking establishment 
Food truck or trailer 
Pizza delivery facility 
Restaurant, fast-food restaurant, take-out, yogurt or ice cream shop 


K. Retail Sales 
Facilities involved in the sale, lease, or rental of new or used products. 
Example Uses: 
Sale, lease or rental of alcoholic beverages, antiques, appliances, art supplies, baked goods, bicycles, books, building supplies, cameras, carpet and .oor coverings, crafts, clothing, computers, convenience goods, dry goods, electronic equipment, fabric, .owers, fuel (including gasoline and diesel fuel), furniture, garden supplies, gifts or novelties, groceries, hardware, home improvement, household products, jewelry, medical supplies, music, musical instruments, o.ce supplies, package shipping, pets, pet supplies, pharmaceuticals, photo .nishing, picture frames, plants, printed materials, produce, souvenirs, sporting goods, stationery, tobacco, used or second­hand goods, vehicle parts and accessories, videos, and related products 
Art studio, gallery 
Check cashing 
Convenience store (with gas) 
Convenience store (without gas) 
Corner Store 
Drop-in child care center 
Dry-cleaning or laundry drop-o. facility 
Pawnshop 
Seafood market, farm stand 

L. Vehicle Sales 
Direct sales, rental or leasing of passenger vehicles, light and medium trucks, and other consumer motor vehicles such as motorcycles, boats, and recreational vehicles. 


Example Uses: 
Boats and other recreational vehicle sales 
Vehicle sales, rental, or leasing 


M. Water-Oriented 
Uses that require direct access to navigable waters. 
Example Uses: 
Boat livery 
Dock or pier (commercial) 
Dry storage of boats 
SEC. 7.2 USE CATEGORIES 
7.2.4 Industrial Use Categories 
Ferry/water taxi 
Marina 

Wet storage of boats (commercial) 



7.2.4 Industrial Use Categories 
A. Heavy Industrial 
Firms involved in research and development activities without light fabrica­
tion and assembly operations; limited industrial/manufacturing activities. 
The uses emphasize industrial businesses, and sale of heavier equipment. 
Factory production and industrial yards are located here. Sales to the gen­
eral public are limited. 
Example Uses: 
Any use that is potentially dangerous, noxious or o.ensive to neighboring uses in the district or those who pass on public ways by reason of smoke, odor, noise, glare, fumes, gas, vibration, threat of .re or explosion, emis­sion of particulate matter, interference with radio, television reception, radiation or any other likely cause 
Asbestos, radioactive materials 
Animal processing, packing, treating, and storage, livestock or poultry slaughtering, concentrate plant, processing of food and related products, production of lumber, tobacco, chemical, rubber, leather, clay, bone, paper, pulp, plastic, stone, or glass materials or products, production or fabrication of metals or metal products including enameling and galvaniz­ing, Automobile dismantlers and recyclers, commercial feed lot 
Bulk storage of .ammable liquids, chemical, cosmetics, drug, soap, paints, 
fertilizers and abrasive products 
Concrete batching and asphalt processing and manufacture, batch plant 
Detention center, jail, prison 
Earth moving, heavy construction equipment, transportation equipment 
Explosives, fabricated metal products and machinery 
Impound lot, wrecker service includes vehicle wreckers, auto storage, 
wrecking, junk or salvage yard Labor hall, leather and leather products includes tanning and .nishing Petroleum, lique.ed petroleum gas and coal products and re.ning Primary metal manufacturing Pulp mill, rubber and plastic products, rubber manufacturing 

SEC. 7.2 USE CATEGORIES 
7.2.4 Industrial Use Categories 
Scrap metal processors, sawmill, secondary materials dealers 
Trailer leasing, auction vehicle, broker vehicle, pawn shop vehicle 
Tire recapping, tobacco products, transportation equipment 


B. Light Industrial 
Manufacturing, assembly, repair or servicing of industrial, business, or con­sumer machinery, equipment, products, or by-products mainly by providing centralized services for separate retail outlets. Contractors and building maintenance services and similar uses perform services o.-site. Few cus­tomers, especially the general public, come to the facility. 
Example Uses: 
Brewery, winery Bus or rail transit vehicle maintenance or storage facility Contractors storage including janitorial and building maintenance service, 
exterminator, or other maintenance yard or facility, building, heating, plumbing, landscaping or electrical contractor and others who perform services o.-site, but store equipment and materials or perform fabrica­tion or similar work on-site 
Crematorium, pet crematorium Electronics service center Food beverage products except animal slaughter, stockyards Lawn, tree or garden service Laundry, dry-cleaning, and carpet cleaning plants Leather and leather products except tanning and .nishing Lumberyard and wood products, sheet metal shop, soft drink bottling Manufactured or modular housing sales Stone, clay, glass, and concrete products Bulk mailing service Clothing, textile apparel manufacturing O.  ce showroom/warehouse Printing, publishing, and lithography Production of artwork and toys, sign-making, movie production facility, 
photo-. nishing laboratory Repair of scienti.c or professional instruments and electric motors Sheet metal, welding, machine, tool repair shop or studio Woodworking, including cabinet makers and furniture manufacturing 

7-6 | City of Bastrop 
ARTICLE 7. USE PROVISIONS 

C. Research and Development 
A facility focused primarily on the research and development of new prod­ucts. 

Example Uses: 
Laboratories, o.ces, and other facilities used for research and development by or for any individual, organization, or concern, whether public or pri­vate; prototype production facilities that manufacture a limited amount of a product in order to fully investigate the merits of such a product; pilot plants used to test manufacturing processes planned for use in produc­tion elsewhere; production facilities and operations with a high degree of scienti.c input; facilities and operations in which the input of science, technology, research, and other forms of concepts or ideas constitute a major element of the value added by manufacture per unit of product. 

D. Self-Service Storage 
Facilities providing separate storage areas for personal or business use 
designed to allow private access by the tenant for storing or removing 
personal property. 
Example Uses: 
Warehouse, self-service, fully enclosed indoor multi-story storage, mini-warehouse 

E. Vehicle Service 
Repair and service to passenger vehicles, light and medium trucks, and 
other consumer motor vehicles such as motorcycles, boats, and recreation­al vehicles. 


Example Uses: 
Audio and alarm system installation, custom accessories, quick lubrication facilities, auto detailing, minor scratch and dent repair, bedliner instal­lation, glass repair/replacement, tire sales and mounting, full- or self-service vehicle wash 
Alignment shop, body shop, engine replacement or overhaul, repair of cars, trucks, RVs and boats, repair or replacement of brakes, shocks, mu.ers and transmissions 
Service station 
Towing service, truck service, vehicle towing station 


F. Warehouse and DistribuOon 
Facilities involved in the storage or movement of goods for themselves or other .rms. Goods are generally delivered to other .rms or the . nal con­sumer with little on-site sales activity to customers. 
Example Uses: 
Bulk storage, including non.ammable liquids, cold storage plants, including frozen food lockers, household moving and general freight storage, sepa­rate warehouse used by retail store such as furniture or appliance store 
Bus barn Commercial packing for fruits and vegetables Distribution facility, central postal facility Freight, service facility Outdoor storage yard Parcel services Railroad switching yard, freight terminal, piggyback yard Transfer and storage business where there are no individual storage areas 
or where employees are the primary movers of the goods to be stored or 
transferred 
Trailer storage, drop o. lot 
Truck or motor freight terminal, service facility 
Trucking operation 
Warehouse 


G. Waste-Related Service 
Characterized by uses that receive solid or liquid wastes from others for transfer to another location and uses that collect sanitary wastes or that manufacture or produce goods or energy from the composting of organic material. 
Example Uses: 
Animal waste processing Garbage or refuse collection service (o.  ce and truck .eet) Land.ll Manufacture and production of goods from composting organic material Recycling facility including recyclable material storage, recycling drop-o. 
facility, recycling buy-back center, recycling collection center 
Solid or liquid waste transfer station, waste incineration 

SEC. 7.2 USE CATEGORIES 
7.2.5 Open Use Categories 

H. Wholesale Trade 
Facilities involved in the sale, lease, or rent of products to industrial, institu­tional or commercial businesses only. The use emphasizes on-site sales or order-taking and often includes display areas. Businesses may or may not be open to the general public, but sales to the general public are limited. Products may be picked up on-site or delivered to the customer. 
Example Uses: 
Mail-order house 
Sale or rental of machinery, equipment, heavy equipment, building materi­als, special trade tools, welding supplies, machine parts, electrical sup­plies, plumbing supplies, janitorial supplies, restaurant equipment, and store .xtures 
Wholesale sales of food, clothing, auto parts, building hardware and similar products 



7.2.5 Open Use Categories 
A. Agriculture 
Characterized by uses that create or preserve areas intended primarily for the raising of animals and crops, conservation, and the secondary industries associated with agricultural production. 
Example Uses: 
Agricultural airstrip 
Animal raising including horses, hogs, cows, sheep, goats, and swine, poul­try, rabbits, and other small animals, apiculture, aquaculture, dairying, personal or commercial animal breeding and development 
Crop production, soil preparation, agricultural services, large animal and veterinary services, farm labor and management services Floriculture, horticulture, pasturage, row and .eld crops, viticulture, tree or 
sod farm, silviculture, sale of agriculture products 
Fish hatcheries and preserves 
Grain, fruit, .eld crop and vegetable cultivation and storage 
Hunting, trapping and game propagation 
Livestock, horse, dairy, poultry and egg products 
Livestock auction 
Milk processing plant 
Packing house for fruits or vegetables 


SEC. 7.3 RESIDENTIAL USE STANDARDS 
7.3.1 Detached Living 
Plant nursery, plant nursery with landscape supply 
Poultry slaughtering and dressing 
Timber tracts, forest nursery gathering of forest products 


B. Resource ExtracOon 
Characterized by uses that extract minerals and other solids and liquids from land. 
Example Uses: 
Dredging, earth extraction, clearing or grading (timber cutting) 
Extraction of phosphate or minerals 
Extraction of sand or gravel, borrow pit, metal, sand stone, gravel clay, 

mining and other related processing 
Stockpiling of sand, gravel, or other aggregate materials 




Sec. 7.3 ResidenOal Use Standards 
7.3.1 Detached Living 
Detached living may take place within the Single-Family House and Side Yard House building types only. 

7.3.2 A. ached Living 
Attached living may take place within the Attached House and Row House building types only. 

7.3.3 MulO family Living 
Multifamily living may take place within the Apartment House, Apartment and General Shopfront building types only. 

7.3.4 Upper Story Living 
Upper story living may take place within the General Shopfront and Workshop building types. 
7-8 	| City of Bastrop 
ARTICLE 7. USE PROVISIONS 


7.3.5 Manufactured Home Park 
A.	 General 
Manufactured Home Parks are de.ned as a parcel of land under single own­ership which has been planned and improved for the placement of three or more manufactured or mobile homes for more or less permanent duration. A manufactured home park may include travel trailer accommodations pro­vided that no more than 15% of the park is used for this purpose. Manufac­tured home parks may be allowed in the Suburban context by the Planning Commission as a special use permit under 16.2.9, Special Use Permit. 

B. 	Standards 
The following standards shall apply to all manufactured home parks: 
1. 	
Each mobile home park shall consist of a minimum of three acres and shall be designed to accommodate a minimum of ten manufactured or mobile homes. No park shall exceed a maximum density of ten mobile homes per acre. The minimum lot size per mobile home is 3,000 square feet with a minimum lot width of 30 feet. There shall be a minimum distance of 20 feet between each unit. 

2. 	
All structures including but not limited to: buildings; parking pads; and parking spaces shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet from all property lines. The maximum height of all structures is 40 feet. 

3. 	
A minimum of 1 ½ parking spaces shall be provided per unit. At least one parking space must be located in the area designated as part of a manu­factured or mobile home space. 

4. 	
Access and circulation within the manufactured home park shall be pro­vided by streets, public or private, or driveways. Access must be provided to each space. Circulation plans must be approved by the Administrator.  Private streets must have a minimum width of 18 feet, and shall be pro­vided with a permanent dust free surface that shall be durable and well drained under normal use and weather conditions. 

5. 	
Other facilities or structures within the park for uses accessory to the operation of the park, such as laundries, storage, garages, guest parking, park o.ces, and recreational facilities are allowed subject to the setback and height requirements. Any accessory use that draws its trade from 



outside the park is prohibited. Not less than ten percent of the gross site area shall be devoted to recreational facilities, generally provided in a central location or, in larger parks, decentralized.  A recreation area may include space for buildings serving as recreational centers, park areas, playgrounds, tennis courts and swimming pools. Recreational areas must be available for the use of all park residents. 
6. 	
When located adjacent to a residential district or ground . oor residen­tial use, a low intensity bu.er as established in 11.3.5, Required Bu.ers, shall be installed around the property.  An equivalent alternative bu.er may be approved through the site plan review process established in 16.2.8, Site Plan Review. 

7. 	
All manufactured or mobile homes shall be installed in a manner con­sistent with Louisiana Revised Statute 51:912.22 and shall include the removal of any moving hitch, wheels, and axles, and transporting lights. The base of each manufactured or mobile home shall be skirted with an attractive screening device. 




7.3.6 Group Living 
A. 	No group living facility shall be located within 3,000 feet of any other group living facility. 
B. 	For the purpose of this part, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest property line of the premise where the group living facility is located, to the nearest property line of the premises of any other group living facility. 
7.3.7 Mobile Homes For all properties within the corporate limits of the City located on the public roadway corridors of Washington, Franklin, Madison, Je. erson and North Marable Streets, 
1. 	
A Mobile Home, as de.ned in 17.2 of the Bastrop Zoning Development Code; and 

2. 	
In general, any structure, transportable in one or more sections, which when erected onsite measures eight feet or more in width and 32 feet 



Supp. No. 1 
SEC. 7.4 PUBLIC USE STANDARDS 
7.4.2 Parks and Open Space 
or more in length, and which is built on a permanent chassis, and is de­signed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connecdted to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, cooling adn electrical systems contained therein night out; 
shall not be considered a Single-Family House, Side Yard House or Attached House as these terms are used in Articles 3 through 6 of the City of Bastrop Zoning Development Code. A mobile home, house trailer or any structure referenced in (a) and (b) of 7.3.7 may not be placed on Washington, Franklin, Madison, Je.erson and North Marable Streets. 

(Ord. No. 14-4222, §1, 6-12-14) 
Sec. 7.4 Public Use Standards 
7.4.1 Civic 
A. 	Police, Fire, EMS StaOon and Sub-staOon 
A low intensity bu.er as established in 11.3.5, Required Bu.ers, shall be installed along any common property line adjacent to a residential district or ground .oor residential use. An equivalent alternative bu.er may be ap­proved through the site plan review process established in 16.2.8, Site Plan Review. 

B. Places of Worship 
1. 	
When located in any residential district a place of worship shall be lo­cated on a corner lot no smaller than 20,000 square feet. 

2. 	
When located in any residential district, all parking shall be located on the same site, contiguous site, or in a district that allows commercial parking as principal use. 

3. 	
A low intensity bu.er as established in 11.3.5, Required Bu. ers, shall be installed along any common property line adjacent to a residential district or ground .oor residential use. An equivalent alternative bu.er may be approved through the site plan review process established in 16.2.8, Site Plan Review. 



7.4.3 Minor UOliOes 

7.4.2 Parks and Open Space 
A. 	Cemetery and Mausoleum 
1. 	
Cemeteries shall be located on sites of at least three acres. 

2. 	
A mausoleum which is not located in a cemetery shall be located on a site of at least one acre. 

3. 	
All structures six feet in height or over including, but not limited to mau­soleums, monuments and buildings, and all mausoleums not located in a cemetery regardless of height, shall be set back at least 20 feet from all property lines. 

4. 	
All graves or burial lots shall be set back at least 20 feet from each lot line and any public right-of-way. 

5. 	
A low intensity bu.er as established in 11.3.5, Required Bu. ers, shall be installed along any common property line adjacent to a residential district type or a ground .oor residential use. An equivalent alternative bu.er may be approved through the site plan review process estab­lished in 16.2.8, Site Plan Review. 



B. Neighborhood RecreaO onal Fields 
Neighborhood recreational .elds for active recreation and athletics equipped with outdoor lighting shall be subject to the following standards. 
1. 	
Neighborhood recreational .elds may be no larger than three acres. 

2. 	
A low intensity bu.er as established in 11.3.5, Required Bu. ers, shall be installed along any common property line adjacent to a residential district or a ground .oor residential use. An equivalent alternative bu.er may be approved through the site plan review process established in 16.2.8, Site Plan Review. 

3. 	
All .eld lighting shall meet the requirements of Article 12, Outdoor Lighting. 



7-10 | City of Bastrop 
ARTICLE 7. USE PROVISIONS 


7.4.3 Minor UOliOes 
A. 	Amateur Radio Operator Tower (65 feet or less) 
1. 	
An amateur radio operator tower may not exceed 65 feet in height. Ad­ditional height may be granted through the special use permit process under 16.2.9 Special Use Permit. 

2. 	
The tower shall be located so that no part of the antenna or its elements encroaches within the required side or rear setbacks or within ten feet of any easement for overhead electric distribution or transmission lines. 

3. 	
The tower height shall be established as the tallest point of the sup­porting tower and shall not include antenna mast or antenna elements a.xed to the tower. 

4. 	
No more than one such tower shall be located on a lot. 

5. 	
The request for a building permit shall be accompanied by a copy of a valid Amateur Radio Operators license issued by the FCC for the loca­tion being requested. 

6. 	
A tower shall not be structurally installed in such a way that it could fall onto a neighbor’s property during normal operations or in the event of high winds. Installation shall conform to all local building code and structural design requirements pertaining to wind loading and structural strength characteristics protecting against collapse of the tower. 

7. 	
A low intensity bu.er as established in 11.3.5, Required Bu.ers, shall be installed around the base of any tower. An equivalent alternative bu.er may be approved through the site plan review process established in 16.2.8, Site Plan Review provided that the alternative landscaping bu.er serves to reasonably screen the tower from adjacent residential properties. 



B. Stealth Wireless CommunicaO on Device 
Stealth Wireless Communication Devices may be permitted when attached to any existing conforming structure subject to the following standards. 
1. 	 Height  
The top of the stealth wireless communication device may not be more than 12 feet above the facility to which it is attached. 

2. Setbacks 
The facility to which the stealth wireless communication device will be attached shall maintain the required standards for the respective build­ing type. 
3. AestheOcs 
Any stealth wireless communication device, including feed lines and antennae, shall be designed so as to be compatible with the facade, roof, wall or facility on which it is a.xing so that it matches the existing structural design, color and texture. 

C. Electric, Telephone, and Cable Transmission Lines 
1. 	
All new electric services in the Suburban, Urban and Center contexts shall be placed underground. Temporary construction service may be permitted above ground. 

2. 	
All other utilities, including but not limited to telephone and cable, shall be located underground. 

3. 	
The applicant shall make the necessary arrangements including the provi­sion of any easements to or any construction or installation charges with each of the serving utilities for the installation of such facilities and shall be subject to all applicable laws and regulations for their construction. 

4. 	
Transformers, switching boxes, terminal boxes, meter cabinets, pedes­tals, ducts, and other facilities necessarily appurtenant to such under­ground utilities may be placed above the ground in a screened location approved by the City of Bastrop provided they remain clear of any sidewalk, bicycle or pedestrian way. 



7.4.4 Major UOliOes 
A.	 Wireless CommunicaOon Tower (WCT) 
All proposed WCT towers and facilities shall comply with the following standards. 
1. LocaOon 
The location, size and design of all wireless communication towers and facilities shall be such that minimal negative impacts result from the fa-

Supp. No. 1 
SEC. 7.4 PUBLIC USE STANDARDS 
7.4.4 Major UOliOes 
WCT HEIGHT 

Residential Districts 	120 ft 
Mixed Use/Commercial/ 150 ft Industrial Districts 
Special Purpose Districts 	200 ft. 
cility. A new WCT may not be approved nor shall any zoning or building permit for a new WCT be issued unless the applicant certi.es that the WCT equipment planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommo­dated on any existing or approved tower or other structure due to one or more of the following reasons: 
a. 	
The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of existing or approved structures and those structures cannot be reinforced to accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost. 

b. 	
The planned equipment would result in technical or physical inter­ference with or from other existing or planned equipment and the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost. 

c. 	
There is no appropriate existing or pending structure to accommo­date the planned equipment. 




WCT CO-LOCATION 

 0 - 99 ft. 3 
100 - 149 ft. 4 
150 - 169 ft. 5 
170 - 200 ft. 6 

d. 	Other reasons that make it impractical to place equipment planned by the applicant on existing or approved structures. 
2. Height 
Building type height restrictions do not apply to WCT towers.  WCT tower height may not exceed the standards established in the table below. Any tower greater in height than allowed in the table below may 
Zoning Development Code | 7-11 

SEC. 7.4 PUBLIC USE STANDARDS 
7.4.4 Major UOliOes 
be allowed by the Planning Commission as a special use permit under 16.2.9, Special Use Permit. 
3. Setbacks 
The minimum setback requirement for support structures, including associated attachments, shall correspond to the open lot building type for each context area, except that a minimum bu.er equal to the height of the tower shall be maintained between any support structure and any lot line within a residential district. 
4. 	Distance and Spacing 
All WCT towers and facilities shall be separated by a minimum distance of one-quarter mile as measured from property line to property line. 
5. Co-LocaOon 
a. 	
All proposed WCT towers and facilities shall be structurally designed to accommodate additional WCT sectorized antennas consistent with the table below. 

b. 	
All co-located WCT antennas shall be placed on a structure in such a manner as to avoid interference with or impairment of operations of existing antennas or other uses. 


6. 	Screening and Fencing 
a. 	
Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable and shall be supplemented as required by the City of Bastrop. 

b. 	
Where the site is within or abuts a residential district, public land, park or streets, a high intensity bu.er as established in 11.3.5, Required Bu.ers, shall be installed along the side of the abutting property. 

c. 	
Security fencing shall be required around the base and guy anchors of any tower. 


7. LighOng 
Towers shall not be arti.cially lighted unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or other governmental authority. Any lighting required by the FAA shall be of the minimum intensity and the number of .ashes per minute (i.e., the longest duration between 

7-12 | City of Bastrop 
ARTICLE 7. USE PROVISIONS 
.ashes) allowed by the FAA. Dual lighting standards shall be required and strobe lighting standards prohibited unless required by the FAA. The lights shall be oriented so as not to project directly onto surround­ing residential property, consistent with FAA requirements. 
8. Submi. al Requirements 
All applicants for a WCT tower and facility shall submit the following documents to the Administrator: 
a. 	
A site plan showing property boundaries, tower, guy wire anchors, existing structures, proposed transmission buildings and other ac­cessory uses, access, parking, fences, a landscaping plan and exist­ing abutting land uses around the site. 

b. 	
A study from a professional engineer which speci.es the tower height and design including a cross-section of the structure, demon­strates the tower’s compliance with applicable structural standards, including a certi.cation that the tower will withstand at a minimum sustained winds in accordance with the appropriate building code, and a description of the tower’s capacity, including the number and type of antennas which it can accommodate. 

c. 	
Written statements that the proposed tower will comply with regu­lations administered by the Federal Aviation Administration, Federal Communications Commission, and all applicable governmental bod­ies or that the tower is exempt from those regulations; and 

d. 	
A letter of intent committing the tower owner and his or her suc­cessors to allow shared use of the tower if capacity exists based on existing and planned use, and if a future applicant agrees in writing to pay any reasonable charge of shared use, the potential use is technically compatible and the future applicant is in good standing. 


9. ExempOons 
The following shall not be subject to the requirements of this paragraph: 
a. 	Regular maintenance or upgrade of antenna elements of any existing wireless communications facility that does not include the addition of any new antenna elements, feed lines, or associated sup­port equipment on the facility or the placement of any new wireless communications facility. 

b. 	
Any government-owned wireless communications facility, upon the declaration of a state of emergency by federal, state, or local gov­ernment, and a written determination of public necessity by the City of Bastrop designee; except that such facility must comply with all federal and state requirements. No wireless communications facility shall be exempt from the provisions of this section beyond the dura­tion of the state of emergency. 

c. 	
Antenna-supporting structures, antennae and/or antenna arrays for AM/FM/TV/HDTV broadcasting transmission facilities that are licensed by the Federal Communications Commission. 






Sec. 7.5 Commerce Use Standards 
7.5.1 Day Care 
A.	 General 
1. 	
The minimum site for a day care center in a detached dwelling shall be 20,000 square feet. 

2. 	
A low intensity bu.er as established in 11.3.5, Required Bu. ers, shall be installed along any common property line adjacent to a residential district or a ground .oor residential use. An equivalent alternative bu.er may be approved through the site plan review process established in 16.2.8, Site Plan Review. 

3. 	
A day care facility located in a residential district may only be located in a detached dwelling building type. 

4.
 Su.  cient o.-street passenger drop-o. and passenger loading area shall be provided on-site. 



B. Adult Day Care Center 
1. 	
No adult day care center may be located within 1,500 feet of any other adult day care center. 

2. 	
For the purpose of this subsection, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest property line of the premises where the adult day care cen-



Supp. No. 1 
SEC. 7.5 COMMERCE USE STANDARDS 
7.5.2 Indoor RecreaOon 
ter is located, to the nearest property line of the premises of any other 
adult day care center. 

C. Day Care Center For Children 
1. 	
No day care center for children proposed to be located in a residential district may be located within 1,500 feet of any other day care center for children. 

2. 	
For the purpose of this subsection, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest property line of the premise where the day care center for children is located, to the nearest property line of the premises of any other day care center for children. 

3. 	
The maximum number of children to be accommodated on site shall be speci.ed. Children who are related to the child care provider by blood or marriage and are kept at the facility shall be counted for purposes of determining enrollment and facility compliance with these standards. 

4. 	
Enrollment shall mean the total number of children on site at any one time. 

5. 	
No playground equipment shall be permitted within the front building setback. 



7.5.2 Indoor RecreaOon 
A. 	Sexually Oriented Business 
The Bastrop City Council .nds that sexually oriented businesses have a negative secondary e.ect on both commercial and residential properties, resulting in blight and the downgrading of property values, increased crimi­nal activity, and an adverse health impact. The following standards shall apply to all sexually oriented businesses: 
1. 	It shall be a violation of this code for a person, corporation, or other legal entity to operate or issue a license to operate any sexually oriented business within 2,500 feet of: 
a. 
The property line of a residential district; 

b. 
A residential use; 


Zoning Development Code | 7-13 

SEC. 7.5 COMMERCE USE STANDARDS 
7.5.3 O.  ce 
c. 	
The property line of any public library, public park or playground,  or public museum; 

d. 	
The property line of any church, synagogue, shrine, chapel, mortu ary, or any other place used regularly for religious services; 

e. 	
The property line of any school, kindergarten or day care center.   “School” shall include only such public, private, or church-spon­sored schools as regularly teach the subjects commonly taught in the primary and secondary schools of Louisiana; or 

f. 	
Any other sexually oriented business, or in the same building as another sexually oriented business, or upon the same parcel as an­other sexually oriented business, provided that, if the single parcel is large enough to maintain both sexually oriented businesses with at least 2,500 feet between them, simultaneous existence of both businesses shall be allowed. 


2. 	For the purpose of 7.5.2.A, measurement shall be made as a person walks using the sidewalk (or public rights-of-way when sidewalks do not exist) from the nearest point of the property line of any residential district, resi­dential use, public library, public park or playground, or public museum, church, synagogue, shrine, chapel, mortuary or other place used regularly for religious services, any school, kindergarten or day care center, to the nearest point of public entry of the sexually oriented business. 


7.5.3 O.  ce 
The following standards apply to o.ces allowed by special use permit in the S-RM-2 district. 
1. 	
The use shall be located on the ground .oor of the building. 

2. 	
Maximum .oor area of each individual use may not exceed 4,000 square feet. 



7.5.4 Outdoor RecreaOon 
A.	 Generally 
All outdoor recreational uses that are equipped with outdoor lighting shall be subject to the following standards: 
1. 	When located within 400 feet of a residential district or a ground .oor 

7-14 	| City of Bastrop 
ARTICLE 7. USE PROVISIONS 
residential use, a low intensity bu.er as established in 11.3.5, Required Bu.ers, shall be installed around the property. An equivalent alternative bu.er may be approved through the site plan review process estab­lished in 16.2.8, Site Plan Review. 
2. 	
For the purpose of this subsection, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest property line of the outdoor recreational use, to the nearest property line of the premises where the residential district or ground .oor residential use is occurring. 

3. 	
All .eld lighting shall meet the requirements of Article 12, Outdoor Lighting. 



B. Campground, Travel Trailer Park, and RV park 
All campground, travel trailer park or RV park uses shall be subject to the following standards: 
1. 	
No campground, travel trailer park or RV park may be located on a site less than ten acres. 

2. 	
When located within 600 feet of a residential district or a ground .oor residential use, a high intensity bu.er as established in 11.3.5, Required Bu.ers, shall be installed around the property. An equivalent alternative bu.er may be approved through the site plan review process estab­lished in 16.2.8, Site Plan Review. 

3. 	
For the purpose of this subsection, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest property line of the campground, travel trailer park or RV park use, to the nearest property line of the premises where the residen­tial district or ground .oor residential use is occurring. 

4. 	
All structures including but not limited to: buildings; camp sites; parking pads; and parking spaces shall be set back a minimum of 75 feet from all property lines. 



C. Horse Stable, Riding Academy Equestrian Center 
The following standards apply to all horse stables, riding academies, or equestrian centers. 
1. 	No horse stable, riding academy or equestrian center may be located 

on a site less than 4 acres. An additional acre shall be required for each horse kept on the property. 
2. 	
All stables, rings, or other accessory structures shall be a minimum of 100 feet from any property line. 

3. 	
The buildings located on the site may not cover more than . ve percent of the site. 



D.	 HunOng and Fishing Preserve 
The following standards apply to all hunting and . shing preserves. 
1. 	
No hunting or .shing preserve may be located on a site less than 80 acres. 

2. 	
The buildings located on the site may not cover more than . ve percent of the site. 

3. 	
No single building on the site may be larger than 10,000 square feet. 




7.5.5 Personal Service 
A.	 Animal Care 
1. 	
Outdoor runs shall only be permitted in the Suburban and Special con­texts. 

2. 	
Outdoor runs in the Suburban context shall only be permitted on sites larger than one acre in size. 

3. 	
When animal care facilities with outdoor runs in the Suburban context are located within 250 feet of a residential district or a ground .oor residential use, a low intensity bu.er as established in 11.3.5, Required Bu.ers, shall be installed around the property. An equivalent alternative bu.er may be approved through the site plan review process estab­lished in 16.2.8, Site Plan Review. 

4. 	
For the purpose of this subsection, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest property line of the animal care facility, to the nearest prop­erty line of the premises where the residential district or ground .oor residential use is occurring. 



Supp. No. 1 
SEC. 7.5 COMMERCE USE STANDARDS 
7.5.7 Retail Sales 
5. 	All overnight care of animals in the Suburban, Urban, or Center con­text must occur indoors and all pens, kennels and runs must be located within an enclosed building. 


7.5.6 Restaurant/Bar 
A. 	Restaurant/Bar in the ResidenO al MulO family Districts 
The following standards shall apply to restaurants or bars allowed by special use permit in the S-RM-2 district. 
1. 	
The use shall be located on the ground .oor of the building. 

2.
 Maximum .oor area of each individual use may not exceed 4,000 square feet. 

3. 	
Neither drive-thru nor pick-up windows are allowed. 



B. Restaurant/Bar in the ResidenOal Mixed Use Districts 
The following standards shall apply to restaurants or bars allowed in the U-RMX-2 and C-RMX-2 districts. 
1. 	
The use shall be located on the ground .oor of the building as required by the district. 

2. 	
Neither drive-thru nor pick-up windows are allowed. 

3. 	
In the Urban context, a low intensity bu.er as established in 11.3.5, Required Bu.ers, shall be installed along the common property line adjacent to a residential district or a ground .oor residential use. An equivalent alternative bu.er may be approved through the site plan review process established in 16.2.8, Site Plan Review. 



C. Restaurant/Bar in the Main Street Districts 
The following additional standards shall apply to restaurants or bars al­lowed in the C-MS-3 district. 
1. 	
Parking on the lot shall be located at the side or rear of a building and not between the building and the street. 

2. 	
Neither drive-thru nor pick-up windows are allowed. 



7.5.7 Retail Sales 

7.5.7 Retail Sales 
A.	 Art Studio/Gallery 
The following standards apply to art or photography studios or galleries allowed in the S-RM-2 district. 
1. 	
The use shall be located on the ground .oor of the building. 

2.
 Maximum .oor area of each individual use may not exceed 4,000 square feet. 



B. Convenience Store with Gas Pumps, Gas StaOon 
1. General Standards 
a. 	
The primary building, including the fuel canopy, shall conform to all building envelope standards. 

b. 	
Gasoline pumps, tanks, vents and pump islands shall be located no closer than 20 feet to any side or rear property line or right-of-way. 

c. 	
No sign of any type or any gasoline pump or tank shall be located within 20 feet of a residential district or ground .oor residential use. 

d. 	
A high intensity bu.er as established in 11.3.5, Required Bu.ers, shall be installed along any common property line adjacent to a residential district or a ground .oor residential use. An equivalent alternative bu.er may be approved through the site plan review process established in 16.2.8, Site Plan Review. 


2. Fuel Canopies 
a. 	
Fuel canopies shall not be located closer than 15 feet to any side or rear property line or right-of-way. 

b. 	
No fuel canopy shall exceed a height of 20 feet. 

c. 	
Fuel canopies shall be integrated architecturally with the design of the principal building and shall be complementary to the overall color scheme of the building façade from which it projects. 

d. 	
Fuel canopy lighting shall not extend beyond the area beneath the canopy and all .xtures shall be recessed, including any .xture or lens. 



7-16 | City of Bastrop 
ARTICLE 7. USE PROVISIONS 
3. Single-Bay AutomaOc Car Wash 
An accessory single-bay automatic (not self-service) car wash com­pletely enclosed except for openings necessary to allow entry and exit of vehicles may be permitted subject to the following: 
a. 	
The car wash structure shall be located no closer than 50 feet to any side or property line adjacent to a residential district or ground .oor residential use. 

b. 	
The car wash structure shall be constructed of building materials consistent with that of the principal building, including the roof. 

c. 	
When located adjacent to a residential district or ground . oor resi­dential use, the car wash facility shall not operate before 7:00 AM or after 10:00 PM. 



C. Convenience Store without Gas Pumps 
The following standards apply to convenience stores without gas pumps allowed in the S-RM-2, U-RMX-2, and C-RMX-2 districts. 
1. 	
The use shall be located on the ground .oor of the building. 

2.
 Maximum .oor area of each individual use may not exceed 4,000 square feet. 



D.	 Corner Store 
A corner store may be allowed by the Planning Commission as a special use permit under 16.2.9, Special Use Permit, at intersections in the S-RS-15, S-RS-10, S-RS-6, S-RM-2, S-PD, U-RS-3, U-RT-2, U-PD, C-RT-2, and C-PD districts subject to the standards listed below. 
1. One residenOal unit is allowed on the lot with the corner store.  Al­lowed uses in the corner store are restricted to: 
a. 	
Consumer convenience services (examples include automated bank­ing machines, private postal and deposit boxes); 

b. 	
consumer repair services (examples include watch, jewelry, musical instrument, appliance repair); 

c. 	
food sales (examples include grocery stores, bakeries, candy shops, delicatessens); 



d. 	
general retails sales (examples include apparel, fabrics, arts, an­tiques, bicycles, cosmetics, jewelry); 

e. 	
personal services (examples include beauty /barber shops, seam­stress, tailor, shoe repair, dry-cleaning pick-up stations); 

f. 	
restaurant (examples include diners, dinner houses, soda fountains, ice cream parlors). 


2. 	
All other uses are prohibited, including drive-through services, fast food restaurants, outdoor speakers, and all auto-oriented uses. 

3. 	
In no case shall the total .oor area of a corner store exceed 3,000 square feet. 

4. 	
A corner store shall not be operated within 600 feet of another corner store.  For the purpose of this subsecOon, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest property line of the corner store to the nearest property line of any other corner store. 

5. 	
A corner store shall not be operated outside of the hours of 7:00 am to 10:00 pm. 

6.
 In addiOon to meeOng all the requirements of the district in which the corner store is located, the corner store must meet the following addiO onal requirements: 

a. 	
Minimum 50 % ground story transparency and 20% upper story transparency; 

b. 	
Maximum 30 foot blank wall area; and 

c. 	
Street facing entrance is required. 



7. 	
Landscaping requirements as established in Sec. 11.3, All Other Uses, shall be met including the installaOon of a low intensity bu. er as established in 11.3.5, Required Bu.ers, around all porOons of the property that abut a residenOal district or residenOal use. An equiva­lent alternaO ve bu.er may be approved through the site plan review process established in 16.2.8, Site Plan Review. 

8. 	
No parking shall be permi.ed forward of the front building line. 



Supp. No. 1 
SEC. 7.5 COMMERCE USE STANDARDS 
7.5.8 Vehicle Sales 

E. Dry Cleaning Pick Up StaOon 
The following standards apply to dry cleaning pick up stations allowed in the S-RM-2 district. 
1. 	
The use shall be located on the ground .oor of the building. 

2.
 Maximum .oor area of each individual use may not exceed 4,000 square feet. 




7.5.8 Vehicle Sales 
A.	 General 
1. 	
A high intensity bu.er as established in 11.3.5, Required Bu. ers, shall be installed along any common property line adjacent to a residential district or a ground .oor residential use. An equivalent alternative bu.er may be approved through the site plan review process established in 16.2.8, Site Plan Review. 

2. 	
All outdoor lighting shall be directed downward and shall not glare onto any adjacent residential district or ground .oor residential use. All out­door lighting shall meet the requirements of Article 12, Outdoor  Lighting. 

3. 	
New car display may not be arti.cially elevated above the general topography of the site. 

4. 	
No outside speaker system shall be allowed. 



B. Main Street District 
The following additional standards shall apply to all vehicle sales facilities in the Center Main Street (C-MS-3) district. 
1. 	
The sales and leasing of motor vehicles for display shall be conducted within a fully-enclosed building. The outdoor display and storage of vehicles for sale or rental shall not be allowed. 

2. 	
A maximum of two service bay doors no more than 24 feet in width each shall be allowed. No more than one bay door shall be allowed on each side of the building. 



7.6.1 Heavy Industrial 
Sec. 7.6 Industrial Use Standards 
7.6.1 Heavy Industrial 
A.	 RadioacO ve Materials 
1. 	
A high intensity bu.er as established in 11.3.5 Required Bu.ers, shall be installed around the property. An equivalent alternative bu.er may be approved through the site plan review process established in 16.2.8, Site Plan Review. 

2. 	
No person, corporation, or other legal entity may operate any radioac­tive materials or waste facility within 2,500 feet of: 

a. 	
A public or private elementary or secondary school; 

b. 	
A public or private day care facility or kindergarten; 

c. 	
A residential district or use; or 

d. 	
A public park. 



3. 	
For the purpose of this subsection, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest property line of the premise where the radioactive materials or waste facility is located, to the nearest property line of the premises of a public or private elementary or secondary school, public or private day care facility or kindergarten, residential district or use, or public park. 



B. Scrap Metal Processors and Wrecking, Junk or Salvage Yards 
The following standards shall apply to scrap metal processors and wrecking, junk or salvage yards. 
1. 	
A high intensity bu.er as established in 11.3.5, Required Bu.ers, shall be installed around the property. An equivalent alternative bu.er may be approved through the site plan review process established in 16.2.8, Site Plan Review. 

2. 	
No person, corporation, or other legal entity may operate any scrap metal processors or wrecking, junk or salvage yard within 1,500 feet of: 



7-18 | City of Bastrop 
ARTICLE 7. USE PROVISIONS 
a. 	
A public or private elementary or secondary school; 

b. 	
A public or private day care facility or kindergarten; 

c. 	
A residential district or use; or 

d. 	
A public park. 


3. 	For the purpose of this subsection, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest property line of the premise where the scrap metal proces­sors and wrecking, junk or salvage yard is located, to the nearest prop­erty line of the premises of a public or private elementary or secondary school, public or private day care facility or kindergarten, residential district or use, or public park. 


7.6.2 Self-service Storage 
A.	 General 
1. 	
With the exception of lighting .xtures and climate controls, no electrical power supply may be accessible to the renter/lessee of the storage unit. 

2. 	
The following activities shall be prohibited on the premises: 


a. 	
Servicing, repair, or fabrication of motor vehicles, boats, trailers, lawn mowers, appliances, or other similar equipment; 

b. 	
Operation of a transfer-and-storage business; 

c. 	
Operation of power tools, spray painting equipment, table saws, lathes, compressors, welding equipment, kilns, or other similar equipment except when needed for maintenance of the use; 

d. 	
Any activity that is noxious or o.ensive because of odors, dust, noise, fumes, or vibrations; 

e. 	
Storage of hazardous chemicals, .ammable liquids, or combustible and explosive materials; or 

f. 	
Habitation of storage units by humans or animals. 



B. Warehouse, Self-service, Mini-warehouse 
1. 	
All storage shall be contained within a fully-enclosed building. However, the storage of boats, RV’s or other similar vehicles may be permitted in accordance with Article 13, Outdoor Storage and Display. 

2. 	
A high intensity bu.er as established in 11.3.5, Required Bu. ers, shall be installed along any common property line adjacent to a residential district or a ground .oor residential use. An equivalent alternative bu.er may be approved through the site plan review process established in 16.2.8, Site Plan Review. 

3. 	
Where the end wall of a self-service storage building is visible from a pub­lic right-of-way, the wall shall be bu.ered by a hedge that has a mature height of at least six feet. 



C. Warehouse, Self-Service, Indoor MulO -story 
1. 	
All warehouse storage on the property shall be in a minimum two-story, single-enclosed building. 

2. 	
All storage units shall be accessed internally. 

3. 	
External doors to individual units shall not be permitted. 

4. 	
One consolidated loading area is permitted to the rear or side of the building. 

5. 	
All storage of boats, RV’s or other similar vehicles shall be in the single-enclosed building. 



7.6.3 Vehicle Service 
A.	 General 
1. 	
A high intensity bu.er as established in 11.3.5, Required Bu.ers, shall be installed along any common property line adjacent to a residential district or ground .oor residential use. In the Center context, the Urban High Inten­sity bu.er shall be used. An equivalent alternative bu.er may be approved through the site plan review process established in 16.2.8, Site Plan Review. 

2. 	
All outdoor lighting shall be directed downward and shall not glare onto 


SEC. 7.6 INDUSTRIAL USE STANDARDS 
7.6.4 Waste Related Services 
any adjacent residential district or ground .oor residential use. All out­door lighting shall meet the requirements of Article 12, Outdoor Lighting. 
3. 	No outside speaker system shall be allowed. 

B. Main Street District 
The following additional standards shall apply to all vehicle service facilities in the Center Main Street (C-MS-3) district. 
1. 	
The service and repair of all motor vehicles shall be conducted within a fully-enclosed building. The outdoor display and storage of vehicles shall not be allowed. 

2. 	
A maximum of two service bay doors no more than 24 feet in width each shall be allowed. No more than one bay door shall be allowed on each side of the building. 




7.6.4 Waste Related Services 
A.	 Land.ll 
1. 	
The site for sanitary land.lls shall be a minimum of 100 acres of land that would be approved by all regulatory agencies. 

2. 	
A high intensity bu.er as established in 11.3.5, Required Bu.ers, shall be installed around the property. An equivalent alternative bu.er may be approved through the site plan review process established in 16.2.8, Site Plan Review. 

3. 	
No person, corporation, or other legal entity may operate any land.ll within 2,500 feet of: 


a. 	
A public or private elementary or secondary school; 

b. 	
A public or private day care facility or kindergarten; 

c. 	
A residential district or use; or 

d. 	
A public park. 


4. 	For the purpose of this subsection, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest property line of the premise where the land.ll is located, to 

7.6.4 Waste Related Services 
the nearest property line of the premises of a public or private elemen­tary or secondary school, public or private day care facility or kindergar­ten, residential district or use, or public park. 
5.
 No .ll shall be located within the 100 year .oodplain and no excava­tion except as expressly authorized by the Bastrop City Council shall be conducted within the 100 year .oodplain. 

6. 	
No excavation or .lling shall be made within 100 feet of any property line of the site or within 100 feet of any public street right-of-way. 

7. 	
Provisions shall be made for the proper drainage of stormwater falling on or crossing the site at all times during and after completion of the operations. Operations shall not obstruct the normal .ow of any public drain, or abrogate the riparian rights of any other party to a stream or drain. 

8. 	
The depth of excavation and the materials to be used for .ll shall not have any adverse e.ect on the supply, quality or purity of ground water or wells. 

9. 	
A layer of clean earth at least two feet thick shall be deposited and thor­oughly compacted over all .nal .ll to bring the surface to the .nished surface grade as shown on the topographic plan .led with the applica­tion. The .nal . ll and .nished grade shall be stabilized, seeded and sod­ded or appropriately planted after completion and closure of each stage of land. ll operations. 

10. 
The installation of roads, parking areas, buildings, structures and operational facilities and equipment shall be located on the site so that adjoining properties will not be adversely a.ected. 

11. 
The operation shall be conducted so as not to create a nuisance or cause undue noise, vibration, dust, odor or incandescence to adjacent proper­ties. The premises shall be kept in a neat and clean condition at all times. No loose paper or debris shall be allowed on the site except on areas where active .lling operations are taking place. Dusty conditions shall be corrected by sprinkling with water or another approved method. No 



7-20 | City of Bastrop 
ARTICLE 7. USE PROVISIONS 
.res shall be permitted. Any smoldering .ame or spontaneous combus­tion shall be immediately extinguished. 
12. 
Except for required or protective fences, no building or structure, other than a scale and entry gatehouse erected in connection with the opera­tion, shall be located in any required setback or closer than 100 feet from any property line. 

13. 
Separation of materials or storage for the salvage thereof on the site shall be conducted within an enclosed building. All unacceptable .ll material shall be removed from the premises immediately after delivery. 

14. 
Water lines shall be installed, connected to a public water supply, or to some other source which by use of pumps will provide water in su.cient quantity to combat .res or settle dust. 

15. 
The days and hours of land.ll operations are subject to the approval of the Bastrop City Council. 






Sec. 7.7 Open Use Standards 
7.7.1 Agriculture 
The following standards apply to all agricultural uses.  (See 7.8.5, for standards on Keeping of Livestock in Residential Districts as an accessory use.) 
A. 	With the exception of fences, any structure for keeping and raising livestock shall be at least 100 feet from all property lines. 
B. 	Any yard, corral, runway, pen or manure pile shall be no closer than 50 feet from any residential dwelling other than a dwelling unit(s) of an occupant of the property.  
C. 	For the purpose of this subsection, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the near­est point of any structure, yard pasture, runway, pen or manure pile to the nearest property line or residential dwelling. 


Sec. 7.8 Accessory Uses 
7.8.1 General 
A. 	Unless otherwise expressly stated, accessory uses are allowed in conjunc­tion with allowed principal uses. Accessory uses must be accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to a permitted principal use. 
B. 	No accessory use may be established on a lot prior to the establishment of an allowed principal use. 
C. 	The Administrator is authorized to determine when a structure or use meets the de.nition of an accessory use. In order to classify a structure or use as accessory, the Administrator must determine that the use: 
1. 	
Is subordinate to the principal use in terms of area, extent and purpose; 

2. 	
Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants of the principal use served; 

3. 	
Is located on the same lot as the principal structure or use, or on a con­tiguous lot in the same ownership; 


SEC. 7.8 ACCESSORY USES 
7.8.2 Home OccupaOons 
4. 	
Does not involve operations not in keeping with the character of the principal use served; and 

5. 	
Is not of a nature likely to attract visitors in larger numbers than would normally be expected. 




7.8.2 Home OccupaOons 
A. 	Prohibited Home OccupaOons 
The following uses are not allowed as home occupations. There shall be no group instruction of more than two people in connection with a home occupation. 
1. 	
Vehicle and/or body and fender repair. 

2.
 Outdoor repair. 

3. 	
Food handling, processing or packing, other than services that utilize standard home kitchen equipment. 

4. 	
Medical or dental lab. 

5.
 Restaurant. 

6. 	
Bulk storage of . ammable liquids. 

7. 	
Funeral homes and mortuaries. 

8. 	
Animal hospitals and kennels. 

9.
 Commercial parking. 

10.
 Retail sales. 



B. Class A 
The intent of a Class A home occupation is to allow very limited activities in a residential dwelling, provided such activities do not impact or detract from the residential character of the neighborhood. A Class A home occupa­tion must be deemed an accessory use and no further approval is required, provided the use meets the following. 
1. 	The use of the dwelling unit for Class A home occupation must be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and must under no circumstances change the residential character of the structure. 

SEC. 7.8 ACCESSORY USES 
7.8.2 Accessory Dwellings Units 
2. 	
There must be no change in the outside appearance of the building or prem­ises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of a home occupation. 

3. 	
No business, storage or warehousing of material, supplies or equipment is allowed outside of the primary dwelling unit. 

4. 	
No equipment or process may be used that creates excessive noise, vibra­tion, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference. 

5. 	
No display of products are visible from the street. 

6. 	
A Class A home occupation is subject to all applicable licenses and busi­ness taxes. 

7. 	
With the exception of one employee, no persons other than members of the family residing on the premises may be engaged in the home occupation. 

8. 	
Storage space and the operation of the business inside the dwelling unit may not exceed 25 percent of the .oor area of the residence. 

9. 	
No signage is allowed. 



C. Class B 
A Class B home occupation is a business, profession, occupation or trade con­ducted for gain or support within a residential dwelling or its accessory build­ings that requires employees, customers, clients or patrons to visit the home. A Class B home occupation is allowed as a special use permit  under 16.2.9, Special Use Permit, provided that the Planning Commission determines that: 
1. 	
It is carried on by a person residing on the premises and employs no more than two employees not living on the premises. 

2. 	
No more than 25 percent of the total .oor area of the residence or its ac­cessory buildings is used for the home occupation. 

3. 	
No more than two vehicles are used in the conduct of the home occupa­tion, and such vehicles are parked o. the street. 

4. 	
No merchandise or commodity is sold on the premises, except what is incidental to the home occupation. 

5. 	
No mechanical equipment is installed or used except such that is normally used for domestic or professional purposes. 



7-22 | City of Bastrop 
ARTICLE 7. USE PROVISIONS 
6. 	
No expansion is allowed outside the principal structure that houses the home occupation, except that which is necessary to house vehicles used in the conduct of home occupation. 

7. 	
The use will not create undue tra.c congestion or create a tra.  c haz­ard. 

8. 	
Advertising signs shall be limited to one unlighted wall sign no larger than three square feet in area, attached to the structure housing the home occupation. 




7.8.3 Accessory Dwellings Units 
A. 	Accessory Dwelling Unit up to 1,200 square feet 
One accessory dwelling unit up to 1,200 square feet is allowed by right (sub­ject to the standards listed below) on a legal lot of record.  

B. Accessory Dwelling Unit in excess of 1,200 square feet 
An accessory dwelling unit in excess of 1,200 square feet may be allowed by the Planning Commission as a special use permit (subject to the standards below) under 16.2.9, Special Use Permit.  In addition to the minimum site requirements for the principal structure, an additional 3,000 square feet shall be required for the accessory dwelling unit. 

C. Standards 
The following standards shall apply to all accessory dwelling units: 
1. 	
In no case shall the living area of the accessory dwelling unit exceed the living area of the principal structure. 

2. 	
The owner of the property must occupy either the primary structure or the accessory dwelling. 

3. 	
The minimum distance between units shall be 20 feet. 

4. 	
The front building setback of the accessory dwelling shall not be any closer to the front property line than the front building setback of the principal structure. 



5. 	
The exterior materials and colors of the accessory dwelling shall 
complement the exterior appearance of the principal structure. 


6. 	
One additional parking space on the same premises is required for the accessory dwelling unit. 



7.8.4 Drive-Through FaciliOes 
A. 	A drive-through is allowed in conjunction with an allowed ground . oor non­residential use, except where expressly prohibited elsewhere in this zoning development code. 
B. 	The drive-through facility must orient to an alley, driveway, or interior park­ing area, and not a street. 
C. 	None of the drive-through facilities (e.g., driveway queuing areas, windows, teller machines, service windows, kiosks, drop-boxes, or similar facilities) can be located within 20 feet of a street and may not be oriented to a street corner. 
D. 	The minimum spacing of drive-through facilities receiving access onto the same street is 400 linear feet along that street’s block face (same side of street). 

7.8.5 Keeping of Livestock in ResidenO al Districts 
The keeping of livestock as an accessory use to residential use shall be allowed in all Residential Single-Family Districts (RS-). 
A. 	Standards for Keeping of Livestock 
1. 	
A minimum lot size of one (1) acre is required to qualify for the keeping of livestock within the City of Bastrop. 

2. 	
Livestock shall be kept within enclosures which may include fences, cor­rals, barns, pens, or other similar enclosure. Livestock enclosures must meet the setback requirements of the zoning district within which they are located. 

3. 	
Any building or structure housing livestock or any yard, runway, pen or manure pile shall be no closer than 50 feet from any residential dwelling other than the dwelling unit of the occupant of the property. 


SEC. 7.8 ACCESSORY USES 
7.8.5 Keeping of Livestock in ResidenO al Districts 
4. 	Property owners keeping livestock must maintain such animals in a manner that does not cause adverse impact to neighboring properties and is responsible for the regular removal and disposal of animal waste, and control of insects, erosion and odor. 

B. Allowed Livestock DensiOes 
1. 	Animal unit is de.ned to provide a reasonable standard for determining allowed livestock densities. 
a. 	
A large livestock animal unit is equivalent to one horse, mule, cow, or 2 ½ swine or other similar sized animals. 

b. 	
A small livestock animal unit is established based upon the size and characteristics of the animal and is equivalent to 4 sheep, llamas, alpacas, ostrich or emus, 6 goats, geese or turkeys, 10 rabbits, 12 chickens, ducks, or pheasants, or equivalent combination of such animals. 

c. 	
The Administrator shall determine the equivalent number of animals allowed within an animal unit for animals not listed herein including miniature forms of large animals. The Administrator determina­tion should take into consideration the purpose of this part and the potential impacts to adjacent properties. 


2. 	The maximum animal density shall be one animal unit, or fraction there­of, per one acre.  Maximum animal density does not include o.spring until said o.spring are nine (9) months of age. 

C. ExcepOons to Minimum Lot Size 
Property less than one acre shall be allowed to keep small animal livestock based on the proportional animal unit equivalency above, for example a ½ acre lot would be allowed a ½ small animal unit. 

SEC. 7.9 TEMPORARY USES 
7.9.1 Temporary Uses Exempt from Permit 


Sec. 7.9 Temporary Uses 
Certain uses are temporary in character. They vary in type and degree, as well as length 
of time involved. Such uses may have little impact on surrounding and nearby proper­
ties or they may present questions involving potential incompatibility of the tempo­
rary use with existing uses. Unless otherwise specified in this zoning development 
code, the following regulations govern temporary uses. 
7.9.1 Temporary Uses Exempt from Permit 
The following allowed temporary uses do not need to obtain a temporary use permit. 
A.	 Garage or Yard Sales 
Private sales are limited to two sales per dwelling unit each calendar year and the length of each allowed sale shall not exceed three consecutive days, except that the Administrator may allow a third sale in any calendar year upon submission of su.cient proof of a change in ownership of the residen­tial premises on which the sale is to be conducted. 

B. Storage PODS 
1. 	
One storage pod for o.-site storage of household or other goods lo­cated in any setback is allowed for a maximum of 30 consecutive days. 

2. 	
The storage pod must be placed completely on-site (and is not allowed to be placed in any type of public right-of-way). 

3. 	
The storage POD must be placed on a paved surface. 



C. ConstrucO on Dumpsters 
One construction dumpster is allowed on-site in association with a valid building permit. The use of such a dumpster is strictly limited to the time actively underway. In no event can the use of the dumpster continue past expiration of the building permit. 


7.9.2 Temporary Use Permit Required 
The following temporary uses are allowed subject to approval of a temporary use 
permit in the frequency stated below except that no property may have more than 
four of the events listed below in one calendar year. 
7-24 | City of Bastrop 
ARTICLE 7. USE PROVISIONS 

A. 	Commercial Circuses, Carnivals or Fairs 
Commercial circuses, carnivals or fairs, for not more than two consecutive weeks in any calendar year. 

B. Temporary Religious or Revival AcOviOes 
Temporary religious or revival activities in tents in association with a place of worship, for not more than two consecutive weeks in any calendar year. 

C. Special Events 
Special events occurring no longer than seven consecutive days once every three months. 

D. 	Grand Opening Sales 
Grand opening sales, including outside food and beverage vending, for three consecutive days, once per zoning permit. 

E. Other Temporary Uses 
Other temporary uses similar in nature to the ones listed above, with cor­responding limitations, as determined by the Administrator. 


7.9.3 Mobile Home or Trailer for Temporary Use 
A. 	After approval by the Administrator, a mobile home or trailer may be used as a temporary o.ce, security shelter, or shelter for materials or tools (but not for residential purposes or sales o.ces) incidental to construction on or devel­opment of the premises upon which the mobile home or trailer is located. 
B. 	Such use is strictly limited to the time construction or development is actively underway. In no event may the use continue more than six months without the further approval of the Administrator. 

7.9.4 Real Estate Development Projects 
A. 	A developer may request a temporary use permit for necessary commercial promotional, storage, or fabrication activities at a development site that occur during construction of that developer's project. 
B. 	When the request is for a temporary sales o.ce, model home, or apart­ment, the application must list the lots, apartment units, or dwelling units to be initially sold. 
ARTICLE 7. USE PROVISIONS 
C. 	The temporary use permit will be restricted to only those activities and properties listed on the petition. Such activities may not include any sale of properties outside the development site or any resale of properties. 
D. 	The following uses in connection with such a project require a temporary use permit: 
1. 	
O.ces for sale of real estate or for persons engaged in the development; 

2. 	
Construction materials storage, general contractor’s business o.ce, processing, or fabrication; 

3. 	
Equipment storage; or 

4. 	
Model homes or sample apartments. 



SEC. 7.9 TEMPORARY USES 
7.9.4 Real Estate Development Projects 
Zoning Development Code  | 


This page left intentionally blank 





ARTICLE 8. RULES FOR BUILDING TYPES 

This page left intentionally blank 
ARTICLE 8. RULES FOR BUILDING TYPES 
Sec. 8.1 Measurement & ExcepOons .  .  .  .  .  .  .8-1 
8.1.1 Building Coverage .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  8-1 
8.1.2 Primary, Side & Service Street Designation .  .  .  .  .  .  8-1 
8.1.3 Lot Width .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  8-1 
8.1.4 Setbacks .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 8-2 
8.1.5 Height .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  8-3 
8.1.6 Transparency .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 8-5 
8.1.7 Blank Wall Area .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 8-5 
8.1.8 Building Entrances .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 8-5 
Sec. 8.2 Principal Buildings per Lot .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 8-6 
8.2.1 One Principal Building Per Tract or Lot .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 8-6 
8.2.2 Multiple Principal Buildings on a Lot .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  8-6 
Sec. 8.3 Accessory Structures .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 8-6 
8.3.1 General .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 8-6 
8.3.2 Accessory Structure Separation.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  8-6 
Sec. 8.4 Rules for ResidenOal Building Types . . 8-7 
8.4.1 Garage and Carport Placement .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  8-7 
8.4.2 Foundation .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 8-7 
8.4.3 Side Yard House .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 8-8 
8.4.4 In.ll Standards.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  8-8 
Sec. 8.5 Rules for Other Building Types  .  .  .  .  . 8-9 
8.5.1 Civic Building Type .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 8-9 
8.5.2 Open Lot Building Type .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  8-9 
This page left intentionally blank 


Sec. 8.1 Measurement and ExcepOons 
8.1.1 Building Coverage 

A. 	The maximum area of the lot that is permitted to be covered by buildings, including both principal structures, structured parking and roofed accessory structures. 
B. 	Building coverage does not include paved areas such as driveways, un­covered porches or patios, decks, swimming pools, porte cochere, or roof overhangs of two feet or less. 
C. 	A detached residential garage up to 450 square feet associated with a single-family house, side yard house, attached house, or row house is not included in the calculation of lot coverage. 
8.1.2 Primary, Side and Service Street DesignaOon 
A site’s primary, side and service street frontages shall be designated by the Administrator during the Site Plan Review process under 16.2.8, Site Plan Re­view.  In making a determination the Administrator shall consider the standards set forth below.  When no site plan is required, the Administrator will review an application and make a determination as to whether designated frontages conform to the standards below prior to issuance of any permits. 
A. 	When a lot abuts only one street, the street is the primary street frontage. 
B. 	On corner lots, one street is a primary street frontage and the other street(s) may be a primary street or a side street frontage. In determining the one pri­mary street frontage, the Administrator shall consider the following conditions: 
SEC. 8.1 MEASUREMENT AND EXCEPTIONS 
8.1.3 Lot Width 

1. 	
The street with the highest street classi.cation or highest average daily tra.  c count; 

2. 	
The established orientation of the block; 

3. 	
The street abutting the longest face of the block; and 

4. 	
The street parallel to an alley within the block. 


C. 	When a lot runs from one street to another and has a double frontage, one street may be designated a service street provided the following standards are met: 
1. 	
The applicant controls the land along an entire block face and the ser­vice street is designated from one street intersection to another street intersection only; 

2. 	
A site with a service street must have at least two street frontages and one street frontage must be a primary street; and 

3. 	
Only one service street frontage may be designated abutting any block. 



8.1.3 Lot Width 
The minimum lot width of all lots shall be measured from the side property line to side property line along the right-of-way of the primary street providing ac­cess to the lot. 



SEC. 8.1 MEASUREMENT AND EXCEPTIONS 
8.1.4 Setbacks 

8.1.4 Setbacks 
A.	 General 
1. 	
No part of a setback or other open space required for any structure or use for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this zoning development code may be included as a part of a setback or other open space similarly required for another structure or use. 

2. 	
Front and side (street), and parking setbacks are measured from the edge of the right-of-way. Side setbacks are measured from the side property line. Rear setbacks are measured from the rear property line or the edge of the right-of-way if there is an alley. 




B. Build-To Areas 
1. 	
The primary and side street build-to areas are the portions of the lot within the minimum and the maximum setbacks. 

2. 	
The building width required in the primary and side street build-to areas is the minimum percentage of the building façade that must be located within each build-to area. 


8-2 	| City of Bastrop 
ARTICLE 8. RULES FOR BUILDING TYPES 

C. Parking Setbacks 
1. 	
On-site surface parking must be located behind the parking setback line. 

2. 	
The parking setback line applies to both ground and upper stories of a building. 


D.	 Encroachments 
The following allowed encroachments apply to all required setbacks unless otherwise stated, so long as they do not extend into any easements. Structures below and covered by the ground may extend into any required setback. 
1. Building Features 
a. 	
Chimneys, pre-fabricated chimneys, .ues, or smokestacks may encroach a maximum of two feet. 

b. 	
Building eaves or roof overhangs may extend up to two feet; pro­vided that such extension is at least three feet from the property line, its lower edge is at least 7½ feet above the ground elevation, and it is located at least .ve feet from any other building or eave. 

c. 	
Bay windows, entrances and similar features that are less than ten feet wide may extend up to 3½ feet but must remain at least .ve feet from the property line. 

d. 	
Cornices, eaves, belt courses, sills, buttresses, or other similar archi­tectural features may project up to 1½ feet. 

e.
 Unenclosed .re escapes or stairways may project up to four feet. 

f. 	
Unenclosed patios, decks or terraces may extend up to four feet into a required side setback, or up to eight feet into a required rear setback but may not project within .ve feet of a common lot line. 



2. Building Elements 
a. 	Porches may extend up to eight feet into a required setback but may not project within three feet of a common lot line. A porch may not encroach into the public right-of-way without a license for the use of the public right-of-way. 

b. 	
Stoops may extend a maximum of .ve feet into a required setback but may not project within .ve feet of a common lot line. A stoop may not encroach into the public right-of-way without a license for the use of the public right-of-way. 

c. 	
Balconies may extend up to six feet into a required setback but may not project within .ve feet of a common lot line. A balcony may not encroach into the public right-of-way without a license for the use of public right-of-way. 

d. 
Awnings, galleries, and arcades may extend into a required front set­


back. Awnings, galleries, and arcades may not encroach into the public 
right-of-way without a license for the use of the public right-of-way. 

3. 	Mechanical Equipment and UO lity Lines 
SEC. 8.1 MEASUREMENT AND EXCEPTIONS 
8.1.5 Heights 


8.1.5 Height 
A. Structure Height 
1. 	Structure height is measured in both number of stories and feet from the average grade to the top of the highest point of the roof. 
Pitched Roof Flat Roof 
Top of 
Roof 

Height 

Height 
Top of 

Roof Story 
Story 

a.  Mechanical equipment associated with residential uses, such as HVAC units and security lighting, may extend into a required rear or side setback but must remain at least four feet from a common lot line.  
b.  Solar and wind energy systems may extend into a required rear or side setback, but must remain at least three feet from a common lot line.  
c.  Utility lines located underground and minor structures accessory to utility lines (such as hydrants, manholes, and transformers and other cabinet structures) may extend into a required rear or side setback. Underground utilities may additionally extend into a required front setback.  

4. Other Encroachments 
a. 	Outdoor storage and display as set forth in Article 13, Outdoor Stor­age and Display. 
Average 
Average 
Grade 
Grade 

2. 	Average grade is determined by calculating the average of the highest and lowest elevation along the natural or improved grade (whichever is more restrictive) along the front of the building parallel to the front setback line. 
Height Limit 
Highest and 
Lowest Elevaons 

c. 	
Signs in conformance as set forth in Article 14, Signs. 

d. 	
Fences and walls as set forth in Sec. 11.5 Fences and Walls. 



Front of Building 

e. 	Benches, trash receptacles, public art, water features, bicycle racks, bollards, planters, and other street furniture. 
3. 	A basement with 59 percent or more of its perimeter wall area surround-
f.	 Pedestrian lighting. 
ed by natural grade is not considered a story. 

g. 	Landscaping, sidewalk, trees, tree grates, and planters. 
Highest Elevaon Average of 

b. Outdoor dining may extend into any required setback. 
SEC. 8.1 MEASUREMENT AND EXCEPTIONS 
8.1.5 Height 
4. 	An attic is not a story provided that 50 percent or more of the attic space is less than seven feet, six inches in clear height, measured from the .nished .oor to the . nished ceiling. 
Ac-Story 

ARTICLE 11.  RULES FOR BUILDING TYPES 

D.	 Height ExcepOons 
The following accessory structures may exceed the established height limits, provided they do not exceed the maximum building height by more than 12 feet: 
1. 	
Amateur communications tower; 

2.
 Cooling tower; 

3.
 Clerestory; 

4. 	
Chimney and vent stack;. 

5. 	
Elevator penthouse or bulkhead; 

6.
 Flagpole; 

7. 	
Mechanical equipment room; 

8. 	
Ornamental cupola or dome; 


B. Story Height 
1. 	
Story height is measured from the .nished .oor to the ceiling above. 

2. 	
Required ground story elevation is measured from the natural or im­proved grade (whichever is more restrictive) to the .nished .oor of the ground .oor. Grade is measured continuously across a lot. 


C. Sloping Lots 
Where a lot slopes downward from the front property line, one story that is additional to the speci.ed maximum number of stories may be built on the lower, rear portion of the lot. 
9. 	
Parapet wall, limited to a height of four feet. 

10. 
Roof top deck; 

11.
 Skylights; 

12.
 Solar panels; 

13.
 Spire, belfry; 

14. 
Stairway access to roof; 

15. 
Tank designed to hold liquids; 

16. 
Visual screens surrounding roof mounted mechanical equipment; and 

17. 
Wind turbines and other integrated renewable energy systems. 


E. AddiO onal Height 

Additional height for principal or accessory structures may be granted through the process under 16.2.9, Special Use Permit. 
Street 

F.	 Bulk Plane 
Any building that abuts a residential single-family (RS-) district is subject to a bulk plane starting at 40 feet in height at the side or rear setback line, and extending upward one foot for every additional foot into the site from the setback line. 



8.1.6 Transparency 
A. Ground .oor transparency (windows and doors) is measured between two and twelve feet above the adjacent sidewalk, or the natural or improved grade. 
B. 	For General Shopfront and Large Format Shopfront building types only, a minimum of 60 percent of the ground story transparency must allow views into the ground story use for a depth of at least six feet. Windows must be clear, unpainted, or made of similarly treated glass. Neither spandrel glass nor backpainted glass complies with this provision. 

SEC. 8.1 MEASUREMENT AND EXCEPTIONS 
8.1.8 Building Entrances 


8.1.7 Blank Wall Area 
A. 	A portion of the exterior façade of the building which does not include a substantial material change (paint color is not considered a substantial change); windows or doors; or columns, pilasters or other articulation greater than 12 inches in depth. 
B. 	Blank wall area applies to both ground and upper story street-facing facades. 



8.1.8 Building Entrances 
The following building entrance requirements apply to Apartment, General Shopfront, Large Format Shopfront, Workshop, Civic and Open Lot building types. 
A. 	An entrance providing both ingress and egress, operable during normal business hours, is required to meet the street facing entrance requirements. Additional entrances o. another street, pedestrian area or internal parking area are permitted. 
B. 	The entrance separation requirements provided for the building type must be met for each building, but are not applicable to separate adjacent buildings. 
C. 	An angled entrance may be provided at either corner of a building along the street to meet the street entrance requirements, provided any applicable entrance spacing requirements can still be met. 
D. 	A minimum of 50 percent of a required entrance must be transparent. 
E. A required .re exit door with no transparency may front on a primary, side, or service street. 
Zoning Development Code | 8-5 

SEC. 8.2 PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS PER LOT 
8.2.1 One Principal Building Per Tract or Lot 
Sec. 8.2 Principal Buildings per Lot 
8.2.1 One Principal Building Per Tract or Lot 
Unless otherwise permitted in 8.2.2, Multiple Principle Buildings on a Lot, no more than one principal building may be erected on a single lot. This provision shall not apply to property developed under an approved master plan in the planned development districts or as an open lot building type in any other con­text. In addition, wireless communication towers and facilities, or power lines on a site shall not constitute an additional principal building. 

8.2.2 MulOple Principal Buildings on a Lot 
A. De.ned 
A group of two or more Row Houses, Apartments, General Shopfronts, Large Format Shopfronts, Workshops and/or Civic building types, on a single lot op­erating under a common legal relationship. The provisions of this section do not apply to a permanent o.-premise advertising sign on an individual tract or lot where only one such sign is permitted on an individual tract or lot. 
B. General 
Multiple principal buildings in the form of Row Houses, Apartments, Gen­eral Shopfronts, Large Format Shopfronts, Workshops and/or Civic building types shall meet all applicable development standards as set forth in this zoning development code. If multiple principal buildings are established on a single lot the following requirements shall be met: 
1. 	
Uses shall be limited to those permitted within the district in which the development is located. 

2. 	
The overall intensity of the land use shall be no higher, and the standard of development no lower, than that permitted in the district in which the project is located. 

3. 	
The distance of every building from every property line shall meet the relative setback requirements of the district in which the development is located. Buildings fronting a street shall meet all front setback require­ments including any applicable designated frontage requirements. 


8-6 	| City of Bastrop 
ARTICLE 8. RULES FOR BUILDING TYPES 

4. 	The maximum height of any building shall not exceed the height limit permitted in the district in which the development is located. 
Sec. 8.3 Accessory Structures 
8.3.1 General 
A. 	Accessory structures shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to a permit­ted principal structure. 
B. 	Accessory structures shall be located on the same lot as the principal struc­ture, or on a contiguous lot in the same ownership. 
C. 	No accessory structure may extend forward of the front building facade of the primary structure. 
D. 	Accessory structures shall be compatible with the architectural character of the principal structure. 

8.3.2 Accessory Structure SeparaOon 
In the Suburban context, accessory structures shall be separated from all princi­pal structures by a minimum of 10 feet. 
Sec. 8.4 Rules for ResidenOal Building Types 
(Single-Family House, Side Yard House, Attached House, Apartment House, Row House, Apartment) 
8.4.1 Garage and Carport Placement 
A.	 Applicability 
1. With the exception of the apartment building type, the following garage 
SEC. 8.4 RULES FOR RESIDENTIAL BUILDING TYPES 
8.4.2 FoundaOon 

C. Row House and Rear Loaded Garages 
Street-facing garages and carports are not permitted with row house units. When provided, rear loaded garages and carports must be positioned as set forth below. 
and carport placement requirements apply to all the building types. (Sin­gle-Family House, Side Yard House, A.ached House, Apartment House, Row House) 


2. 	In addition to the standards provided below, attached garages and carports are considered part of the principal structure and must meet all applicable requirements of the principal structure. 
B. Single-Family House, Side Yard House, A.ached House, and 
Apartment House 

1. 	
Street facing garages and carports are not permitted on lots 40 feet or less in width. 

2. 	
Street-facing garages and carports, when provided must be positioned as set forth below, however, carports may not be permitted in the car­riage court form. 


Semi-Flush 
Position garage 
Side-Loaded

between 3 and 10 Garage or carport facefeet behind front wall is oriented perpendicular Carriage Court
plane, extending no 	Set Back
to street, at least 3 feet Permitted only on lotsmore than 30% of 

behind front wall plane. at least 70 feet wide. Garage or carport is Detached the width of the Windows must cover a Garage face is oriented positioned more than Garage or carport is building. minimum of 15% of the perpendicular to street. 10 feet behind the positioned to the front wall plane of rear of the principal
street-facing garage Windows must cover 
façade. a minimum of 15% of the building. building. 



or side street (corner lot only). If facing side street Semi-Flush requirements above apply. 


8.4.2 FoundaOon 
A.	 Applicability 
The following foundation standards apply to all residential building types in the Suburban and Urban context areas. 
B. General FoundaOon Treatments Required 
1. 	
All residential building types must be built upon a permanent foundation. 

2. 	
One of the following foundation treatments must be applied to new residential building types not built on a slab foundation. 



Foundaon Skirng Clad Pier and Beam Elevated 
a. Foundation Skirting A curtain skirting wall constructed of brick, stone, lattice or a siding material consistent with the siding material used on the primary 
building. Additional materials may be approved by the Administrator. 
façade. 

SEC. 8.4 RULES FOR RESIDENTIAL BUILDING TYPES 
8.4.3 Side Yard House 
b. 	Clad Pier and Beam 
Traditional pier and beam treatment provided that the piers provided are clad in brick or other material approved by the Administrator. 

c. Elevated 
In the event that the ground story elevation of the residential building type is in a .ood prone area and is more than 60 inches above the natural grade; the foundation may be treated with either one of the above mentioned methods or may be left without a skirting. 

3. 	
All foundation treatments shall be in accordance with applicable build­ing code regulations. 

4. 	
All skirting shall be installed under the perimeter of the home and shall be uninterrupted except for required ventilation and access. 


C. InstallaOon of Manufactured Homes 
In addition to the standards above, all manufactured homes shall be in­stalled in a manner consistent with Louisiana Revised Statute 51:912.22. 

8.4.3 Side Yard House 
A. 	An easement between the two property owners to allow for maintenance or repair of the house may be required when the roof overhang or side wall of the house are within four feet of the adjacent property line (no roof over­hang can extend across the property line).  The easement on the adjacent property must provide at least .ve feet of unobstructed space. 
B. 	If the side wall of the house is on the property line, or within three feet of the property line, windows or other openings that allow for visibility into the side yard of the adjacent lot shall not be allowed. Windows that do not 
allow visibility into the side yard of the adjacent lot, such as a clerestory window or a translucent window, are allowed. 
ARTICLE 8. RULES FOR BUILDING TYPES 


8.4.4 In. ll Standards 
A. Intent 
The following standards are intended to accommodate in.ll development in a residential district consisting predominately of single-family or side yard house building types. They have been crafted to allow an applicant and the Administrator to look to the surrounding character for guidance. These stan­dards are intended to encourage reinvestment in existing neighborhoods and reinforce the traditional character of established residential neighborhoods. 
B. Applicability 
1. 	
The in.ll development standards shall be used for any residential build­ing type that is less than two acres in size, is located within a residential district consisting predominately of single-family house or side yard house building types legally established before 1950. 

2. 	
Residential projects two acres or more in size shall follow the applicable district standards. 


C. Front Setbacks 
Structures shall be located within the range of front setbacks on the street. This range of setbacks is measured on the basis of the four lots surrounding the project site (the two closest lots in either direction along the street).The new structure shall be located within the range of setbacks (no closer than the narrowest setback, no further than the deepest setback). Where a setback in these four lots is signi.cantly out of the range of setbacks along the street, it may be eliminated from the range. Where the calculation of a range of set­backs is not practicable, the structure shall meet the district standards. 

8.5.2 Open Lot Building Type 

D. Height 
The maximum building height shall be 1.5 times the average building height of the four lots surrounding the project site (the two closest lots in either direction along the street). Unless otherwise restricted by building type standards, the in.ll development shall not be restricted to less than 2 stories or an additional 12 feet. 
E. Garages and Carports 
Street-facing garages and carports may be allowed where an alley is not present and street-facing garages or carports are part of the dominant char­acter of properties fronting on the same block face. 
F. Front Porches 
A front porch is required where front porches are part of the dominant char­acter of properties fronting on the same block face. 
G. Ground Floor ElevaOon 
Raised ground .oors shall be required where raised ground .oors are part of the dominant character of properties fronting on the same block face. Any project that requires a raised ground .oor must have a foundation height of at least 18 inches measured from top of grade to the .rst .nished .oor. In the event of a demonstrated disability-related hardship, the Administrator may approve an alternative zero-step entry design. 
Sec. 8.5 Rules for Other Building Types 
8.5.1 Civic Building Type 
The Civic building type may only be used for new buildings that will predomi­nantly be occupied with uses from the public use categories. See 7.2.2, Public Use Categories. 

8.5.2 Open Lot Building Type 
The Open Lot building type may only be used for development that will be oc­cupied by parks and open space or with uses from the open use categories. See 7.2.5, Open Use Categories. 
This page left intentionally blank 








ARTICLE 9. OVERLAY DISTRICTS 

This page left intentionally blank 
ARTICLE 9. OVERLAY DISTRICTS 
Sec. 9.1 Historic District Overlay (-H) .  .  .  .  .  .  .9-1 
9.1.1 Purpose .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  9-1 
9.1.2 Historic District Overlay (-H) Established .  .  .  .  .  .  .  9-1 
9.1.3 Application .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  9-1 
9.1.4 Historic District Commission .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 9-2 
9.1.5 Certi.cate of Appropriateness Required .  .  .  .  .  .  . 9-2 
9.1.6 Design Standards .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  9-2 
This page left intentionally blank 
Sec. 9.1 Historic District Overlay (-H) 

9.1.1 Purpose 
The purpose of the Historic District Overlay (HDO) is to promote the education­al, cultural and economic welfare of the City of Bastrop, preserving and protect­ing historic structures and neighborhoods which serve as visible reminders of the history and heritage of the city, region, state and nation, by: 
1. 	
Providing a mechanism to identify and preserve the historic and architec­tural characteristics of the City of Bastrop which represents elements of the community's cultural, social, economic, political and architectural history; 

2. 	
Enhancing property values and the stabilization of historic neighborhoods; 

3. 	
Ensuring sustainability through the conservation of building materials and the embodied energy in existing buildings; 

4. 	
Increasing economic and . nancial bene.ts through the community's attractiveness to tourists and visitors; and 

5. 	
Providing educational opportunities to increase public appreciation of the community's unique heritage. 



The intent of this article is to create a method to draw a reasonable balance between private property rights and the public interest in preserving the com­munity's unique historic character by ensuring that demolition of, moving, or al­terations to properties of historic value shall be carefully considered for impact to the property's contribution to the community's heritage. 

9.1.2 Historic District Overlay Established 
The Historic District Overlay (HDO) is hereby established. The following area of the City of Bastrop, Louisiana, is hereby designated as the “Bastrop Historic District Overlay,” to-wit: 
1. 	The eight-block of downtown area of Bastrop, Louisiana, containing the Morehouse Parish Courthouse (the “Courthouse Square”), and the one-block areas immediately adjacent and to the northwest, north, north­east, west, east, southwest, and south of said Courthouse Square. 
SEC. 9.1 HISTORIC DISTRICT OVERLAY ..H. 
9.1.3 ApplicaOon 
2. 	
The entirety of the school campus situated at the corner of South Washington Street and Cahoon Avenue, commonly known as the “East Campus”, which includes a tract of immovable property and improve­ments situated thereon currently under the ownership of the More­house Parish School Board. 

3. 	
The entirety of the property located at 305 East Madison Avenue and commonly known as the “Farmers’ Market,” which includes a tract of immovable property and improvements situated thereon currently under the ownership of the Morehouse Parish Police Jury. 

4. 	
The entirety of the property located at 224 North Washington Street, and previously known as “Stephenson Chevrolet,” which includes a tract of immovable property and improvements situated thereon currently under the ownership of the Floyd Stephenson Family. 

5. 	
The entirety of the property located at 409 South Washington Street, which includes a tract of immovable property and improvements thereon currently under the ownership of Wesley and Rene Pickens. 



The HDO shall include all properties designated by ordinance to be within the Bastrop Historic District, and these properties shall be shown on the O.cial Zoning Map. 

9.1.3 ApplicaOon 
To operate in accordance with the Bastrop Master Land Use Plan, the HDO is created as a special district to be superimposed on other districts contained in these regulations. Its boundaries are designated on the O.  cial Zoning Map, and it is indicated by appending (-H) to the underlying zoning district abbre­viation. The uses, housing types, minimum lot requirements, minimum yard requirements, maximum height, and accessory uses and accessory signs shall be those allowed by the underlying zoning districts, unless further constrained by application of the regulations in the Bastrop Historic District, established by Ordinance 99-3872, including any amendments thereto. 
9.1.4 Historic District Commission 

9.1.4 Historic District Commission 
The Historic District Commission is established and shall operate as de.ned by Ordinance 99-3872, including any amendments thereto. Under this zoning development code, the Historic District Commission shall have the following additional powers and responsibilities: 
1. 	
To review and comment on proposed zoning map amendments, applica­tions for special use permits or variances that a.ect proposed or designated landmarks and historic districts. Such review shall be made prior to any public hearing by the Planning Commission or the Board of Adjustment; 

2. 	
To delegate to the Administrator such minor Certi. cate of Appropriateness decisions as the Commission considers appropriate; and 

3. 	
To testify before all boards and commissions, including the Planning Com­mission and the Board of Adjustment, on any matter a. ecting historically and architecturally signi.cant property and landmarks. 



9.1.5 CerO.cate of Appropriateness Required 
In a designated Historic District Overlay, no building, structure, or site, includ­ing outbuildings, partywalls, courtyards, sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, fences and signs, shall be erected, constructed, altered, repaired, relocated or demolished, unless the action meets with the requirements set forth in this zoning development code and Ordinance 99-3872, including any amendments thereto, and a Certi.cate of Appropriateness is approved and issued by the Historic District Commission.  (See 16.2.14) 

9.1.6 District Standards 
The standards, design guidelines and procedures associated with the Bastrop Historic District are set forth and de.ned in Ordinance 99-3872 and 16.2.14 of this zoning development code. 

ARTICLE 10.  PARKING, SITE ACCESS, AND OFF-STREET LOADING 

This page left intentionally blank 
ARTICLE 10. PARKING, SITE ACCESS AND OFF.STREET 
Sec. 10.1 Applicability .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 10-1 
Sec. 10.2 Parking Requirements  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 10-1 
10.2.1 General Provisions .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .10-1 
10.2.2 Parking Ratios .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .10-2 
10.2.3 Credit for On-Street Spaces  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .10-3 
10.2.4 Parking Reductions  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .10-3 
10.2.5 Large Vehicle Parking in Residential Districts .  .  .  .10-4 
Sec. 10.3 Parking Area Design Standards .  .  .  . 10-5 
10.3.1 Dimensions .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .10-5 
10.3.2 Surfacing  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .10-6 
10.3.3 Setback  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .10-6 
10.3.4 Lighting .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .10-7 
10.3.5 Striping  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .10-7 
10.3.6 Curbs   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .10-7 
10.3.7 Drainage .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .10-7 
LOADING 

Sec. 10.4 Bicycle Parking.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 10-7 
Sec. 10.5 AlternaOve Parking Plan  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 10-8 
10.5.1 Applicant-Submitted Parking Data .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .10-8 
10.5.2 O.-Site Parking .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .10-8 
10.5.3 Shared Parking .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .10-8 
10.5.4 Valet Parking .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .10-9 
10.5.5 Recording of Approved Plans  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .10-9 
10.5.6 Amendments .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .10-9 
Sec. 10.6 Site Access .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 10-9 
10.6.1 General Standards .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .10-9 
10.6.2 Access to Arterial Streets .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .10-9 
10.6.3 Driveways for Residential Building Types  .  .  .  .  .  .10-9 
10.6.4 Driveways for Other Building Types  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 10-10 
10.6.5 Clear Sight Distance .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 10-10 
Sec. 10.7 Stacking and Queueing Spaces .  . . 10-11 
Sec. 10.8 O.-Street Loading .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  10-11 
10.8.1 Loading Facilities Required .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 10-11 
10.8.2 Design and Layout .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 10-11 
This page left intentionally blank 
Sec. 10.1 Applicability 
A. Unless speci.cally exempt, all existing and proposed development shall provide parking facilities, site access, and o.-street loading in accordance with this article. No certi.cate of occupancy may be issued until these stan­dards have been met. 
B. 	With the exception of restriping a parking area or other vehicular use area which does not result in a recon.guration of the parking spaces, any modi.cation to existing parking facilities shall conform to the require­ments of this article. 
C. 	Buildings and uses lawfully existing as of the e.ective date of this zoning development code may be renovated or repaired without providing ad­ditional parking facilities, provided there is no increase in gross .oor area or change in use of existing .oor area that would increase parking demand. 
D. 	Where a building or use existed as of the e.ective date of this zoning development code, and the building or use is enlarged in gross . oor area or impervious area by ten percent or 2,000 square feet, whichever is less, parking as speci.ed in this article shall be required for the enlarged area. The addition of an accessory building or structure shall be considered an enlargement of the building or use. 
E. 	A change in use of a building or use existing as of the e.ective date of this zoning development code shall require additional parking facilities to com­ply with the requirements of this article for the new use unless: 
1. 	
The building is less than 2,000 square feet in .oor area; or 

2. 	
The new use has the same parking requirement or a lesser requirement than the previous one. 


SEC. 10.2 PARKING REQUIREMENTS 
10.2.1 General Provisions 

Sec. 10.2 Parking Requirements 


10.2.1 General Provisions 
A.	 Parking Required 
No use shall provide less than the minimum number of parking spaces re­quired under this section. Required parking may be for fee at the discretion of the property owner or occupier. 

B. LocaOon of Parking Spaces 
Unless otherwise approved in an alternative parking plan under Sec. 10.5, Alternative Parking Plan, parking spaces shall be located as set forth below. 
1. 	Single-Family House, Side Yard House, A.ached House, Row House, and Apartment House 
a. 	
Required parking spaces shall be located on the same lot and shall not be located within the required front setback. 

b. 	
Garage and carport placement shall meet the requirements of 8.4.1, Garage and Carport Placement. 


2. 	Apartment, General Shopfront, Large Format Shopfront, Workshop, Civic and Open Lot Building Types 
a. 	
All required parking spaces shall be located on the same site or o.­site within 100 feet of the building, structure or use served (mea­sured from the nearest point of the parking area to the nearest point of the building, structure or use served by such parking lot). 

b.
 All o.-street parking shall be arranged so that no vehicle is forced onto any public street to gain access from one parking aisle to an­other parking aisle. 



C. Clear Sight Distance 
No parking lot or vehicular use area shall interfere with a clear sight dis­tance as set forth in Sec. 15.1, Clear Sight Distance. 

SEC. 10.2 PARKING REQUIREMENTS 
10.2.2 Parking RaOos 

10.2.2 Parking RaOos 
A. CalculaOon of RaOos 
1. Mixed Uses 
Developments containing more than one use shall provide parking spaces in an amount equal to the total of the requirements for all uses. 
2. FracO onal Measurements 
Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be the next highest whole number. 

B. Minimum 
The following minimum parking ratios apply to all zoning districts. Where in the opinion of the applicant, a listed ratio requires too much or too little parking, the applicant may provide an alternative parking plan with data submitted in support of higher or lower ratios, as provided under Sec. 10.5, Alternative Parking Plan. 

C. Required Parking RaOos 
Unless speci.cally reduced in 10.2.4, Parking Reductions, the following parking ratios shall apply to all development. 
ARTICLE 10.  PARKING, SITE ACCESS AND OFF.STREET LOADING 

PARKING RATIOS Speci. c Use Minimum Parking 

Household Living Single-Family House 2.0 per unit (on site) If on lot less than 30 ft in width 1.0 per unit (on site) Side Yard House 2.0 per unit 
If on lot less than 30 ft in width 1.0 per unit Attached House 2.0 per unit Row House 1.0 per unit Multifamily dwelling, 1.25 per each Studio/E.  ciency unit + 
Upper-story residential, Apartment 1.50 per each 1 bedroom unit + house 1.75 per each 2 bedroom unit + 
2.00 per each 3 bedroom unit + 
+ 0.20 visitor space per each unit Live-Work 2.0 per unit All other uses 2.0 per unit 

Group Living All uses 1.0 per 300 SF of GFA Social Service All uses 1.0 per 300 SF of GFA 

Civic 	College or university 1.0 per 400 SF of GFA Community garden 1.0 per 5,000 SF of outdoor use area Convention center 1.0 per 500 SF of GFA Place of worship 1.0 per 5 seats in main worship space All other uses 1.0 per 300 SF of GFA 
Parks & open space All uses As determined by Administrator Utilities All uses 1.0 per 250 SF of GFA (o.  ce) 

Day care All uses 1.0 per 300 SF of GFA Indoor recreation All uses 1.0 per 250 SF of GFA Medical Hospital 0.50 per bed 
Medical, dental o.ce or chiropractor 1.0 per 150 SF of GFA 

All other uses 1.0 per 250 SF of GFA O.ce All uses 1.0 per 250 SF of GFA Outdoor recreation Campground, travel trailer park, RV 1.0 per space 
park 
Golf course or country club 3.0 per hole + 

2.0 per court Horse stable, riding 1.0 per each 5 stalls academy equestrian center Stadium or arena 1.0 per 4 seats All other uses 1.0 per 5,000 SF (outdoor use area) 
SF = Square Feet       GFA = Gross Floor Area 

PARKING RATIOS Speci. c Use Minimum Parking Commerce (continued) 
Overnight lodging  All uses  1.0 per guest room +  
1.0 per 300 SF of conference, ban­ 
quet, restaurant  
Personal service  If less than 4,000 SF of GFA  1.0 per 1,000 SF of GFA  
All other uses  1.0 per 500 SF of GFA  
Restaurant/Bar  1.0 per 200 SF of GFA  
Retail sales  If less than 4,000 SF of GFA  1.0 per 1,000 SF of GFA  
All other uses  1.0 per 500 SF of GFA  
Vehicle sales  All uses  1.0 per 500 indoor SF GFA +  
1.0 per 10,000 SF outdoor lot area  
Water-oriented  All uses  1.0 per every 3 wet or dry slips  
Industrial  
Heavy industrial  All uses  1.0 per 600 SF GFA (o.  ce) +  
1.0 per 4,000 SF GFA  
Light industrial  All uses  1.0 per 600 SF GFA (o.  ce) +  
1.0 per 4,000 SF GFA  
Research & develop- All uses  1.0 per 400 SF GFA (o.  ce)  
ment  
Self-service storage  All uses  1.0 per 250 SF GFA (non-storage) +  
1.0 per every 50 storage units  
Vehicle service  All uses  3.0 per bay or 1.0 per 250 SF GFA, as  
applicable whichever is greater  
Warehouse & distri- All uses  1 per 500 SF GFA o.  ce space +  
bution  1 per 4,000 SF indoor storage area  
Waste-related service  All uses  1.0 per 250 SF GFA (o.  ce) +  
1.0 per 4,000 SF GFA  
Wholesale trade  All uses  1.0 per 250 SF GFA (o.  ce) +  
1.0 per 4,000 SF of indoor storage  
Open  
Agriculture  All uses  1.0 per 250 SF GFA (o.  ce)  
Agricultural airstrip  All uses  1.0 per 250 SF GFA (o.  ce) +  
1.0 per 5,000 SF of hanger area  
Resource Extraction  All uses  1.0 per 250 SF GFA (o.  ce)  

SF = Square Feet       GFA = Gross Floor Area 
10.2.4 Parking ReducOons 

D.	 Maximum 
1. 	
No use shall provide more than 150 percent or two additional space (whichever is greater) of the required parking shown in the table above unless any parking above the 150 percent threshold is provided on pervi­ous surface or as underground or structured parking. 

2. 	
Where a project is intended to be developed in phases, the Administra­tor may approve development of a parking area intended to serve cur­rent and future development. 



E. Unlisted Uses 
The parking space requirements for a use not speci.cally listed in the table shall be the same as for the listed use deemed most similar to the proposed use by the Administrator. 


10.2.3 Credit for On-Street Spaces 
On-street parking spaces located immediately abutting the subject parcel, lying entirely within the extension of the side lot lines into the roadway and not within any required clear sight distance, may be counted toward meeting these parking requirements. 

10.2.4 Parking ReducOons 
Parking may be reduced in the Suburban, Urban and Center contexts according to the following standards. 
A. 	Provision of Structured Parking 
Where parking is provided in a structure, the required total number of spaces may be reduced by 10 percent. 

B. Access to Car-Sharing Program 
A residential project or a mixed use project with a residential component providing an active car-share program may reduce the total number of required parking spaces. The reduction shall equal .ve spaces per car-share vehicle available on-site to residents of the project. 

10.2.5 Large Vehicle Parking in ResidenO al Districts 
C. Tree PreservaOon & Topography 
The Administrator may approve a reduction in the total number of required parking spaces by one space for every tree over 24 inches in diameter at breast height preserved within the parking area. The maximum reduction allowed for tree preservation is .ve percent of the total required parking spaces. The Administrator may also reduce the required number of spaces by up to .ve percent for reasons of topography or other natural conditions speci.c to the site. 

D. 	Center Main Street District 
No parking is required in the Center Main Street district (C-MS-3). Where parking is provided, it must meet the dimensional standards of this article. 


10.2.5 Large Vehicle Parking in ResidenO al Districts 
A.	 Commercial Vehicles 
1. 	
The parking overnight, servicing, repair and storage of trucks, buses, vans and tractors in excess of 6,000 lbs. vehicle empty weight, as listed on the vehicle registration form, is prohibited in the Suburban, Urban, and Center contexts. 

2. 	
The parking overnight, servicing, repair and storage of trailers in excess of 2,500 lbs. empty weight as listed on the trailer registration form is prohibited in the Suburban, Urban, and Center and contexts. 

3. 	
In addition to the vehicles listed above, stake-bed trucks, . atbed trucks, box trucks, step vans, tow trucks, wreckers, bucket trucks, or vehicles converted for the sale of food are prohibited from parking overnight in the Suburban, Urban, and Center and contexts, regardless of their empty vehicle weight. 

4. 	
The parking, servicing, repair and storage of construction equipment is prohibited in the Suburban, Urban, and Center and contexts, except in connection with authorized active construction on the premises. 



10-4 | City of Bastrop 
ARTICLE 10.  PARKING, SITE ACCESS AND OFF.STREET LOADING 

B. RecreaOonal Vehicles and Equipment 
1. 	
For the purpose of this section, recreational vehicles and equipment are de.ned as including boats, travel trailers, camping trailers, truck campers, motor homes, private motor coaches and van conversions, as licensed by the State of Louisiana. 

2. 	
Recreational vehicles or equipment may be parked and stored in any residential district within the Suburban or Urban contexts provided the vehicle or equipment meets the following standards. 


a. 	
Is operational with current license tags; 

b. 	
Is on the property of the owner or tenant who resides at the resi­dence; 

c. 	
Is the personal property of the owner or tenant; and 

d. 	
Is not parked or stored in any required set back and must be located on a paved or gravel pad behind the front plane of the principal building or structure on the lot. 


3. 	No lot or parcel of land shall contain more than one boat and one recre­ational vehicle stored outside of a completely enclosed building, and no such vehicle or equipment shall be used for living, sleeping, housekeep­ing or business purposes. In addition, no such vehicle or equipment shall be connected to utility services except in preparation for departure. 

10.3.1  Dimensions 
2. 	Parking spaces using geometric standards other than those speci.ed above may be approved if developed and sealed by a State of Louisiana registered engineer, subject to a determination by the Administrator that the proposed facility will satisfy these parking requirements as adequately as would a facility using the dimensions speci. ed above. 

B. Parking Pods 
Parking areas located within 50 feet of an adjacent property or a public street right-of-way and consisting of more than 20 parking spaces shall be organized into parking pods that are separated by the following perimeter landscaping and island plantings. 
Interior Island 

STREET LOADING .PARKING, SITE ACCESS AND OFF ARTICLE 10.   
Sec. 10.3 Parking Area Design Standards 
10.3.1 Dimensions 
A. Parking Space Layout 
There must be a safe, adequate, will-lit and convenient arrangement of pe­destrian pathways, bikeways, roads, and driveways within any parking lot.  Streets, pedestrian walks and parking areas must be designed as integral parts of an overall site design, which must be properly related to existing and proposed buildings, adjacent uses and landscaped areas. 
1. 	Parking space layout shall meet the following dimensions. 
8’ 
18’
22’ 
Perimeter Landscaping 
Parking Pod 2 
Two Way 
Drive Aisle 
14’
One Way 10’ 20’ 
Parallel Parking 
Median Island Terminal Island 
18’ 
10’ 
9’ 
Two Way 
90° Parking 
Parking Pod 1 
36’-2“
60° 
1. Perimeter Landscaping 
One Way 
Perimeter landscaping shall be a minimum of . ve feet wide, landscaped 
16’

with shrubs installed at a rate of one for every 15 square feet of land­scaped area. Selected shrubs shall not exceed a mature or maintained 60° Parking height of three feet. In the Urban and Center contexts a 30-inch high wall 
Zoning Development Code | 10-5

10.3.2 Surfacing 
located in a three-foot planting strip may be substituted for the shrubs, but shall not cause visibility problems for the safe movement of tra.  c on or adjacent to the site. 
2. Interior Islands 

a. 	
An interior landscaped island shall be provided for every ten spaces. Each island shall contain a minimum of 200 square feet with a mini­mum width of eight feet inside the curb and include a minimum of one canopy tree. 


b. 	
Interior islands shall be evenly distributed throughout the parking area, with no parking space located more than 100 feet from a plant­ing island. 

c. 	
Interior islands may be consolidated or intervals may be expanded in order to preserve existing trees where approved by the Administrator. 



3. Terminal Islands 
All rows of spaces shall terminate in a curbed landscaped island. Each island shall conform to the speci.cations described for interior islands above. 
4. Median Islands 
a. 	
A median island with a minimum width of eight feet inside the curb shall be sited between every six single parking rows and along pri­mary internal and external access drives. 

b. 	
Each median island shall be planted at the rate of one canopy tree for every 40 linear feet (spaced a maximum of 50 feet apart). 

c. 	
Median intervals may be expanded in order to preserve existing trees, where approved by the Administrator. 

d. 	
A median island may also serve as the location for a sidewalk con­necting the use and the street. In such case, the sidewalk shall be a minimum of .ve feet wide, and the remaining planting area shall be no less than .ve feet wide. 


5. 	Maximum Parking Area Pod Size 
Parking areas shall be broken up by landscaped area, tree islands, and buildings into pods containing no more than 160 parking spaces. 

10-6 | City of Bastrop 
ARTICLE 10.  PARKING, SITE ACCESS AND OFF.STREET LOADING 
6. Vehicle Sales Use Areas 
The interior island, terminal island, median island and maximum pod size requirements do not apply to areas specially designated for the display of motor vehicles for sale or rental, but the requirements do apply to required employee and customer parking areas. 

C. Accessible Parking 
Accessible parking shall be provided in compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines, as determined by the Louisiana State Fire Marshal. 


10.3.2 Surfacing 
A.	 Surfacing Required 
Except as provided below, where parking facilities or any other vehicular use area are provided, they shall be surfaced with asphalt bituminous, concrete or dustless material approved by the Administrator, and shall be maintained in a smooth, well-graded condition. 

B. Pervious Parking Surfaces 
1. 	
All parking spaces may be surfaced with a pervious parking surface that is engineered for parking or driveways. 

2. 	
Where an existing tree is adjacent to parking; paver bricks or other pervious surface shall be used within the dripline of the tree. No parking shall be located closer than .ve feet from the trunk of an existing tree. 

3. 	
Where provided, pervious parking surfaces shall be maintained in a smooth, well-graded condition. 



10.3.3 Setback 
A. All o.-street parking must observe the required parking setback for the appropriate building type and zoning district, and in all cases, a minimum parking setback of not less than .ve feet, and a side yard on a corner lot of not less than . ve feet. 
B. 	In the event any parking abuts a walkway, sidewalk or street, the park­ing shall separated by curbing or other protective device with a minimum distance of .ve feet between the protective device and the edge of the walkway, sidewalk or street. 
C. 	All parking shall be separated from buildings by a minimum distance of three feet. 

10.3.4 LighOng 
Parking lots must provide lighting in accordance with Article 12, Outdoor Lighting. 

10.3.5 Striping 
All parking areas over 2,000 square feet or containing more than . ve individual o.-street parking spaces, shall stripe their required parking spaces. 

10.3.6 Curbs 
Where parking facilities or any other vehicular use areas are provided, they shall have curbs or wheel stops to prevent vehicles from overhanging adjacent prop­erty or landscaped areas. Where vehicles will overhang over medians or islands, shrubs and trees shall be planted a minimum of two feet from back of the curb or wheel stop. Where pervious parking surfaces are provided, the Administrator may allow wheel stops in place of curbs. 

10.3.7 Drainage 
Where parking facilities or any other vehicular use areas are provided, they shall be drained so as not to cause any nuisance on adjoining or nearby properties. Where possible, a portion of the drainage from parking areas should be drained through swales that include deep rooted perennial ornamental grasses. 
SEC. 10.4 BICYCLE PARKING 

Sec. 10.4 Bicycle Parking 
In order to enhance transportation opportunities, the following standards for bicycle parking shall be met. 
A. 	New General Shopfront, Large Format Shopfront, Workshop and Civic building types shall provide a minimum of four bicycle parking spaces. 
B. 	Bicycle parking facilities shall be located within 200 feet of the main build­ing entrance, in areas with natural surveillance. 
C. 	Bicycle parking facilities shall be inverted “U”- type construction. Alterna­tive high-quality bicycle parking facilities may be approved by the Adminis­trator if they can be shown to: 
1. 	
Provide adequate theft protection and security; and 

2. 	
Support the bicycle at two points of contact to prevent damage to the bicycle wheels and frame. 



SEC. 10.5 ALTERNATIVE PARKING PLAN 
10.5.1 Applicant-Submi.ed Parking Data 
Sec. 10.5 AlternaOve Parking Plan 
10.5.1 Applicant-Submi.ed Parking Data 
The Administrator may modify the parking requirements of this article when an applicant submits parking data, prepared and sealed by a registered engineer in the State of Louisiana, which illustrates that the standards of this article do not accurately apply to a speci.c development. The data submitted for an alterna­tive parking plan shall include, at a minimum, the size and type of the proposed development, the mix of uses, the anticipated rate of parking turnover and the anticipated peak parking and tra.c loads of all uses. 

10.5.2 O. -Site Parking 
The Administrator may approve the location of required parking spaces on a separate lot from the lot on which the principal use is located if the o.-site parking complies with all of the following standards. 
A.	 Ineligible AcOviOes 
1. 	
O.-site parking may not be used to satisfy the o.-street parking re­quirements for residential uses (except for guest parking), convenience stores or other convenience-oriented uses. 

2. 	
Required parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities may not be located o.-site. 



B. LocaOon 
O.-site parking spaces shall be located within 750 feet from the primary en­trance of the use served unless shuttle bus service is provided to the remote parking area. 

C. Zoning Classi.caOon 
O.-site parking areas shall be located within a district which would permit the use to which such parking is accessory. 

D.	 Agreement 
1. In the event that an o.-site parking area is not under the same owner­ship as the principal use served, a legally binding written agreement 

10-8 | City of Bastrop 
ARTICLE 10.  PARKING, SITE ACCESS AND OFF.STREET LOADING 
between the record owners of the property establishing the duration and conditions associated with the o.-site parking. 
2. An o.-site parking agreement may be rescinded only if all required o.­street parking spaces will be provided in accordance with this article. 


10.5.3 Shared Parking 
The Administrator may allow shared parking facilities if the shared parking complies with all of the following standards: 
A.	 Ineligible AcOviOes 
Required parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities may not be located o.-site. 

B. LocaOon 
Shared parking spaces shall be located within 750 feet of the primary entrance of all uses served, unless shuttle bus service is provided to the parking area. 

C. Zoning Classi.caOon 
O.-site parking areas shall be located within a district which would permit the use to which such parking is accessory. 

D. 	Shared Parking Study 
Applicants shall submit a shared parking analysis to the Administrator that clearly demonstrates the feasibility of shared parking. The study shall address, at minimum, the size and type of the proposed development, the composition of tenants, the anticipated rate of parking turnover, and the anticipated peak parking for all uses that will be sharing the parking spaces. 

E. Agreement 
1. 	
A shared parking plan will be enforced through written agreement among all owners of record. An attested copy of the agreement be­tween the owners of record shall be submitted to the Administrator. 

2. 	
A shared parking agreement may be rescinded only if all required o.­street parking spaces will be provided in accordance with this article. 




10.5.4 Valet Parking 
The Administrator may approve valet parking as a means of satisfying parking requirements if the valet parking meets all of the following standards: 
A. 	Adequate assurance of the continued operation of the valet parking is provided, such as a contractual agreement for valet services or the tenant’s a.davit agreeing to provide such services. 
B. 	An equivalent number of valet spaces are available to replace the required parking spaces. Such valet spaces do not require individual striping, and may take into account the tandem or mass parking of vehicles. 
C. 	Valet parking drop-o. locations shall meet the requirements for stacking areas. 
D. 	The design of the valet parking shall not cause customers who do not use the valet service to park o.-premise or cause queuing in the right-of-way. 

10.5.5 Recording of Approved Plans 
An attested copy of an approved alternative parking plan and any associated agree­ments shall be recorded in the deed records for Morehouse Parish. The applicant shall provide proof of recording prior to approval of the certi.cate of occupancy. 

10.5.6 Amendments 
An alternative parking plan may be amended by following the same procedure required for the original approval. 
Sec. 10.6 Site Access 
For the purposes of this section, and all other references in this zoning devel­opment code, the following streets shall be designated as arterial streets: W 
Madison Avenue, E Madison Avenue, W Je. erson Avenue, E Je. erson Avenue, 
N Washington Street, S Washington Street, N Franklin Street, S Franklin Street, 
Na. Avenue, Airport Road, and Marlatt Street. 

10.6.1 General Standards 
A. 	All buildings shall be located on a site abutting a public or private street. 
B. 	Liner buildings (generally a building pulled up to and parallel to the street which is designed to conceal an area such as a parking lot or structure, with 
SEC. 10.6 SITE ACCESS 
10.6.3 Driveways for ResidenOal Building Types 
a typical 40 foot depth), unless otherwise approved by the City of Bastrop Engineer or Administrator, must take vehicular access from within the site. 

C. 	Unless otherwise approved by the City of Bastrop Engineer or Administra­tor, all nonresidential sites abutting an arterial street must provide a shared cross-access easement with a minimum paving width of 22 feet when abut­ting another mixed use or nonresidential property. 
D. 	No vehicle or obstacle may block driveways intended for use as a .re lane or cross-access easement. 

10.6.2 Access to Arterial Streets 
A. 	Direct driveway access from any lot less than 100 feet wide in the Suburban Context or 75 feet wide in the Urban Context to an existing or proposed arterial street shall be prohibited. 
B. 	When a non-residential site is abutting an existing or proposed arterial street, access to the arterial street may be limited by one of the following means: 
1. 	
Driveway access between a site and an arterial street may be located no closer than 200 feet to any other proposed or existing intersecting arterial; 

2. 	
Sites may be subdivided so as to provide access onto a frontage road; or 

3. 	
Approval of driveway access between a site and the arterial at an inter­val less than those speci.ed may be granted only by review and recom­mendation of the City of Bastrop Engineer or Administrator. 



10.6.3 Driveways for ResidenOal Building Types 
(Single-Family House, Side Yard House, Attached House, Apartment House, Row House, Apartment) 
A.	 Alley Access 
1. 	
When an improved alley is provided, all vehicular access shall take place from the alley. Access may be taken from the side street on corner lots. 

2. 	
All lots 40 feet or less in width are required to take vehicular access from a rear alley. In the event that a lot existing at the time of the e.ective date of this zoning development code is less than 40 feet in 



10.6.4 Driveways for Other Building Types 
width and does not abut an alley, then the lot may take vehicular ac­
cess from the street. 

B. Width of Driveways 
1. 	
Driveways on lots less than 35 feet in width may be no less than eight feet and no more than 12 feet in width in the required front setback. 

2. 	
Driveways on lots greater than 35 feet in width may be no less than eight feet and no more than 20 feet in width in the required front setback. 



C. LocaOon of Driveways 
1. 	
Non-alley loaded driveways may be no closer than 30 feet from any other driveway in the Suburban context and no closer than 20 feet in the Urban and Center context, and no closer than three feet to any side lot line, unless a shared or connected driveway between adjoining lots is approved by the Administrator.  The total width of any shared or con­nected driveway shall not exceed 20 feet. 

2. 	
Unless otherwise approved or required by the City of Bastrop Engineer or Administrator, non-alley loaded driveways may intersect a street no closer than 20 feet from the intersection of two street right-of-way lines and no closer than 50 feet from the intersection of an arterial street. 



10.6.4 Driveways for Other Building Types 
(General Shopfront, Large Format Shopfront, Workshop, Civic and Open Use) 
A.	 Alley Access 
When an improved alley is provided, all vehicular access shall take place 
from the alley. Access may be taken from the side street on corner lots. 

B. Width of Driveways 
A driveway may be no less than eight feet and no more than 30 feet in width. 

10-10 | City of Bastrop 
ARTICLE 10.  PARKING, SITE ACCESS AND OFF.STREET LOADING 

C. LocaOon of Driveways 
1. 	A legal lot of record shall be permitted the number of driveways identi.ed in the following table. 


DRIVEWAYS 

200 feet of frontage or less 1 
201 feet to 400 feet of frontage 2 
401 feet to 600 feet of frontage 3 
601+ feet of frontage 4 

2. 	
The City of Bastrop Engineer or Administrator may approve or require additional driveways. Such determination shall consider site design, pedestrian and vehicle circulation, adjacent uses, topography, speed of tra.c on adjacent roads, and other such considerations. 

3. 	
Driveways shall be separated by a distance not less than 150 feet measured centerline to centerline of the driveways. In the event that an in.ll lot is unable to meet this separation requirement due to the location of existing driveways on adjacent lots, the in.ll lot shall be permitted one driveway. 

4. 	
Unless otherwise approved or required by the City of Bastrop Engineer or Administrator, the permitted driveway for a corner lot shall connect to the street with the lower roadway classi.cation or tra.  c volume. 

5. 	
Unless otherwise approved or required by the City of Bastrop Engineer or Administrator, non-alley loaded mixed use driveways may intersect a street no closer than 50 feet from the intersection of two street right­of-way lines and no closer than 100 feet from the intersection of an arterial street. 




10.6.5 Clear Sight Distance 
A clear sight distance shall be established at the intersection of a driveway and a street and on all corner sites (the intersection of two streets), as set forth in Sec. 15.1, Clear Sight Distance. 




10.7 Stacking and Queueing Spaces 
The following stacking standards shall apply unless otherwise expressly approved by the Administrator. The Administrator may require additional stacking spaces where trip generation rates suggest that additional spaces will be needed. 
A. 	Minimum Number of Spaces 
O.-street stacking spaces shall be provided as follows: 

STACKING & 
Minimum Spaces Measured From


QUEUEING 
Automated teller machine 3 Machine Bank teller lane 4 Teller or window Car lubrication stall 2 Entrance to stall Car wash stall, automated 4 Entrance to wash bay Car wash stall, hand-operated 3 Entrance to wash bay Day care drop o. 3 Passenger loading area Gasoline pump island 2 Pump island Parking area, controlled 
4 Key code box 

entrance Pharmacy or other retail sales 4 Window Restaurant drive through 6 Order box Restaurant drive through 2 Order box to pick-up window Valet parking 3 Valet stand School (public and private) * Determined by Administrator Other * Determined by Administrator 
B. Design and Layout 
Required stacking spaces are subject to the following design and layout standards: 
1. Dimensions 
Stacking spaces shall be a minimum of nine feet by 20 feet in size. 
2. LocaOon 
Stacking spaces shall not impede on- or o. -site tra.  c movements or movements into or out of parking spaces. 
SEC. 10.8 OFF.STREET LOADING 
10.8.2 Design and Layout 
3. Design 
Stacking spaces shall be separated from other internal driveways by raised medians if deemed necessary by the Administrator for tra.c movement and safety. 

Sec. 10.8 O. -Street Loading 
10.8.1 Loading FaciliO es Required 
A. O.-street loading facilities shall be required for uses in all districts, with the exception of the Center Main Street district (C-MS-3), that regularly handle large quantities of goods, as determined by the Administrator. Loading facilities shall be of su.cient quantity to adequately serve the proposed use. 
B. 	Any vehicle sales or rental facility or similar use requiring delivery of vehi­cles by truck shall demonstrate adequate on-site area exists for the loading and unloading of such trucks. 
C. 	Any convenience store or similar use requiring deliveries by truck shall demon­strate adequate on-site area exists for the loading and unloading of such trucks. 

10.8.2 Design and Layout 
A. 	With the exception of the Center Main Street district (C-MS-3), loading and unloading activities shall not be permitted in any public right-of-way. 
B. 	With the exception of the Center Main Street (C-MS-3), loading and unload­ing activities may not encroach on or interfere with the public use of streets, sidewalks, and lanes by vehicles or pedestrians. Adequate space shall be made available for the unloading and loading of goods, materials, items or stock for delivery and shipping. 
C. Where o.-street loading facilities are provided, they shall be not less than 15 feet in width by 40 feet in length, with not less than 15 feet of vertical clearance. 
D. 	All loading areas shall be screened from view from any public right-of-way and adjacent residential districts as established in 11.4.2, Loading Areas. 
This page left intentionally blank 
ARTICLE 11.  LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING 

This page left intentionally blank 
ARTICLE 11. LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING 
Sec. 11.1 Applicability .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 11-1 
Sec. 11.2 ResidenOal Building Type Requirements                          (Except Apartment) .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 11-1 
Sec. 11.3 All Other Building Type Requirements . . 11-1 
11.3.1 Street Trees .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .11-1 
11.3.2 General Landscaped Area .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .11-1 
11.3.3 Required Bu.ers .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .11-1 
Sec. 11.4 Screening  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 11-6 

11.4.1 Service Areas  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .11-6 
11.4.2 Loading Areas  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .11-6 
11.4.3 Mechanical Equipment .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .11-6 
11.4.4 Utilities  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .11-6  
Sec. 11.5 Fences and Walls  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 11-6 
Sec. 11.6 Design and InstallaOon .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 11-7 

11.6.1 Plant Material .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .11-7 
11.6.2 Credit for Existing Plant Material .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 11-7 
11.6.3 Tree Removal .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .11-8 
11.6.4 Sight Distance Planting .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .11-8 
11.6.5 Irrigation .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .11-8 
11.6.6 Tree Protection During Construction .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .11-8 
11.6.7 Issuance of Certi.cate of Occupancy .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .11-8 
Sec. 11.7 AlternaOve Landscape Plan .  .  .  .  .  . 11-8 
Sec. 11.8 Maintenance  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 11-9 

11.8.1 Responsibility .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .11-9 
11.8.2 Maintenance  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .11-9 
11.8.3 Failure to Maintain .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .11-9 
This page left intentionally blank 
Sec. 11.1 Applicability 
A. Unless speci.cally exempted below, all existing and proposed development shall provide landscaping in accordance with this article. No certi. cate of occupancy shall be issued until these standards have been met. 
B. 	Buildings and uses lawfully existing as of the e.ective date of this article may be renovated or repaired without providing additional landscaping, provided there is no increase in gross .oor area or change in use of existing .oor area, or the addition of accessory buildings or structures.  
C. 	Where a building or use existed as of the e.ective date of this article, and the building or use is enlarged in gross .oor area or impervious area by ten percent or 2,000 square feet, whichever is less, landscaping as speci. ed in this article shall be required. 
D. 	Parking areas providing .ve or less spaces are exempt from the parking landscaping requirements below. 
Sec. 11.2 ResidenOal Building Type Requirements (Except Apartment) 
Single-family houses, side yard houses, attached houses and apartment houses in the Suburban and Urban context shall be exempt from the landscaping stan­dards set forth in this article. 
Sec. 11.3 All Other Building Type 
Requirements (Apartment, General Shopfront, Large Format Shopfront, Workshop, Civic, and Open Lot) 
11.3.1 Street Trees 
A. 	Street trees shall be required along all streets at the rate of one canopy tree per lot or one canopy tree for every 40 linear feet (spaced a maximum of 50 feet apart). 
B. 	Where overhead utilities exist, understory trees may replace canopy trees at the rate of one understory tree for every 20 feet (spaced a maximum of 30 feet apart). 
SEC. 11.3 ALL OTHER BUILDING TYPE REQUIREMENTS 
11.3.3 Required Bu. ers 

C. 	All street trees shall be planted in the right-of-way. Where underground utilities or other practical di.culties exist, the Administrator may allow street tree planting no less than .ve feet or more than 15 feet from the back of the sidewalk or from the front property line if no sidewalk is provided. 
11.3.2 General Landscaped Area 
All lots shall be landscaped with a minimum of one canopy tree, one under-story tree and four shrubs for every 4,000 square feet of lot area. 
11.3.3 Required Bu. ers 
A.	 Generally 
1. 	
A required bu.er is not commensurate with the term setback. A required bu.er is determined exclusive of any required setback; however, the re­quired bu.er may be located wholly or partially within a required setback. 

2. 	
No principal building on the subject site may be located closer than . ve feet to a required bu. er. 

3. 	
The purpose of a bu.er is to interrupt sight lines from adjacent property. If the grade of the site, or other condition, prevents the bu.er from accom­plishing this purpose then the minimum requirements may be modi. ed by the Administrator. 

4. 	
Water, sanitary sewer, electrical, telephone, natural gas, cable, storm drain­age, or other service lines may be located within bu.ers. 

5. 	
Required trees and shrubs must be installed a minimum of .ve feet away from any .ow line of a swale. 

6. 	
The parking of vehicles is prohibited in a required bu. er. 

7. 	
When a bu.er between district boundaries is required, the bu.er type shall be based on the context in which the bu.ering property is designated. 

8.
 Bu.er width is calculated on the average width of the bu.er per 100 feet or the portion of the bu.er length if it is less than 100 feet. The minimum width of the bu.er at any one point shall not be less than one-half the required width of the bu. er. 

9. 	
Design variations may be permitted by the Administrator. 



ARTICLE 11.  LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING 

11.3.3 Required Bu. ers 
B. Low Intensity Bu. ers 
1. 	
A low intensity bu.er is required in the Suburban, Urban, and Center con­texts where any mixed use district abuts a (RMX, MX) residential district. 


2. 	
A low intensity district boundary bu.er may also be required as a use 
standard under Article 7, Use Provisions.  




C. High Intensity Bu. ers 
1. 	
A high intensity bu.er is required in the Suburban, Urban, Center and 
Special contexts where any commercial district or industrial district 
abuts a (CC, LI, HI) residential district. 


2. 	
A high intensity district boundary bu.er may also be required as a use 
standard under Article 7, Use Provisions. 




11.3.3 Required Bu. ers 

D. District Boundary Bu.er by Context 
The following Bu.er standards establish the requirements for each 100 lineal feet, or portion thereof, for each bu.er intensity level in each applicable context area. 

a. Width 
The bu.er shall be an average of 10 feet wide. 
b. Fence 
The required fence shall be a minimum of six feet in height and constructed of materials, such as treated wood or other material approved by the Administrator. 
c. Canopy Trees 
The bu.er shall contain four canopy trees per 100 lineal feet. 
d. Understory Trees 
Understory trees are not required for this bu. er. 
e. Shrubs 
The bu.er shall be required to contain 10 shrubs per 100 lineal feet. 
a. Width 
The bu.er shall be an average of 25 feet wide. 
b. Wall 
The required wall shall be a minimum of six feet in height and con­structed of one or a combination of the following: brick; stone; cast-stone; split-faced block; stucco over standard concrete masonry blocks; or other material approved by the Administrator. 
c. Canopy Trees 
The bu.er shall contain six canopy trees per 100 lineal feet. 
d. Understory Trees 
The bu.er shall contain .ve understory trees per 100 lineal feet. 
e. Shrubs 
The bu.er shall be required to contain 25 shrubs per 100 lineal feet. 

11.3.3 Required Bu.ers 
3. Urban and Center Low Intensity 4. Urban and Center High Intensity 

a. Width 
The bu.er shall be an average of 10 feet wide. 
b. Fence 
The required fence shall be a minimum of six feet in height and con­structed of materials, such as treated wood, wrought iron or other material approved by the Administrator. If a wrought iron fence is used, it shall be planted so as to create an evergreen wall. 
c. Canopy Trees 
The bu.er shall be contain four canopy trees per 100 lineal feet. 
d. Understory Trees 
Understory trees are not required for this bu.er. 
e. Shrubs 
The bu.er shall be required to contain 10 shrubs per 100 lineal feet. Shrubs are not required for this bu.er if the fence is planted so as to create an evergreen wall. 
a. Width 
The bu.er shall be an average of 15 feet wide. 
b. Fence 
The required wall shall be a minimum of six feet in height and con­structed of one or a combination of the following: brick; stone; cast-stone; split-faced block; stucco over standard concrete masonry blocks; or other material approved by the Administrator. 
c. Canopy Trees 
The bu.er shall contain four canopy trees per 100 lineal feet. 
d. Understory Trees 
Understory trees are not required for this bu.er. 
e. Shrubs 
The bu.er shall be required to contain 12 shrubs per 100 lineal feet. 

11.3.3 Required Bu.ers 
5. Special, High Intensity 


a. Width 
The bu.er shall be an average of 35 feet wide. 
b. Fence 
The required wall shall be a minimum of eight feet in height and constructed of one or a combination of the following: brick; stone; cast-stone; split-faced block; stucco over standard concrete ma­sonry blocks; or other material approved by the Administrator. 
c. Canopy Trees 
The bu.er shall contain ten canopy trees per 100 lineal feet. 
d. Understory Trees 
The bu.er shall contain nine understory trees per 100 lineal feet. 
e. Shrubs 
The bu.er shall be required to contain 35 shrubs per 100 lineal feet. 

SEC. 11.4 SCREENING 
11.4.1 Service Areas 
Sec. 11.4 Screening 

11.4.1 Service Areas 
A. 	Trash collection, trash compaction, recycling collection and other similar service areas shall be located on the side or rear of the building and shall be e.ectively screened from view from residential properties or public rights-of-way. 
B. 	Enclosures shall be fully screened by opaque walls or fences at least eight feet high with self-closing access doors. Wall or fence materials shall be compatible with the primary structure. 

11.4.2 Loading Areas 
A. 	All loading areas visible from residential districts or public rights-of-way shall provide a 100 percent opaque, year-round screen. 
B. 	This screen shall consist of walls, fences, plant material or combination totaling eight feet in height at installation. Wall or fence materials shall be compatible with the primary structure. An equivalent alternative screening may be approved through the site plan review process established in 16.2.8, Site Plan Review. 

11.4.3 Mechanical Equipment 
A. 	All roof, ground and wall-mounted mechanical equipment (e.g. air handling equipment, compressors, duct work, transformers and elevator equipment) shall be screened from ground level view from residential districts or public rights-of-way. 
B. 	Roof-mounted mechanical equipment shall be shielded from view on all sides. Screening shall consist of materials consistent with the primary build­ing materials, and may include metal screening or louvers painted to blend with the primary structure. 
C. 	Wall or ground-mounted equipment screening shall be constructed of: 
1. 	
Planted vegetative screens; 

2. 	
Brick, stone, reinforced concrete or other similar masonry materials; or 

3. 	
Redwood, cedar, pressure-treated wood or other similar materials. 



11-6 
  | 
City of 
B
astrop 

ARTICLE 11. LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING 


11.4.4 UOliOes 
With the exception to those located in rights-of-way, all above-ground utilities and appurtenances to underground utilities which require above-ground instal­lation, shall be screened by a continuous planting of shrubs, with a minimum mature height equal to that of the utility structure. Required access points to these utilities are exempt from screening. 
Sec. 11.5 Fences and Walls 
A. 	No fence or wall may be more than seven feet in height in residential districts or nine feet in height in all other districts. A fence or wall in any required front yard shall not exceed four feet in height. 
B. 	No wall or fence may be located within any required drainage, utility or similar easement. 
C. 	All fences and walls shall be constructed of high quality materials including one or a combination of the following: decorative blocks; brick; stone; cast-stone; split-faced block; stucco over standard concrete masonry blocks; treated wood; wrought iron; or other material approved by the Administra­tor. No wall containing more than 50 percent exposed standard concrete masonry blocks may be allowed, whether painted or not. 
D.	 Electri.ed fences, barbed wire or concertina wire shall not be permitted. 
E. 	Chain-link fences are only permitted as follows: 
1. 	In the front, side, or rear yard setback of Single-Family House, SideYard House, Attached House and Apartment House building types and any Public Use (See 7.2.2), if all Public Use Standards as established in Sec. 

7.4 are met. 
2. 	Chain-link fences shall be color coated. Galvinized chain link fencing is not permitted. 

F. 	Breaks in the fence or wall may be provided for pedestrian connections to adjacent developments. 
G. 	At the intersection of a driveway and a street and on all corner lots (the intersection of two streets), a clear sight distance shall be established as set forth in Sec 15.1, Clear Sight Distance. 
Sec. 11.6 Design and InstallaOon 
11.6.1 Plant Material 
A.	 General 
1. 	
All landscaping shall be installed in a sound manner and in accordance with accepted standards of the Louisiana Nurseryman's Manual for the Environmental Horticulture Industry, latest edition, as published by the Louisiana Nursery and Landscape Association. 

2. 	
Plant materials shall be cold hardy for the speci.c location where they are to be planted. 

3. 	
Trees and shrubs shall be drought-tolerant and able to survive on natu­ral rainfall once established. 



B. Canopy Trees 
1. 	
Canopy trees selected for planting shall meet the minimum require­ments provided in the AMERICAN STANDARD FOR NURSERY STOCK, latest edition as published by the American Nursery & Landscape Association. 

2. 	
All single trunk trees shall have a minimum 2½-inch caliper and must mea­sure a minimum of ten feet tall at time of planting. All tree heights shall be measured from the top of the root ball to the tip of the highest branch. 

3. 	
Multi-trunk trees shall have main stems with a minimum 1½-inch caliper per trunk, a minimum of three main stems, and must measure a minimum of ten feet tall at time of planting. All tree heights shall be measured from the top of the root ball to the tip of the highest branch. 



C. Understory Trees 
1. 	
Understory trees selected for planting shall meet the minimum require­ments provided in the AMERICAN STANDARD FOR NURSERY STOCK, latest edition as published by the American Nursery & Landscape Association. 


2. 	
All single trunk trees shall have a minimum 1½-inch caliper and must mea­sure a minimum of eight feet tall at time of planting. All tree heights shall be measured from the top of the root ball to the tip of the highest branch. 


SEC. 11.6 DESIGN AND INSTALLATION 
11.6.2 Credit for ExisOng Plant Material 
3. 	Multi-trunk trees shall have main stems with a minimum one-inch caliper per trunk, a minimum of three main stems, and must measure a minimum of eight feet tall at time of planting. All tree heights shall be measured from the top of the root ball to the tip of the highest branch. 

D.	 Shrubs 
1. 	
Shrubs selected for planting shall meet the minimum requirements provided in the AMERICAN STANDARD FOR NURSERY STOCK, latest edition as published by the American Nursery & Landscape Association. 

2. 	
All required shrubs shall be a minimum of 20 inches in height in a mini­mum 3-gallon container. 

3. 	
Shrubs shall be of a species that under average conditions will reach a minimum height of 24 inches within 12 months. 

4. 	
When planted as a hedge, the maximum spacing for 20-inch high shrubs shall be 36 inches on center. Spacing for other size shrubs shall be deter­mined by the Administrator. 



E. Ground Cover and Vines 
1. 	
Ground cover (other than turf grass) shall be minimum of four-inch well-rooted container stock spaced no more than 12 inches on center. 

2. 	
Well-rooted 2½-inch container stock may be substituted and spaced six inches on center. 

3. 	
Vines and ground cover plants should show a number of vigorous woody runners or a well-developed crown. 



11.6.2 Credit for ExisOng Plant Material 
A. 	Required landscaped areas shall incorporate existing natural vegetation to the maximum extent feasible. Prior to disturbance of a required planting area, approval shall be obtained from the Administrator. Where existing vegetation is inadequate to meet the required landscaping standards, ad­ditional plant material shall be required. 
B. 	Existing native habitat or vegetation located within planting areas and meeting the requirements of this article may be counted. 
Zo
nin
g D
e
ve
l
o
pme
nt Co
d
e
  | 
11-7 


11.6.3 Tree Removal 
C. 	In the event that the existing vegetation has been credited and is subsequent­ly removed or dies, it shall be replaced with the appropriate planting material. 
D. 	Credit may also be permitted for existing plant material, fences and walls on abutting property, provided such items are in a permanently protected area, including, but not limited to: 
1. 
A conservation easement or preserve area on adjacent property; or 

2. 
An existing utility or drainage easement exceeding 100 feet in width. 



11.6.3 Tree Removal 
It shall be unlawful to remove healthy, mature trees from any lot without .rst securing approval from the Administrator to ensure compliance with this ar­ticle. No more than .fteen percent of live trees having six-inch or more caliper are to be removed in areas other than driveways and the building footprint. 
11.6.4 Sight Distance PlanOng 
Excluding street trees 12 inches or less DBH (diameter at breast height) required by this article, at the intersection of a driveway and a street and on all corner lots (the intersection of two streets); a clear sight distance shall be established as set forth in Sec. 15.1,Clear Sight Distance. All established street trees interfering with the clear sight distance shall be maintained by the abut­ting property owner and shall be kept free of foliage for 80 inches measured up from the base of the tree. Any shrubs interfering with the clear sight distance shall not exceed 30 inches in height. 
11.6.5 IrrigaOon 
Where non-native or non-drought tolerant native vegetation is incorporated, an irrigation system shall be required. 
11.6.6 Tree ProtecOon During ConstrucOon 
A. 	Existing trees to remain on the site as required landscaping shall be protected from vehicular movement and material storage over their root spaces during construction. An undisturbed area with a porous surface shall be reserved below the dripline of each tree or group of trees. 
11-8 
  | 
City of 
B
astrop 

ARTICLE 11. LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING 

B. 	Trees designated for protection must be completely enclosed by a fence. Fencing must be in place prior to any clearing or site work. Fencing must remain in place until all construction has been completed or a certi.cate of occupancy has been issued, whichever is latest. 
11.6.7 Issuance of CerO.cate of Occupancy 
A. 	The Administrator shall not issue a permanent certi.cate of occupancy until all seeding, trees and plant material have been placed in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
B. 	A temporary certi.cate of occupancy may be issued for a period of 30 days under circumstances that would a.ect the seeding and planting of the site, or until the proper planting season is reached to complete the landscaping requirements, and may be extended up to 90 days upon request. 
Sec. 11.7 AlternaOve Landscape Plan 
A. 	An alternative landscape plan may be approved by the Administrator where the required landscaping in this article cannot be physically met on the site for one of the following reasons: 
1. 	
Redevelopment of an existing site requires landscaping to be added, but a building, pavement or stormwater facility already exists; or 

2. 	
The site has lost area from existing landscaping due to adjacent road widening. 



B. 	An alternative landscape plan may be approved by the Bastrop Planning Commission where other unusual circumstances, common sense and good judgement dictate, if the plan achieves the intent and general landscape open space ratio and planting density. The a.ected property owner may submit an application citing the rationale for any landscape plan modi.cations not in compliance with this article. The Bastrop Planning Commission will document their decision and rationale for any alternative landscape plan approval. 
11.8.3 Failure to Maintain 

Sec 11.8 Maintenance 
11.8.1 Responsibility 
The responsibility for maintenance of a planted area shall remain with the owner, his or her successors, heirs, assignees or any consenting grantee. 
11.8.2 Maintenance 
A. 	All plant materials shall be maintained in an attractive and healthy condi­tion. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, watering, mulching, fertilizing and pest management, mowing, weeding, removal of litter and dead plant material, and necessary pruning and trimming. 
B. 	Necessary pruning and trimming shall be in accordance with the American National Standards for Tree Care Operations: Tree Shrub and Other Woody Plant Maintenance – Standards Practices (Pruning), and shall not be inter­preted to include topping of trees through removal of crown material or the central leader, or any other similarly severe procedures that cause irrepa­rable harm to the natural form of the tree, except where such procedures are necessary to maintain public overhead utilities. 
C. 	Dead or diseased plant materials shall be removed. Replacement plant materials shall be provided for any required plants that die or are removed for any reason. 
D. 	Landscape structural features such as walls, fences, berms or water features shall be maintained in a structurally safe and attractive condition. 
11.8.3 Failure to Maintain 
In the event that any owner of a landscaped area fails to maintain the area according to the standards of this paragraph, the City of Bastrop shall have the right to recover the cost of enforcement, including reasonable attorney fees. The City of Bastrop may also, following reasonable notice and a demand that de.ciency of maintenance be corrected, enter the landscaped area to take maintenance action. The cost of such maintenance shall be charged to the party having the primary responsibility for maintenance of the landscaped area. 
This page left intentionally blank 
11-10 | City of Bastrop Louisiana Land Use Toolkit   11-10 
ARTICLE 12.  OUTDOOR LIGHTING 

This page left intentionally blank 
ARTICLE 12. OUTDOOR LIGHTING 
Sec. 12.1 Applicability .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 12-1 
Sec. 12.2 Prohibited Sources  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 12-1 
Sec. 12.3 Design Requirements .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 12-1 
12.3.1 Fixture (Luminaire).  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .12-1 
12.3.2 Fixture Height  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .12-1 
12.3.3 Light Source (Lamp) .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .12-1 
12.3.4 Mounting  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .12-1 
12.3.5 Limit Lighting to Periods of Activity  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .12-1 
Sec. 12.4 Speci. c LighOng .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 12-2 
12.4.1 Security Lighting .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .12-2 
12.4.2 Accent Lighting  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .12-2 
12.4.3 Canopy Area Lighting .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .12-2 
12.4.4 Entrances .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .12-2 
12.4.5 Commercial Parking Area Lighting .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .12-2 
12.4.6 Outdoor Recreation .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .12-2 
Sec. 12.5 Excessive IlluminaOon  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 12-2 
This page left intentionally blank 
Sec. 12.1 Applicability 
A. Unless speci.cally exempt below, all existing and proposed development shall meet the provisions of this article. 
B. 	Holiday lighting is exempt from the provisions of this article. 
C. 	Buildings lawfully existing as of the e.ective date of this article, may be renovated or repaired without modifying outdoor lighting in conformance with this article, provided there is no increase in gross .oor area in the building or the impervious area of the site. 
D. 	Where a building existed as of the e.ective date of this article, and the building is enlarged in gross .oor area or impervious area on the site by ten percent or 2,000 square feet, whichever is less, outdoor lighting as speci.ed in this article shall be provided. 
Sec. 12.2 Prohibited Sources 
The following light .xtures and sources shall not be used where the source of the direct light emitted is visible from adjacent lots: 
A. 	Low-pressure sodium and mercury vapor light sources; 
B. Cobra-head-type .xtures having dished or drop lenses or refractors which house other than incandescent sources; and 
C. 	Searchlights and other high-intensity narrow-beam .xtures. 
Sec. 12.3 Design Requirements 
Outdoor lighting shall primarily be designed to provide safety and protect proper­ty values, while secondarily accenting key architectural elements and to empha­size landscape features. Light .xtures shall be designed as an integral design element that complements the design of the project. This may be accomplished through style, material or color. All lighting .xtures designed or placed to illumi­nate any portion of a site shall meet the following requirements: 
SEC. 12.3 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 
12.3.5 Limit LighOng to Periods of AcOvity 

12.3.1 Fixture (Luminaire) 
The light source shall be concealed and shall not be visible from any street right-of-way or adjacent properties. In order to direct light downward and mini­mize the amount of light spill into the night sky and onto adjacent properties, all lighting .xtures shall be cuto. . xtures. Non-cuto. .xtures may only used for decorative purposes or to illuminate pedestrian areas and shall use luminaires that have incandescent sources of 100 watts or less. 
12.3.2 Fixture Height 
Lighting .xtures shall be a maximum of 30 feet in height within parking areas and shall be a maximum of 15 feet in height within non-vehicular pedestrian areas. Light .xtures located within 50 feet of the property line of any residential district or ground .oor residential use may not exceed 15 feet in height. 

12.3.3 Light Source (Lamp) 
Only incandescent, .uorescent, light-emitting diode (LED), metal halide, or color-corrected high-pressure sodium may be used. The same light source type shall be used for the same or similar types of lighting throughout the development. 
12.3.4 MounOng 
Fixtures shall be mounted in such a manner that the cone of light is contained on-site and does not cross any property line of the site. 
12.3.5 Limit LighOng to Periods of AcOvity 
The use of sensor technologies, timers or other means to activate lighting during times when it will be needed is encouraged to conserve energy, provide safety and promote compatibility between di.erent land uses. 
SEC 12.4 SPECIFIC LIGHTING 
12.4.1 Security LighOng 
Sec. 12.4 Speci. c LighOng 


12.4.1 Security LighOng 
A. 	Building-mounted security light .xtures such as wall packs shall not project above the fascia or roof line of the building and shall be shielded. 
B. Security .xtures, including but not limited to .oodlights and wall packs, may not face ground .oor residential uses. 
C. Security .xtures shall not be substituted for parking area or walkway light­ing and shall be restricted to loading, storage, service and similar locations. 

12.4.2 Accent LighOng 
Lighting used to accent architectural features, landscaping or art may be di­rected upward, provided that the .xture shall be located, aimed or shielded to minimize light spill into the night sky. 

12.4.3 Canopy Area LighOng 
All development that incorporates a canopy area over fuel sales, automated teller machines or similar installations shall use a recessed lens cover .ush with the bottom surface of the canopy that provides a cuto. or shielded light distribution. 

12.4.4 Entrances 
All entrances to General Shopfront, Large Format Shopfront, Workshop, Civic and Open Lot building types, and all entrances in apartment building types con­taining more than four units, shall be adequately lighted to ensure the safety of persons and the security of the building. 

12.4.5 Commercial Parking Area LighOng 
All commercial parking areas shall be required to provide lighting during night­time hours of operation. 

12.4.6 Outdoor RecreaOon 
A. 	Lighting for outdoor recreation .elds shall be arranged to prevent direct glare onto any public or private property or streets. Light .xtures shall not exceed the maximum permitted post height of 80 feet. 
12-2 | City of Bastrop 
ARTICLE 12.  OUTDOOR LIGHTING 

B. 	Field illumination shall utilize a cuto. type light at the edge of the regular .eld so that light cast beyond the cut o. does not exceed one footcandle. 
C. 	No luminaries or light shield shall be visible from adjoining residential districts. 
Sec. 12.5 Excessive IlluminaOon 
A. 	Lighting within any lot that unnecessarily illuminates and substantially interferes with the use or enjoyment of any other property shall be prohib­ited. Lighting unnecessarily illuminates another lot if it exceeds the require­ments of this Article. 
B. 	Lighting shall not be oriented so as to direct glare or excessive illumination onto streets in a manner that may distract or interfere with the vision of either drivers or pedestrians. 
ARTICLE 13.  OUTDOOR STORAGE AND DISPLAY 

This page left intentionally blank 
ARTICLE 13. OUTDOOR STORAGE AND DISPLAY 
Sec. 13.1 Applicability .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 13-1 Sec. 13.2 Outdoor Storage  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 13-1 
13.2.1  Limited Outdoor Storage .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .13-1 
13.2.2  General Outdoor Storage .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .13-1 
Sec. 13.3 Outdoor Display .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 13-2 
This page left intentionally blank 
Sec. 13.1 Applicability 

A. 	Any merchandise, material or equipment stored outside of a fully-enclosed building shall be subject to the requirements of this article. 
B. 	Vehicles for sale, lease or rent as part of a permitted use (including boats and manufactured housing) shall not be considered merchandise, material or equipment subject to the requirements of this article. 
Sec. 13.2 Outdoor Storage 
Materials stored in outdoor storage are not normally brought indoors over­night. Outdoor storage is broken in two categories as follows: 
13.2.1 Limited Outdoor Storage 
A. 	Limited outdoor storage is de.ned as the overnight outdoor storage of vehicles awaiting repair (includes the storage of vehicles at self-storage fa­cility), merchandise or material in boxes, in crates, on pallets or other kinds of shipping containers, shopping carts, garden supplies, building supplies, plants, .eet vehicles and other similar merchandise, material or equipment. 
B. 	Retail sales uses, other than vehicle sales, having an at-grade (.rst .oor) area of the principal structure, may be permitted a limited outdoor storage area following approval of a site plan illustrating the extent of the permitted area for limited outdoor storage and provided it meets the standards below. 
1. 	
The limited outdoor storage area shall be located immediately adjacent to the principal structure, with direct access to the outdoor display area available from the principal structure. 


2. 	
The limited outdoor storage area shall be located within an area capable of being secured to trespass (compound). 

3. 	
The placement of merchandise shall be arranged and presented in an “open market” atmosphere and generally accessible to customers; how­ever, this requirement shall not prevent the stacking of merchandise on racks, shelving, and similar platforms which may only be accessible by customers with the assistance of an employee. In no instance shall the height of stacked material exceed 20 feet. 



SEC. 13.2 OUTDOOR STORAGE 
13.2.2 General Outdoor Storage 
4. 	
The compound shall be enclosed on its sides by the principal building and an ornamental barrier equal to the height of the material being displayed, but not less than eight feet. The .rst four feet of the barrier, measured from grade, shall consist of a solid decorative wall. If the bar­rier does not entirely consist of a solid decorative wall, the barrier height above four feet shall consist of a decorative fence having opacity of at least 75 percent.  Chainlink fencing is not permitted. 

5. 	
The limited outdoor storage shall be located at least 20 feet from the public right-of-way and any abutting residential district. 



C. 	All other outdoor storage may only be permitted in the RMX, MX, Commer­cial (CC-), and Industrial districts following approval of a site plan illustrating the extent of the permitted area for limited outdoor storage and provided it meets the standards below. 
1. 	
The limited outdoor storage area shall not be more than 12 feet in height and shall be fully screened from the public right-of-way, pub­lic parking areas, or any adjacent residential district by a 100 percent opaque visual barrier or screen. 

2. 	
The limited outdoor storage shall be located at least 15 feet from the public right-of-way and any abutting residential district. 

3. 	
No limited outdoor storage shall be permitted in a street yard or other­wise forward of the front building line. 

4. 	
The limited outdoor storage may be located in the side or rear yard. 

5. 	
Vehicles awaiting repair may be stored  up to 14 days within the re­quired screened storage area. 



13.2.2 General Outdoor Storage 
A. 	General outdoor storage is de.ned as salvage yards, vehicle storage yards, overnight outdoor storage of shipping containers, lumber, pipe, steel, junk and other similar merchandise, material or equipment. 
B. 	General outdoor storage shall only be permitted in the industrial districts following review of a site plan illustrating the extent of the permitted area for general outdoor storage and provided it meets the standards below. 
1. 	General outdoor storage shall be fully screened from view from all adja-cent rights-of-way and any residential district by a 100% opaque visual barrier or screen. 

2. 	
All general outdoor storage shall be located at least 15 feet from the public right-of-way and any abutting residential district. 

3. 	
No general outdoor storage shall be permitted in a street yard or other­wise forward of the front building line. 

4. 	
General outdoor storage may be located in the side or rear yard. 



Sec. 13.3 Outdoor Display 
A. 	Outdoor display is de.ned as the outdoor display of products actively avail­able for sale. The outdoor location of soft drink or similar vending machines shall be considered outdoor display. Outdoor display shall not include mer­chandise or material in boxes, in crates, on pallets or other kinds of shipping containers (such merchandise shall be considered outdoor storage). 
B. 	Outdoor display may be permitted in association with any nonresidential use following approval of a site plan illustrating the extent of the permit­ted area for outdoor display. The area for outdoor display must  meet the standards below. 
1. 	
Outdoor display is permitted adjacent to the primary façade (façade with principal customer entrance) and shall extend no more than eight feet from such façade. 

2. 	
Outdoor display shall be located no closer than .ve feet from any public entrance. 

3. 	
Outdoor display shall occupy no more than 30 percent of the horizontal length of the façade. 

4. 	
Outdoor display shall not impair the ability of pedestrians to use the sidewalk or parking areas. 

5. 	
Outdoor display, other than soft drink or similar vending machines, shall only be displayed during the hours of business operation. 



ARTICLE 14.  SIGNS 

This page left intentionally blank 
ARTICLE 14. SIGNS 
Sec. 14.1 General .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 14-1 
14.1.1 Applicability .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .14-1 
14.1.2 Exempt Signs   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .14-1 
14.1.3 Prohibited Signs  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .14-2 
14.1.4 Existing Signs or Sign Structures .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .14-2 
14.1.5 Sign Permit Required .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .14-2 
14.1.6 Common Sign Plan .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .14-2 
14.1.7 Variances Allowed .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .14-2 
14.1.8 Noncommercial Message Substitution .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .14-2 
Sec. 14.2 Types of Signs .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 14-3 
14.2.1 Building Signs  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .14-3 
14.2.2 Freestanding Signs .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .14-4 
14.2.3 O.-Premises Signs .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 14-6 
14.2.4 Historic Signs .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .14-7 
Sec. 14.3 General Sign RegulaOons   .  .  .  .  .  . 14-7 
14.3.1 Computation of Sign Area  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .14-7 
14.3.2 Construction Standards .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .14-8 
14.3.3 Height of Sign .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .14-8 
Sec. 14.4 Sign Maintenance and Removal .  . . 14-8 
14.4.1 Sign Maintenance .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .14-8 
14.4.2 	Removal of Obsolete, Abandoned,   or Deteriorated Signs  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .14-8 
Sec. 14.5 Nonconforming Signs .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 14-9 

14.5.1 Removal by Abandonment or Change of Business 14-9 
14.5.2 Removal by Damage or Destruction  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  14-9 
14.5.3 Removal When Not Repaired Within 60 days .  . . 14-9 
14.5.4 Removal Upon Change of Principal Use .  .  .  .  .  . 14-9 
14.5.5 Enforcement of Removal .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  14-9 
14.5.6 	Forfeiture .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  14-9 
This page left intentionally blank 
Sec. 14.1 General 
14.1.1 Applicability 
This section applies to all signs erected, placed, painted, installed, or other­wise made visible on private or public property, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
14.1.2 Exempt Signs 
The following signs shall not be subject to the regulations of this article: 
A. 	Signs erected by or on behalf of or pursuant to the authorization of a govern­mental body or agency. 
B. 	Flags, pennants, or insignia of any governmental or nonpro. t organization, when not displayed in connection with a commercial promotion or as an adver­tising device. The .ag pole shall not exceed the allowed height in the district. 
C. 	Signs directing and guiding tra.c on private property that do not exceed four square feet in size each and that bear no advertising message or logo. 
D. 	Small outdoor signs integral to vehicle-oriented sales and service uses, directed to persons who have already entered the premises; such as drive-in restaurant menu boards, .lling station fuel pump signs or instructions on using an auto­matic car wash. No lettering on the sign shall be greater than four inches tall. 
E. 	Directory signs (attached or freestanding) that are not visible from the street, provided that no more than one sign per customer entrance is allowed, up to a maximum of 16 square feet in area. 
F. 	Hanging signs located below a canopy or awning that do not exceed 18 inches in height or .ve square feet in area, provided there is no more than one such sign per customer entrance and the sign maintains a clear height of eight feet above the ground. 
G. 	Sandwich board signs that do not exceed 42 inches in height or six square feet in area per side, provided there is no more than one such sign per business. The sandwich board sign shall not be placed more than six feet from the front primary customer entrance nor placed so as to cause the width of the sidewalk or walkway to be reduced below three feet in width. The sandwich board sign shall not be erected or maintained in a manner that prevents free ingress or egress from any door, window or .re escape. Attaching a sandwich board sign 
SEC. 14.1 GENERAL 
14.1.2 Exempt Signs 
to a structure, pole, sign, or other such object, is prohibited. A sandwich board sign shall only be displayed during business operating hours. 

H. 	On-premise banner signs limited to one per building, or in the case of a multi-tenant development, one per storefront, provided that the banner’s area is no larger than 25 square feet in area.  The banner sign shall be professionally made and constructed of cloth, canvas, plastic, PVC or similar material and have slits for proper wind resistance where necessary, and be adequately secured at each corner of the sign. 
I. 	Temporary signs indicating special events, such as a fair, carnival, festival, grand opening, sale, or similar non-permanent activity to be conducted within the City of Bastrop. Such sign shall not exceed 25 square feet in area and may be erected for a period not to exceed 30 days. Such signs shall be removed within seven days after the event has taken place. 
J. 	Signs containing the message that the real estate on which the sign is located is for sale, lease, or rent, together with information identifying the owner or agent. The real estate sign shall not exceed 16 square feet in size for develop­ments under two acres, and shall not exceed 32 square feet in size or six feet in height for all developments larger than two acres. Only one sign on each street frontage may be erected. 
K. 	One on-premises construction project sign, not to exceed 16 square feet in size in a residential district, or 32 square feet in size in all other districts. Con­struction signs shall not be erected prior to site plan approval or the issuance of a building permit, and shall be removed within 15 days after . nal inspection and approval of the project. 
L. 	Signs not exceeding four square feet in size that are customarily associated with residential use and that are not of a commercial nature, such as signs giving names of occupants, signs on mailboxes and newspaper tubes, and signs posted on private property relating to private parking or warning the public against trespassing or danger from animals. 
M. “Yard Sale” signs located on-site and not exceeding four square feet in area, not used in connection with any continuous commercial activity. 
N. 	“Yard Sale” signs, located o.-site from the property where such activity is to occur, shall be permitted outside of public rights-of-way. Such signs may not 
SEC. 14.1 GENERAL 
14.1.3 Prohibited Signs 
exceed four square feet in size. Signs shall not be erected more than 48 hours before the sale date and shall be removed within 24 hours of the sale date. 

O. 	Political signs are permitted in all districts. Signs shall not exceed nine square feet in aggregate area per lot. No such sign shall be located within or over the public right-of-way. All political signs must be removed within 10 days of said election. 
P. 	Displays, including lighting, erected in connection with the observance of holi­days. Such signs shall be removed within 15 days following the holiday. 
14.1.3 Prohibited Signs 
The following signs are expressly prohibited within all zoning districts: 
A. 	Portable signs, excluding those speci.cally exempted above, but including signs painted on or displayed on vehicles or trailers usually parked in public places primarily for displays. Additionally, any such prohibited sign designed to be portable shall not be permitted to be altered so as to be made permanent. 
B. Roof signs. 
C. 	Windblown signs, including banners, pennants, streamers, spinners, blimps, and gas balloons, unless speci.cally exempted above. 
D. 	Any sign or device set into motion by mechanical, electrical, or other means. 
E. Any .ashing sign or device displaying .ashing or intermittent lights or lights of changing degrees or intensity. 
F. 	Any mechanized or electronic changeable copy sign that .ashes, scrolls or is otherwise displayed for less than 30 seconds at one time. Changeable copy is allowed to replace any portion of an existing or proposed sign, provided the message remains static (no .ashing or scrolling) for a period of no less than 30 seconds at one time. 
G. 	Any sign which is a copy or imitation of an o.cial sign, or which purports to have o.  cial status. 
H. 	Any sign that is attached to the roof of a building that projects above the parapet wall or apex of the roof to which it is attached. 
I. 	Any o.-premises sign not expressly permitted by this article. 
J. 	Any sign placed in the right-of-way, other than those erected by a govern­mental agency. 
K. 	Any sign attached to utility poles, trees or plants. 
14-2 | City of Bastrop 
ARTICLE 14.  SIGNS 

14.1.4 ExisOng Signs or Sign Structures 
Existing signs and sign structures that were legally erected shall be brought into conformance with this article as follows. 
1. 	
Any modi.cation (except for sign maintenance) shall be in compliance with this article. Changing the tenant panel of a multi-tenant sign shall be exempt from this requirement. 

2. 	
A nonconforming sign that is within 10 percent of the height or area requirements of this article may be reviewed and approved for continu­ation by the Board of Adjustment. 



14.1.5 Sign Permit Required 
A zoning permit is required for each sign or series of signs to be installed on a site. The zoning permit shall ensure compliance with this article prior to the issuance of any building or other permit for a sign. 
14.1.6 Common Sign Plan 
A common sign plan shall be .led with the Administrator for all sites occupied by more than one tenant. After the .ling of a common sign plan, all tenant signs shall meet the requirements of the plan. The applicant shall indicate the standards of consistency of all signs on the subject property with regard to: 
A. Colors; 
B. Letter/graphics style; 
C. 	Location of each sign; 
D. 	Materials used in sign construction; and 
E. 	Maximum dimensions and proportion. 
14.1.7 Variances Allowed 
No variance shall be allowed for: 
A. Sign type; 
B. 	Building sign area; 
C. 	Freestanding sign height, area or number; or 
D.	 Sign illumination. 
14.1.8 Noncommercial Message SubsOtuOon 
A noncommercial message may be substituted for the commercial message allowed on any sign type. 
Sec. 14.2 Types of Signs 

14.2.1 Building Signs 
A building sign is an on-premises sign that is directly attached to, erected on, or supported by a building or other structure having a principal function other than the support of such sign. 
A.	 Generally 
1. Allowed Contexts 
Building signs are allowed in all contexts. 
2. Size 
The maximum size of the sum of the area of all building signs shall not exceed one square foot for each lineal foot of frontage to which the sign is exposed. 
3. Number 
More than one wall sign may be erected, provided the total surface area allowed is not exceeded and that the total sign area exposed to any single street frontage shall not exceed 60 percent of the total allowable area for all signs. 
4. Height 
No building sign may extend above the parapet wall or roof line of the building. 
5. ProjecOon/Clearance 
No building sign may project more than 12 inches from the building wall. All building signs that project more than six inches from the wall shall maintain a clear height of eight feet above the ground. 
6. IlluminaOon 
Building signs may be illuminated either internally or externally, provided that such lighting or electronic changeable copy is not prohibited under 
14.1.3 of this article. No sign located within 150 feet of a residential district may be illuminated during the hours between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. 
SEC. 14.2 TYPES OF SIGNS 
14.2.1 Building Signs 




B. Wall Sign 
A wall sign is an on-premises sign attached .at to or mounted away from but parallel to the building wall, projecting no more than 12 inches from the building wall. 

C. ProjecOng Signs 
1.
 A projecOng sign is an on-premises sign fastened directly to a supporOng building wall, and intersecOng the building wall at a right angle. A projecOng sign may be two or three dimensional. 

2. 	
The maximum area of any single side of a projecOng sign shall be 20 square feet. No more than one projecOng sign shall be permi.ed for each tenant. No projecOng sign shall project closer than three feet to the curb line. No sign shall project more than one-half the width of the sidewalk. 



D. 	Awning or Canopy Signs 
1. 	
An awning or canopy sign is an on-premises sign which is a.ached .at to an awning or canopy. 

2. 	
The maximum area of a single awning or canopy sign shall not exceed 25 percent of the surface area of the face of the awning or canopy. One awning sign shall be allowed per awning. No porOon of any awning or canopy sign shall project closer to the curb line than the awning or canopy to which it is a.ached. 



14.2.2 Freestanding Signs 
E. Window Signs 
1. 	
A window sign is an on-premises sign at­tached .at but parallel to the inside of a window. 

2. 	
Window signs are included in the total area of building signs allowed. No window sign shall cover more then 25 percent of the area of the window to which it is a.ached. 




14.2.2. Freestanding Signs 
A freestanding sign is an on-premises sign that is not directly attached to, erected on, or supported by a building or other structure having a principal function other than the support of such sign, but is instead attached to, erected on, or supported by some structure such as a pole, frame or other structure that is not part of the building. 
A.	 Generally 
1. Allowed Contexts 
Freestanding signs are allowed in all contexts, but are not allowed in the Main Street District (C-MS-3). 
2. 	Size and Number 
a.
 NonresidenOal uses in residenOal districts may have one sign with maximum sign area of 16 square feet. 

b. 	
In all other districts, a single occupancy on an individual lot may have one sign with a maximum sign area of one square foot for each lineal foot of street frontage distributed over all faces of the sign. For example, a business with a 100 foot frontage may erect a pylon sign or 2-faced monument sign with a total sign area of 50 square feet on each face of the sign. 

c. 	
For corner or mulOple-frontage lots, two freestanding signs may be allowed. The lineal frontage of each street is used to calculate the area of each allowed sign. For example, a corner lot with 100 



14-4 
  | 
City of 
B
astrop 

ARTICLE 14. SIGNS 
feet of frontage on each of two streets may erect a pylon sign or a 2-faced monument sign with a total area of 50 square feet on each face of the sign. 
d. 	If a common sign plan is approved, two freestanding signs may be 
allowed on a lot or development having a minimum 500 feet of lineal frontage using the formula provided above. 
3. Setback 
No portion of any freestanding sign may extend over any public right-of- way, or be located within 15 feet of any interior side lot line. 
4. Height 
a. 	
No pylon sign or any part of the pylon sign (including base or apron, supports, supporOng structures, and trim) may exceed 32 feet in height. 

b. 	
No monument sign may exceed eight feet in height. 


5. ProjecOon/Clearance 
All pylon signs shall maintain a clear height of eight feet above the ground. 
6. ConstrucOon 
All freestanding signs shall be securely fastened to the ground so that the sign will not be moved by wind or other forces of nature and cause injury to persons or property. 
7. Address Number 
All freestanding signs shall incorporate a street address or address range. Address numbers shall be a minimum of 8 inches in height. The address number shall not be counted against the allowed sign area un­less it exceeds twice the minimum height allowed. 
8. Le.ering Size 
Sign lettering shall be a minimum of 8 inches in height on any street with a designated speed of 45 MPH or greater. 

9. IlluminaOon 
All freestanding signs may be illuminated either internally or exter­nally, provided that such lighting or electronic changeable copy is not prohibited under 14.1.3 of this article. No sign located within 150 feet of a residential district may be illuminated during the hours between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. Lighting directed toward a sign shall be shielded so that it does not shine directly into a public right-of-way or residential building and does not interfere with the safe vision of motorists. 
10. Landscaping 
Shrubs, .owers or ground cover with a planting bed area equal to one-half the sign area shall be planted around the base of any freestanding sign. Required landscaping under this section shall be subject to the requirements of Sec. 11.6, Design and Installation and Sec.11.8, Mainte­nance. 

B. Monument Sign 
A freestanding sign no more than eight feet in height and having a ratio of less than four to one sign width to the narrowest width of support structure. Any sign constructed to the above referenced ratio of support structure to sign width, but in excess of eight feet in height, shall be considered and regulated as a pylon sign. 
SEC. 14.2 TYPES OF SIGNS 
14.2.2 Freestanding Signs 

C. Pylon Sign 
A freestanding sign attached to the ground by one or more support structures having a ratio of greater than four to one sign width to the narrowest width of support structure. 



14.2.3 O.-Premises Signs 

14.2.3 O.-Premises Signs 
With the exception of Billboards meeting the standards below, all o.-premises signs are prohibited. 
A.	 Billboards 
A billboard is a sign which describes or calls attention to products, activities, or services which are not customarily engaged in, produced, or sold on the premises upon which the sign is located. 
1. Size 
The maximum area of a single side or face of a billboard, inclusive of any border and trim, but excluding the base or apron, supports, and other structural members, is as follows. No advertising message is allowed on the base or apron. Not more than one advertising face is allowed on each side of the display. No side-by-side or stacked billboards are al­lowed. V-type or back-to-back billboards shall be considered one sign. 
a. 	
For minor signs, the maximum sign area per side is 72 square feet. 

b. 	
For major signs, the maximum sign area per side is 250 square feet. 

c. 	
For jumbo signs – maximum sign area per side is 450 square feet. 


2. LocaOon and Spacing 
Property facing public streets and all other property which is zoned so as to allow the construction and maintenance of billboards shall be subject to the following. No property or lot shall be rezoned to one of the allowed districts for the sole purpose of allowing the erection of a billboard. 
a. 	
Billboards are allowed in all districts excluding residenOal districts and the Center Main Street district (C-MS-3). 

b. 	
No billboard shall be located within 500 feet from the property line of any residenOal district. 

c. 	
Billboards are not allowed within 500 feet of the roadways of Madison Avenue (E., W.) and Je.erson Avenue (E., W.) where 



14-6 
  | 
City of 
B
astrop 

ARTICLE 14. SIGNS 
they intersect on the west and east and transiOon from two-way streets to one way streets; and within 500 feet of the roadways of Franklin Street (N., S.) and Washington Avenue (N, S.) where they intersect on the north and south and transiOon from two-way streets to one-way streets. 
d. 	
No part of any billboard shall be located less than 1,000 feet from any part of another billboard on the same side of the street. The minimum distance between any billboard on opposite sides of the street shall be no less than 500 feet measured radially. 

e. 	
No billboard shall be erected or maintained upon or directly above the roof of any building structure. 

f. 	
All sign faces shall be perpendicular to the road upon which they front, unless the sign is a V-shaped sign. 

g. 	
Billboards shall not be located in such a manner as to obscure or physically interfere with the e.ecOveness of an o.cial tra.c sign, signal, or device or obstruct or physically interfere with a driver's view of approaching, merging or intersecOng tra.c. 


3. Setback 
Billboards shall be placed at least 25 feet o. the right-of-way of any road, measured from the sign's closest point of reference. 
4. Height 
No billboard or part of a billboard (including base or apron, supports, supporting structures and trim) shall exceed 35 feet in height except where a sign face would not be plainly visible to passing tra.c at a height of 35 feet, the billboard may be raised to a maximum height of 50 feet. This distance shall be measured from the grade of the crown of the street to which the sign is oriented, or from the ground directly beneath the sign face, whichever is higher, to the highest point of the billboard sign. The City of Bastrop Engineer or Administrator shall be charged with verifying that the sign is not plainly visible at 35 feet. 

5. ProjecOon/Clearance 
All billboards shall maintain a clearance from the bottom of a billboard sign face from the grade of the street to which the sign is oriented, or from the ground directly beneath the sign face, whichever is higher, ac­cording to the size of the sign face as follows: 
a.  For minor signs, the minimum clearance shall be six feet.  
b.  For major signs, the minimum clearance shall be eight feet.  
c.  For major signs, the minimum clearance shall be 10 feet.  

6. ConstrucOon 
SEC. 14.3 GENERAL SIGN REGULATIONS 
14.3.1 ComputaOon of Sign Area 

Sec. 14.3 General Sign RegulaOons 

14.3.1 ComputaOon of Sign Area 
The area of all signs shall be computed as follows: 
A. 	The area of a sign that consists of individual letters erected directly onto a wall or awning is measured by .nding the area of the minimum imaginary rectangle, square or shape which fully encloses all sign words, copy, or message. 
B. 	The area of any sign with a structure or cabinet is measured by .nding the area of the minimum imaginary rectangle, square or shape which fully en­closes all extremities of one side of the sign, exclusive of its supports. 


Emblem 


All billboards shall be constructed in accordance with applicable building 
or Decal

codes. Visible backs of all billboards shall be suitably painted, galvanized or otherwise covered to present a neat and clean appearance. 

7. IlluminaOon 
Billboards may be illuminated either internally or externally so long as such lighting or electronic changeable copy is not prohibited under 


14.1.3 of this article and is e.ectively shielded to prevent beams or rays 

of light from being directed into any portion of the traveled ways of a public street, and is not of such intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or to interfere with any driver’s operation of a motor vehicle. 

14.2.4 Historic Signs 
A. 	An historic sign is a building or freestanding sign that is 50 years old or older, or a sign that is parOcularly unique in character, design, or history, 
or that is part of the historic character of a business or building. 

B. 	When an on-premises or o.-premises historic sign is determined by the Bastrop City Council to have parOcular historical or culturally signi.cant 

value, the terms of this arOcle may be parOally or wholly waived. 
Zo
nin
g D
e
ve
l
o
pme
nt Co
d
e
  | 
14-7 

Channel Le.ers 
• 


14.3.2 ConstrucOon Standards 

14.3.2 ConstrucOon Standards 
A. 	All signs shall comply with the appropriate provisions of the applicable building code and this article. 
B. 	Freestanding signs shall meet all Louisiana DOT sight distance requirements. 
C. 	Signs shall be located in such a way that they maintain su.cient horizontal and vertical clearance from all overhead electrical conductors, provided that no sign, except governmental signs, shall be installed closer than ten feet horizontally or vertically from any conductor or public utility guy wire. 
D. 	In no way shall a sign hinder or obstruct the visibility of the right-of-way, either at intersections or points of ingress or egress from parking lots. 

14.3.3 Height of Sign 
The height of a sign shall be measured from the highest point of the sign or supporting structure to the crown of the road adjacent to the sign. 

Sec. 14.4 Sign Maintenance and Removal 

14.4.1 Sign Maintenance 
A. 	All signs shall be maintained in a state of good repair. The Administrator is authorized to inspect each sign periodically to determine that it meets the requirements of this article. Whenever it shall appear to the Administrator that any sign has been structured or is being maintained in violation of this article, such sign shall be made to conform, or shall be removed at the expense of the owner within 30 days after written noti.cation by the Administrator. 
14-8 
  | 
City of 
B
astrop 

ARTICLE 14. SIGNS 

B. 	To ensure that signs are erected and maintained in a safe and attractive manner, the following maintenance requirements shall apply to all signs visible from any street right-of-way: 
1. 	
A sign shall have no more than 20 percent of its surface area covered with dis.gured, cracked, ripped, or peeling paint, poster paper, or other material for a period of more than 30 successive days. 

2. 	
A sign shall not stand with bent or broken sign facing, with broken supports, with loose appendages or struts, or more than 15 percent from vertical for a period of no more than 30 successive days. 

3. 	
A sign shall not have weeds, trees, vines, or other vegetation growing upon it, or obscuring the view of the sign from the street or right-of-way from which it is to be viewed, for a period of no more than 30 successive days. 



C. 	The sign maintenance requirements of this section may be suspended for up to six months following a natural disaster. 
14.4.2 Removal of Obsolete, Abandoned or Deterio­rated Signs 
A. 	Obsolete and Abandoned Signs 
1. 	
Any sign panel or sign copy which identi.es businesses or tenants no longer in existence, products no longer being sold, services no longer being rendered, or events which have already occurred shall be removed by the owner of the premises within 90 days of receipt of noti.cation by the Administrator. Covering obsolete sign panels or sign copy with any material is speci.cally prohibited. 

2. 	
Freestanding on-premises sign structures used in conjunction with a building or portion of a building that is vacant shall be considered as abandoned upon 365 days of the building or portion of building becom­ing vacant and shall be removed, excluding multi-tenant signs. 



B. Deteriorated Signs 
Any sign which, together with its supports, braces, anchors, and other structural elements, is not maintained in accordance with the provisions of the applicable building code, or which is otherwise determined to be unsound or unsafe, shall be removed or brought into compliance with all codes within 30 days of noti.cation by the Administrator. 

Sec. 14.5 Nonconforming Signs 


14.5.1 Removal by Abandonment or Change of Business 
A. 	Any nonconforming o.-premises sign, the use or copy of which is discon­tinued or removed for a period of six months, regardless of any intent to resume or not to abandon such sign, shall be deemed to be abandoned and shall not thereafter be re-established. Abandonment or obsolescence of a nonconforming sign shall terminate immediately the right to main­tain such sign. 
B. 	Any nonconforming on-premises sign, the use or copy of which is discon­tinued or removed for a period of 365 days, regardless of any intent to resume or not to abandon such sign, shall be deemed to be abandoned and shall not thereafter be re-established. Abandonment or obsolescence of a nonconforming sign shall terminate immediately the right to main­tain such sign. 
C. 	Any period of such discontinuance caused by government actions, strikes or acts of God, without any contributing fault by the nonconforming user, shall not be considered in calculating the length of discontinuance for the purposes of this paragraph. 

14.5.2 Removal by Damage or DestrucOon 
Any nonconforming o.-premises sign which is partially damaged or destroyed by any means, to beyond 50 percent of its current market value, that is noncon­forming to the requirements of this article, shall not be restored, but shall be removed or reconstructed in conformance with the provisions of article. 

14.5.3 Removal When Not Repaired Within 60 days 
Any nonconforming sign removed for any reason, including voluntary removal, whose reconstruction has not commenced within 60 days shall not be permit­ted to be replaced unless the replacement sign conforms with all requirements of this zoning development code. A nonconforming sign repaired within 60 days may only be reconstructed or repaired to its original condition as to height, area and in the same location. 
SEC. 14.5 NONCONFORMING SIGNS 
14.5.6 Forfeiture 


14.5.4 Removal Upon Change of Principal Use 
Any nonconforming sign shall be removed or brought into compliance with this article immediately upon a change in the principal use of the site. 

14.5.5 Enforcement of Removal 
A. 	If any sign is not removed as required by this section, the Administrator shall initiate the necessary proceedings to secure removal of such illegal or nonconforming sign, or secure compliance with the provisions of this zon­ing development code. 
B. 	Upon the determination of the Administrator that a sign remains noncon­forming after termination of the allowable time periods provided for above, the Administrator shall notify the sign owner and/or the owner of the land on which the nonconforming sign is located and such owner shall have 30 days after such written notice within which to remove said sign or to appeal the administrative decision. 
C. 	The removal expense may be made a lien upon such real property by the Administrator sending by certi.ed mail to the owner of such real property, a notice of lien for the cost of such removal. The cost of all such mailing and the cost of obtaining the name and address of the owners shall be part of the cost of such removal. 

14.5.6 Forfeiture 
Any private sign installed or placed on public property shall be forfeited to the public and subject to con.scation, unless it conforms to the requirements of this article. In addition to other remedies granted by this section, the Adminis­trator shall have the right to recover from the owner or person placing the sign, the full costs of removal and disposal of the sign. 
This page left intentionally blank 
ARTICLE 15.  SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS 

This page left intentionally blank 
ARTICLE 15. SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS 
Sec. 15.1 Clear Sight Distance .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 15-1 
15.1.1 Obstruction of View at Intersection  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .15-1 
15.1.2 Modi.cation of Clear Sight Distance  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .15-1 
Sec. 15.2 Hours of OperaOon .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 15-2 
This page left intentionally blank 
ARTICLE 15.  SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS 
Sec. 15.1 Clear Sight Distance 
15.1.1 ObstrucOon of View at IntersecOons 
Within the clear sight distance area as de.ned below, unobstructed cross-visi­bility shall be provided according to the following standards. 
A. 	Excluding street trees and necessary utility or tra.c structures, it shall be unlawful to construct or allow to remain, any fence, sign, movable object, hedge, shrub, or other plants that obstructs view between 36 inches in height and 80 inches in height in the clear sight distance area at street intersections or driveway and street intersections. However, trees having limbs and having foliage trimmed in such a manner that no limbs or foliage extend into the unobstructed clear sight distance area shall be allowed, 
provided they are located so as not to create a tra.  c hazard. 

B. 	All street trees encroaching into the clear sight area shall be maintained by the abutting property owner and shall be kept free of foliage for 80 inches measured up from the adjacent road surface. 
C. 	For approach speeds greater than 35 mph or when conditions such as signi.cant changes in grade are present, or when determined by the City of Bastrop Engineer, or Administrator, sight distance shall meet the most recent American Association of State Highway and Transportation O.cials (AASHTO) standards.  
D. 	The following table identi.es the minimum clear sight distances for inter­secting streets and intersecting driveways and streets. 
CLEAR SIGHT Posted Speed Limit on the Greater Street 
DISTANCE 20 MPH 25 MPH 30 MPH 35 MPH 

Driveway or 2 Lanes  150 ft.  175 ft.  200 ft.  250 ft.  
3 Lanes  175 ft.  200 ft.  250 ft.  300 ft.  
4 Lanes  200 ft.  250 ft.  300 ft.  350 ft.  

E. The sight distance shall be measured from a point located 14.5 feet from the intersection of the center line of the minor street with the curb line 
SEC. 15.1 CLEAR SIGHT DISTANCE 
15.1.2 Modi.caOon of Clear Sight Distance 
extension of the major street. This point shall be established at three and a half feet above the minor street pavement elevation. From this point a vehicle driver shall be able to view an object from a predetermined distance measured along the center of the lane of the intersecting major street. This object shall be visible from a height of three and a half feet above the pave­ment of the major street. 

15.1.2 Modi.caOon of Clear Sight Distance 
A. 	The clear sight distance area standard may be modi.ed by the City of Bastrop Engineer or Administrator when deemed necessary to ensure tra.c safety. 
B. 	The clear sight distance area standard shall not apply within the Center Main Street  district (C-MS-3). 
SEC. 15.2 HOURS OF OPERATION 
ARTICLE 15. SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS 
Sec. 15.2 Hours of OperaOon 
A. 	No non-residential use located within 150 feet of a ground . oor residential use or a residential district shall be open for business before 6:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. 
B. 	For the purpose of this part, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest property line of the non-residential use, to the nearest property line of the premises of the ground .oor use or residential district. 
C. 	Any non-residential use desiring to be open longer than the above stated hours may be allowed as a special use as established in 16.2.9, Special Use Permit, subject to any or all of the following conditions: 
1. 	
Parking areas shall be con.gured so as to prevent vehicular headlights from shining into nearby residentially zoned property.  Landscaping, including bu.ers and screening, shall be maintained in accordance with Article 11. 

2. 	
Delivery trucks shall only be permitted between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 

3. 	
All exterior site and building lighting shall comply with requirements of Article 12. 

4. 	
Ingress and egress drives and primary circulation lanes shall be located away from residential areas, where practical, to minimize vehicular traf­.c and noise which may be a nuisance to adjacent residential areas. 

5. 	
All building entrances and exits intended to be utilized by patrons shall be located on the side or sides of the building, which do not abut residentially zoned property, whenever possible, to minimize the po­tential for patrons to congregate and create noise which may become a nuisance to adjacent residential property. 



ARTICLE 16. ADMINISTRATION 

This page left intentionally blank 
ARTICLE 16. ADMINISTRATION 
Sec. 16.1 Review Bodies .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 16-1 
16.1.1 Bastrop City Council .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .16-1 
16.1.2 Planning Commission .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .16-1 
16.1.3 Board of Adjustment  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .16-2 
16.1.4 Administrator .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  16-4 
16.1.5 Summary of Authority .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 16-4 
Sec. 16.2 Procedures .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 16-5 
16.2.1 Common Review Procedures  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .16-5 
16.2.2 Zoning Permit  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .16-7 
16.2.3 Certi.cate of Occupancy .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .16-8 
16.2.4 Administrative Adjustment .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 16-9 
16.2.5 Administrative Interpretation .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 16-10 
16.2.6 Appeal of Administrative Decision  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 16-12 
16.2.7 Variance .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 16-14 
16.2.8 Site Plan Review  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 16-16 
16.2.9 Special Use Permit   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 16-18 
16.2.10 Zoning Map Amendment .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .16-20 
16.2.11 Zoning Text Amendment  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 16-22 
16.2.12 Planned Development (PD) .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 16-24 
16.2.13  Planned Industrial Development (PID)  .  .  .  .  .  . 16-27 
16.2.14 Certi.cate of Appropriateness .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 16-30 
Sec. 16.3 NonconformiOes .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 16-31 
16.3.1 In General .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 16-31 
16.3.2 Nonconforming Uses .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 16-31 
16.3.3 Nonconforming Structures .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 16-32 
16.3.4 Nonconforming Sites .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 16-32 
16.3.5 Nonconforming Lots of Record .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 16-33 
16.3.6 Nonconforming Signs .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 16-33 
Sec. 16.4 Enforcement .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  16-34 
16.4.1 Violations .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 16-34 
16.4.2 Enforcement Powers .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 16-34 
16.4.3 Notice of Violation .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 16-34 
16.4.4 Enforcement Actions .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 16-34 
16.4.5 Penalties.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 16-34 
This page left intentionally blank 
Sec. 16.1 Review Bodies 

16.1.1 Bastrop City Council 
A. 	Authority for Final AcOon 
The Bastrop City Council is responsible for .nal action regarding: 
1. 	
Zoning Text Amendments; 

2.
 Zoning Map Amendments; 

3. 	
Planned Developments (PD); and 

4. 	
Planned Industrial Developments (PID). 



16.1.2 Planning Commission 
A.	 Establishment 
A Planning Commission which shall also serve as a Zoning Commission, is established, which shall consist of seven members to be appointed by the Bastrop City Council. All members must be residents of Morehouse Parish and a majority of members must be residents and quali.ed voters of the City of Bastrop. Members cannot be employees of the City of Bastrop and serve without compensation. 

B. Terms 
Commission members shall be appointed for terms of seven years each. The terms of members of the Planning Commission shall be staggered, so that the term of one member expires each year. The membership of the .rst Commission shall serve respectively one for one year, one for two years, one for three years, one for four years, one for .ve years, one for six years and one for seven years. 
C. Removal and Vacancy 
1. 	
The appointment of any member who is no longer a resident of Morehouse Parish or misses four unexcused meetings in a 12 month period may be terminated by the Bastrop City Council after public hearing. 

2. 	
The Bastrop City Council may remove any member of the Planning Commission, after public hearing, for ine.ciency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in o.ce. 



Supp. No. 1 
SEC. 16.1 REVIEW BODIES 
16.1.2 Planning Commission 
3. 	The Bastrop City Council is authorized to .ll any vacancy for an unexpired term on the Planning Commission caused by death, resignation or otherwise. 

D.	 Chair 
The Planning Commission shall elect its own chair and vice-chair who shall serve for one year. The chair shall preside over all procedures before the Planning Commission. In the absence of the chair, the vice-chair shall act as chair. 

E. Secretary 
The City of Bastrop shall provide a secretary for the Planning Commission. The Secretary shall not be considered a voting member of the Planning Commission. It shall be the duty of the secretary to keep a true and correct record of all proceedings, resolutions, transactions, . ndings, and determinations of the Planning Commission, which shall be a public record. 

F.	 Rules 
The Planning Commission shall adopt rules necessary to the conduct of its a.airs and in keeping with the provisions of this zoning development code. 

G. Sta. and Finances 
1. 	
At the request of the Planning Commission, the CIty of Bastrop may employ sta. necessary for its work, whose appointment, promotion, demotion, and removal shall be subject to the same provisions of law, including civil service regulations, as govern other corresponding civil employees of the City of Bastrop.  

2. 	
The City of Bastrop may contract with planning experts, engineers, architects and other consultants for such services as it may require. 

3. 	
Members of a Planning Commission, when duly authorized by the Planning Commission, may attend planning conferences or meetings of planning institutes or hearings on pending planning legislation, and the Planning Commission may pay the reasonable traveling expenses related to such attendance. 

4. 	
The expenditures of a Commission, exclusive of those made from funds received by gift, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the Bastrop City Council. 


Zoning Development Code | 16-1 

SEC. 16.1 REVIEW BODIES 
16.1.3 Board of Adjustment 
H. MeeOngs 
Meetings shall be held at the call of the chair and at such other times the Planning Commission may determine. All meetings shall be open to the public. 

I. Quorum 
A quorum consisting of four or more members of the Planning Commission must be present to conduct any business of the Planning Commission. 

J.	 VoOng 
The concurring vote of a majority of the quorum present shall be required for any decision or recommendation. A tie vote or failure to take action shall constitute a denial decision or recommendation. All decisions and recommendations shall be accompanied by a written summary of the action taken. 

K. Minutes 
The Planning Commission shall keep minutes of its meetings showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if the member is absent or fails to vote, indicating that fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other o.cial actions, all of which shall be .led in the o.  ce of the Commission and shall be public record. All testimony, objections thereto, and rulings thereon shall be taken down by the Secretary. 

L. Con.ict of Interest 
In the event that a Planning Commission member has any .nancial, ownership, or employment interest in the subject of a vote by the Commission, such member shall disclose such interest and recuse themselves from the vote before the vote so that it appears in the o.cial record. 

M. Training 
All appointed members of the Planning Commission shall receive at least four hours of training in the duties, responsibilities, ethics, and substance of the positions held or to be held, either prior to taking o.ce or no later than one year after o.ce is assumed. All training shall be approved by the Planning Commission. 
N. Authority for Final AcOon 
The Planning Commission is responsible for .nal action regarding: 

16-2 | City of Bastrop 
ARTICLE 16. ADMINISTRATION 
1. 	
Preparation and adoption of a Master Land Use Plan; 

2. 	
Special Use Permits; and 

3. 	
Major site plans. 



O. Review Authority 
The Planning Commission is responsible for review and recommendations regarding: 
1. 	
Zoning Text Amendments; 

2.
 Zoning Map Amendments; 

3. 	
Planned Developments (PD); and 

4. 	
Planned Industrial Developments (PID). 



(Ord. No. 11-4200, §1, 6-8-11) 
16.1.3 Board of Adjustment 
A.	 Establishment 
A Board of Adjustment is established, which shall consist of . ve members to be appointed by the Bastrop City Council. All members must be residents of Morehouse Parish and a majority of members must be residents and quali.ed voters of the City of Bastrop. Members cannot be employees of the City of Bastrop and serve without compensation. 

B. Terms 
Board members shall be appointed for terms of .ve years each. The terms of members of the Board of Adjustment shall be staggered, so that the term of one member expires each year. The membership of the .rst Board shall serve respectively, one for one year, one for two years, one for three years, one for four years and one for . ve years. 

C. Removal and Vacancy 
1. 	
The appointment of any member who is no longer a resident of Moreshouse Parish or misses four unexcused meetings in a 12 month period may be terminated by the Bastrop City Council after public hearing; and 

2. 	
The Bastrop City Council may remove any member of the Board of 


Supp. No. 1 

Adjustment, after public hearing, for ine.ciency, neglect of duty, or 
malfeasance in o.ce. 
3. 	The Bastrop City Council is authorized to .ll any vacancy for an unexpired term on the Board of Adjustment caused by death, resignation or otherwise. 

D.	 Chair 
The Board shall elect its own chair and vice chair who shall serve for one year. The chair shall preside over all procedures before the Board. In the absence of the chair, the vice-chair shall act as chair. 

E. Secretary 
The City of Bastrop shall provide a secretary for the Board. The Secretary shall not be considered a voting member of the Board. It shall be the duty of the secretary to keep a true and correct record of all proceedings, resolutions, transactions, .ndings, and determinations of the Board, which shall be a public record. 

F.	 Rules 
The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules necessary to the conduct of its a.airs and in keeping with the provisions of this zoning development code. 

G. MeeOngs 
Meetings shall be held at the call of the chair and at such other times the Board may determine. The chair, or in the absence of the chair, the vice-chair, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be open to the public. 

H. Quorum 
A quorum consisting of three or more members of the Board of Adjustment must be present to conduct any business of the Board. 

I. VoOng 
The concurring vote of a majority of the entire Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the Administrator, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this article, or to e.ect any variance in the application of this article. 

Supp. No. 1 
SEC. 16.1 REVIEW BODIES 
16.1.3 Board of Adjustment 

J.	 Minutes 
The Board of Adjustment shall keep minutes of its meetings showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if the member is absent or fails to vote, indicating that fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other o.cial actions, all of which shall be .led in the o.ce of the Board and shall be public record. All testimony, objections thereto, and rulings thereon shall be taken down by the Secretary. 

K. Con.ict of Interest 
In the event that a Board of Adjustment member has any .nancial, ownership, or employment interest in the subject of a vote by the Board, such member shall disclose such interest and recuse themselves from the vote before the vote so that it appears in the o.  cial record. 

L. Training 
All appointed members of the Board of Adjustment shall receive at least four hours of training in the duties, responsibilities, ethics, and substance of the positions held or to be held, either prior to taking o.ce or no later than one year after o.ce is assumed. All training shall be approved by the Board of Adjustment. 

M. Authority for Final AcOon 
The Board of Adjustment is responsible for .nal action regarding: 
1. 	
Variances; 

2. 	
Appeals of Administrative Decisions; 

3. 	
Appeals of Major Site Plan Reviews; 

4. 	
Appeals of Special Use Permits; and 

5. 	
Review of Nonconformities as provided for in Sec. 16.4, Nonconformities. 



N. Findings of Fact 
Every decision of the Board of Adjustment shall be based upon .ndings of fact and every .nding of fact shall be supported in the record of its proceedings. 

O. PresumpOon 
Any determination or .nding of the Administrator shall be presumed to be correct until evidence is introduced which would support a contrary determination or .nding. 
Zoning Development Code | 16-3 

SEC. 16.1 REVIEW BODIES 
16.1.4 Administrator 
P. 	Powers Strictly Construed  
This article shall not be construed to empower the Board to change the terms of this article, to change the zoning map or to add to the speci.c uses permitted in any district. The powers of the Board shall be so construed that this article and the zoning map are strictly enforced. 

Q. Appeal from Board Decision 
Recourse from the decisions of the Board of Adjustment shall be to the District Court, as provided by law. 

(Ord. No. 11-4200, §1, 6-8-11) 
16.1.4 Administrator 
A.	 General Authority 
The Administrator is responsible for: 
1. 	
Maintaining a map showing the current zoning classi.cation of all land in the City of Bastrop; 

2. 	
Maintaining written records of all actions taken under this article; and 

3. 	
Making interpretations of this zoning development code. 



B. Authority for Final AcOon 
The Administrator is responsible for .nal action regarding: 
1. 	
Zoning Permits (including permits for temporary uses and signs), and Certi. cates of Occupancy; 

2. 	
Administrative Interpretations and Adjustments; and 

3.
 Minor Site Plans. 



C. Review Authority 
The Administrator is responsible for review and recommendations regarding: 
1. 	
Zoning Text Amendments; 

2.
 Zoning Map Amendments; 

3.
 Special Use Permits; 

4.
 Variances; 



16-4 | City of Bastrop 
ARTICLE 16. ADMINISTRATION 
5.
 Major Site Plans; 

6. 	
Planned Developments (PD); and 

7. 	
Planned Industrial Developments (PID). 



D.	 DelegaOon of Authority 
The Administrator may designate any sta. member to represent the Administrator in any function assigned by this article. The Administrator remains responsible for any . nal action. 

16.1.5 Summary of Authority 
The following table summarizes the review and approval authority of the various review bodies with regard to this zoning development code. 

Sec. 16.2 Procedures 
16.2.1 Common Review Procedures 
A. General 
The following requirements are common to many of the following procedures, and apply to applications submitted under this article. Additional details may be included in the speci. c procedure. 

B.   Pre-ApplicaO on Conference 
1. OpOonal 
Before submitting an application for development approval, an applicant may schedule a pre-application conference with the Administrator to discuss the procedures, standards and regulations required for approval. A pre-application conference is optional, except for the procedures listed below. 
2. Mandatory 
Before submitting an application for the following types of review, an applicant must schedule a pre-application conference with the Administrator to discuss the procedures, standards and regulations required for approval in accordance with this article. 
a. 
Major Site Plan Review; 

b.
 Special Use Permit; 

c. 
Zoning Map Amendment; 

d.
 Zoning Text Amendment; 

e. 
Planned Development (PD); and 

f. 
Planned Industrial Developments (PID). 


SEC. 16.2 PROCEDURES 
16.2.1 Common Review Procedures 

C.   ApplicaOon 
1. IniOaOon 
Parties allowed to .le an application are summarized below. More detailed information may be included with each speci. c procedure. 
Type of Action 
Zoning Permit/ Certi. cate of Occupancy Administrative Adjustment 
Administrative Interpretation Appeal of Administrative Decision 
Variance Site Plan Review Minor Major 
Special Use Permit Zoning Map Amendment Zoning Text Amendment Planned Development (PD) Planned Industrial 
Development (PID) 
2. ApplicaO on Forms 
Owner Planning Bastrop City 
or Agent Commission Council 
• 
• 
• 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

• 








•  •  
•  •  
•  
•  

Applications, containing all information requested, must be submitted on forms and in such numbers as required by the Administrator. 
3. Fees 
Filing fees are established from time to time by the Bastrop City Council in an ordinance or resolution designed to defray the cost of processing the application. Prior to review of an application, all associated fees must be paid in full. Where the Bastrop City Council, Board of Adjustment or Planning Commission initiates an application, no fees shall be required. 
Zoning Development Code | 16-5 

16.2.1 Common Review Procedures 
4.
 Complete ApplicaOons 

5.
 Concurrent ApplicaOons 

a. 	
Applications may be .led and reviewed concurrently, at the option of the applicant. 

b. 	
Any application that also requires a variance shall not be eligible for .nal approval until the variance has been granted. 

c. 	
Applications submitted concurrently are subject to approval of all other related applications; denial or disapproval of any concurrently submitted application shall stop consideration of any related applications until the denied or disapproved application is resolved. 



6.
 Modi.caOon of ApplicaOon 



a.  All applications shall be complete and su.cient for processing before the Administrator is required to review the application.  
b.  An application is complete when the Administrator determines it contains all of the information necessary to decide whether or not the development as proposed will comply with the requirements of this zoning development code.  
c.  The presumption is that all of the information required in the application forms is necessary to satisfy the requirements of this zoning development code. However, it is recognized that each application is unique, and more or less information may be required according to the needs of the particular case. The applicant may rely on the determination of the Administrator as to whether more or  
less information may be submitted.  

An application may be modi.ed at the applicant’s request following approval of the Administrator. Any modi.cation after a hearing but prior to a .nal decision shall require a new hearing. 
D.	 Public NoOce and Hearings 
1. Public NoOce Required 
The minimum required public notices are summarized below. More detailed information may be included with each speci.c procedure. 

16-6 
  | 
City of 
B
astrop 

ARTICLE 16. ADMINISTRATION 
Posted  Published  
Type of Action  Written Notice  Notice of Public  Notice of Public  
Hearing  Hearing  

.
Variance 
.
Appeal of Administrative Decision 
.
Special Use Permit 
.
Zoning Map Amendment 
.
Zoning Text Amendment 
.
Planned Development (PD) 
.
Planned Industrial Development (PID) 
.
Major Site Plan Review 
•  
•  
•  •  
•  •  
•  •  
•  •  
•  •  
•  

2. Wri.en NoOce of Public Hearing 
At least ten days prior to the hearing, a good faith attempt to notify the owner of record shall be made by sending an o.cial notice by regular 
U.S. mail of the time, place and subject matter of the hearing. Where more than 10 parcels are to be initially zoned or rezoned, no written notice is required. 
3. Posted NoOce of Public Hearing 
Notice shall be posted on the subject property for at least 15 days prior to the hearing. A posted notice shall be in number, size, location and content as prescribed by the Administrator and shall indicate the time and place of the public hearing and any other information prescribed by the Administrator. Posted notices shall be removed by the applicant from the subject property within 15 days after all required public hearings have been held. 
4. Published NoOce of Public Hearing 
Notice of the time and place of a public hearing shall be published once a week in three di.erent weeks in the o.cial journal, if designated, or a newspaper of general circulation in the area. The .rst notice shall be published at least 15 days prior to the hearing. 

16.2.2 Zoning Permit 


A.	 When Required 
1. 	A zoning permit is required for the following: 
a. 	
Change in use. 

b. 	
Building permits that do not require site plan review. 

c. 	
Temporary uses. 

d.
 Sign permits. 


2. 	
It shall be unlawful to begin moving, constructing, altering or repairing (except ordinary repairs) any building or other structure on a site, including an accessory structure, until a zoning permit has been issued. 

3. 	
It shall be unlawful to change the use of land or the occupancy of any building until a zoning permit has been issued for the intended use. 

4.
 No certi.cate of occupancy may be issued without a properly issued  zoning permit. 


SEC. 16.2 PROCEDURES 
16.2.2 Zoning Permit 

B. ApplicaOon and Fees 
1. 	
A pre-application conference is optional. 

2. 	
All applications for a zoning permit shall be .led in writing with the Administrator and established fees paid in full. See 16.2.1, Common Review Procedures. 

3. 	
Application shall be made prior to or concurrent with the application for a building permit. 



C. Decision by Administrator 
1. 	
The Administrator may refer the application to other a. ected or 
interested agencies for review and comment. 


2. 	
In deciding to approve, approve with conditions or disapprove the proposed zoning permit, the Administrator shall consider relevant comments of all interested parties and the review criteria below. 

3. 	
The Administrator may attach any condition to the permit necessary to ensure compliance with the standards of this zoning development code. 



D.	 Review Criteria 
The Administrator shall consider the following criteria in approving or disapproving a zoning permit: 
1. 	
The proposed development is consistent with the pertinent elements of the City of Bastrop Master Land Use Plan and any other adopted plans; 

2. 	
The proposed development meets the requirements of this zoning development code; 

3. 	
The proposed development will reinforce the existing or planned character of the neighborhood. 



E. Appeal 
A .nal decision by the Administrator on a zoning permit may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment. See 16.2.6, Appeal of Administrative Decision. 

F.	 ExpiraOon 
A zoning permit expires after six months if a building permit application has not been .led. 

ARTICLE 16. ADMINISTRATION 

16.2.3 CerO.cate of Occupancy 
16.2.3 CerO.cate of Occupancy 
A. When Issued 
A certi.cate of occupancy shall be issued by the Administrator after all 
intended site improvements and building construction has been completed 
in accordance with the zoning permit and if issued, the .nal approval of the 
building permit. Single-family, side yard, and attached house residential 
structures are excluded from this requirement. 


B. ApplicaOon and Fees 
In those cases where a zoning permit has already been issued, no additional 
fees or application procedures are required. If a change in use or occupancy 
requires no site improvements or structural changes that require a building 
permit or other certi.cate, an applicant may apply directly for a Certi.cate 
of Occupancy.  The fee for a zoning permit shall apply. 


C. InspecOons 
The Administrator may perform a .eld inspection to determine compliance with 
this zoning development code prior to the issuance of a certi.cate of occupancy. 


D. Exclusion for Certain ResidenOal Occupancy Changes 
Any change in residential occupancy of a residential unit within an 
apartment, apartment house, row house, or mixed use structure or 
manufactured home park site shall be excluded from the requirements of 
obtaining a certi.cate of occupancy, unless the change in occupancy occurs 
directly in conjunction with: 

1. 
New construction; 

2. 
Remodeling that results in a change of exterior dimensions; or 

3. 
Increase in the number of dwelling units within a structure. 



16.2.4 AdministraO ve Adjustment 


A.	 When Allowed 
The administrative adjustment procedure allows the Administrator to approve modest variations from the standards of this zoning development code. Administrative adjustment is allowed for the following: 
1. 	
Reduction of any required setback or yard by up to 15 percent. 

2. 	
Increase in the maximum height of any building by the lesser of . ve feet or . ve percent. 

3. 	
An increase in lot coverage by no more than . ve percent. 

4. 	
Any other administrative adjustment authorized by a speci.c section of this zoning development code. 



B. ApplicaOon and Fees 
1. 	
A pre-application conference is optional. 

2. 	
All applications for an administrative adjustment shall be .led in writing with the Administrator and established fees paid in full. See 16.2.1, Common Review Procedures. 


SEC. 16.2 PROCEDURES 
16.2.4 AdministraO ve Adjustment 

C. Decision by Administrator 
1. 	
The Administrator may refer the application to other a. ected or 
interested agencies for review and comment. 


2. 	
In deciding to approve, approve with conditions or disapprove the proposed administrative adjustment, the Administrator shall consider relevant comments of all interested parties. 

3. 	
The Administrator may attach any condition to the adjustment necessary to ensure compliance with the standards of this zoning development code. 



D.	 Review Criteria 
The Administrator shall consider the following criteria in approving or disapproving an administrative adjustment: 
1. 	
The proposed adjustment is consistent with the pertinent elements of the City of Bastrop Master Land Use Plan and any other adopted plans; 

2. 	
The proposed development meets the requirements of this zoning development code; and 

3. 	
The proposed adjustment will reinforce the existing or planned 
character of the neighborhood. 




E. Appeal 
A .nal decision by the Administrator on an administrative adjustment may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment. See 16.2.6, Appeal of Administrative Decision. 

F.	 ExpiraOon 
An administrative adjustment expires after six months if a building permit application has not been .led. 

SEC. 16.2 PROCEDURES 
16.2.5 AdministraO ve InterpretaOon 
16.2.5 AdministraO ve InterpretaOon 


A.	 When Allowed 
The administrative interpretation procedure allows the Administrator to render interpretations of any provision of this zoning development code or any rule or regulation issued pursuant to it. Types of interpretation include but are not limited to: 
1. 	
Applicability of a speci.c land use as a permitted or special use. 

2.
 De.nition of speci.c land uses with the context of the Use Provisions speci.ed in Article 7. 

3. 	
Precise location of mapped zoning district boundary lines. 



B. ApplicaOon 
An application for interpretation of the text provisions or Zoning Map of this zoning development code may be initiated by any resident of the City of Bastrop, or may be initiated by the Administrator in response to a particular application. 
1. 	A pre-application conference is optional. 

16-10 | City of Bastrop 
ARTICLE 16. ADMINISTRATION 
2. 	All applications for an administrative interpretation shall be . led in writing with the Administrator.  It shall set forth the speci. c provision or provisions to be interpreted, the facts of the speci.c situation giving rise to the request for an interpretation, and the precise interpretation claimed by the applicant to be correct. 

C. Decision by Administrator 
1. 	
The Administrator may refer the application to other a. ected or 
interested agencies for review and comment. 


2. 	
In deciding to approve, approve with conditions or disapprove the proposed administrative interpretation, the Administrator shall consider relevant comments of all interested parties. 

3. 	
The Administrator shall inform the applicant in writing of the interpretation and shall state the speci.c precedent, reasons and analysis upon which such interpretation is based. 



D.	 Review Criteria 
The Administrator shall consider the following criteria in approving or disapproving an administrative interpretation: 
1. 	
Article 7, Use Provisions, shall guide the decision of the Administrator. 

2. 	
No use interpretation shall permit a use listed as a prohibited use in any district to be established or any such district or any less restrictive district. 

3. 	
No use interpretation shall permit any use in a particular district unless such use is substantially similar to other uses permitted is such district and is more similar to such other uses than to uses permitted or specially permitted in a more restrictive district. 

4. 	
The proposed interpretation is consistent with the pertinent elements of the City of Bastrop Master Land Use Plan and any other adopted plans. 

5. 	
The proposed interpretation will reinforce the existing or planned character of the neighborhood. 



16.2.5 AdministraO ve InterpretaOon 

E. E.ect of Favorable Use InterpretaOon 
No use interpretation .nding a particular use to be permitted or specially permitted in a speci.ed district shall be construed to authorize the establishment of such use nor the development, construction, reconstruction, alteration or moving of any building or structure. The .nding shall merely authorize the subsequent preparation, . ling and processing of applications for any permits and approvals that may be required by this zoning development code or other codes. 

F. DocumentaOon of InterpretaOons 
Following an interpretation by the Administrator, such interpretation shall be appended to the o.cial copy of this zoning development code until such time as a formal amendment renders such appendix redundant. 

G. Appeal 
A .nal decision by the Administrator on an administrative interpretation may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment.  See 16.2.6, Appeal of Administrative Decision. 

16.2.7 Variance 
16.2.6 Appeal of AdministraO ve Decision 

A.	 When Allowed 
Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any o.cer, department, board, or bureau of the  City of Bastrop a.ected by any decision of the Administrator.  Appeals shall be taken within 30 days of the decision. 

B. ApplicaOon and Fees 
1. 	
No pre-application conference is necessary. 

2. 	
An application and notice of appeal for administrative review shall be .led in writing with the Administrator and established fees paid in full. See 16.2.1, common Review Procedures. 



16-12 | City of Bastrop 
ARTICLE 16. ADMINISTRATION 
3. 	The appellant shall provide a written notice of appeal citing the decision that is being appealed, and any reasons why the appeal should be granted. 

C. AcOon by Administrator 
The Administrator shall transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken, after all transcript costs and all other costs of appeal are paid by the person or entity taking the appeal. 

D. 	Stay of Proceedings 
An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Administrator certi.es to the Board of Adjustment after the notice of appeal has been .led that, by reason of facts stated in the certi.cate, a stay would, in the Administrator's opinion, cause imminent peril of life or property.  In such case proceedings shall not be stayed except by a restraining order that may be granted by the Board of Adjustment or by a court of record on application or notice to the Administrator and on due cause shown. 

E. Public Hearing and Decision by Board of Adjustment 
1. 	
Following notice and a public hearing as required in 16.2.1, Common Review Procedures, the Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Administrator. 

2. 	
The Board may reverse or a.rm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have the powers of the Administrator. 

3. 	
Any party may appear at the hearing in person or by agent or by 
attorney. 




F.	 TesOmony and Evidence 
The Board of Adjustment shall limit testimony and other evidence to that contained in the record at the time the Administrator took . nal action. 

ARTICLE 16. ADMINISTRATION 
16.2.7 Variance 

G. Review Criteria 
The Board of Adjustment shall consider the following criteria in deciding an 
appeal: 

1. 	
Whether the decision by the Administrator was in accordance with the 
intent and requirements of this zoning development code. 


2. 	
Whether the Administrator made erroneous .ndings based on the 
evidence and testimony on the record, or failed to fully consider 
mitigating measures or revisions o.ered by the applicant that would 
have brought the proposed project into compliance; or 


3. 	
Whether the Administrator acted arbitrarily or capriciously. 



H. Appeal 
A .nal decision by the Board of Adjustment on an administrative appeal  
may be appealed to District Court. 



16.2.6 Appeal of AdministraO ve Decision 
16.2.7 Variance 

A.	 When Allowed 
The Board of Adjustment shall have the authority to authorize variances from the terms of this zoning development code, subject to terms and conditions .xed by the Board, as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to exceptional and extraordinary circumstances, literal enforcement of the provisions of this zoning development code will result in practical di.culties or unnecessary hardship. 
B. ApplicaOon and Fees 
1. 	
No pre-application conference is necessary. 

2. 	
All applications for administrative review shall be .led in writing with 



16-14 | City of Bastrop 
ARTICLE 16. ADMINISTRATION 
the Administrator and established fees paid in full. See 16.2.1, Common Review Procedures. 

C. Review by Administrator 
The Administrator may refer the application to other a.ected or interested agencies for review and comment. 

D. 	Public Hearing and Decision by Board of Adjustment 
1. 	
Following notice and a public hearing as required in 16.2.1, Common Review Procedures, the Board of Adjustment shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the variance request based on the recommendation of the Administrator and the review criteria below. .led in writing with the Administrator and established fees paid in full. See 16.2.1, Common Review Procedures. 

2. 	
The Board may attach any condition to the variance necessary to ensure compliance with the standards of this zoning development code. 



E. Review Criteria 
No variance shall be authorized unless the Board of Adjustment . nds that all of the following conditions exist: 
1. 	
That the variance will not authorize a use other than those uses allowed in the district; 

2. 	
That the variance will not authorize the physical extension of a noncon­forming use; 

3. 	
That the variance will not vary sign regulations speci.cally prohibited in 14.1.7; 

4. 	
That, due to exceptional and extraordinary circumstances, literal en­forcement of the provisions of this zoning development code will result in practical di.culties or unnecessary hardship; 

5. 	
That the practical di.culties or unnecessary hardship were not cre­ated by the owner of the property or the applicant and are not due to or the result of general conditions in the district in which the property is located; 

6. 	
That the practical di.culties or unnecessary hardship are not solely .nancial; 



ARTICLE 16. ADMINISTRATION 
16.2.6 Appeal of AdministraO ve Decision 
7. 	
That the variance will not substantially or permanently injure the al­lowed uses of adjacent conforming property; 


8. 	
That the variance will not adversely a.ect the public health, safety or 
welfare; and 


9. 	
That the applicant has adequately addressed any concerns raised by the 
Administrator. 




F.	 Appeal 
A .nal decision by the Board of Adjustment on a variance may be appealed 
to District Court. 


G. ExpiraOon 
A variance runs with the land and does not expire, unless an expiration date 
is assigned as a condition by the Board of Adjustment. 


16.2.8 Site Plan Review 
16.2.8 Site Plan Review 

A.	 When Required 
1. 	Major Site Plan 
Major site plan review by the Planning Commission is required for: 
a. 	
Construction of ten or more residential units on a legal lot(s) of record. 

b. 	
Construction or expansion of 5,000 or more square feet of Row House, Apartment, General Shopfront, Large Format Shopfront, Workshop, Civic or Open Lot building types. 



16-16 | City of Bastrop 
ARTICLE 16. ADMINISTRATION 
2. 	Minor Site Plan 
Minor site plan review by the Administrator is required for: 

a. 	
Construction or expansion of up to 5,000 square feet of Row House, Apartment General Shopfront, Large Format Shopfront, Workshop, Civic or Open Lot building types. 

b. 	
Construction of more than two, but less than ten, residential units on a legal lot(s) of record. 

c. 	
Creation of more than 1,000 square feet of additional impervious surface (paving). 

d. 	
Construction of accessory structures in non-residential districts. 



3. 	No Site Plan Required 
No site plan review is required for the following: 
a. 	
Construction or expansion of one to two residential units in a single structure on a legal lot(s) of record. 

b. 	
Creation of up to 1,000 square feet of additional impervious surface (paving). 

c. 	
Construction of accessory structures in residential districts. 



B. ApplicaOon and Fees 
1. 	
A pre-application conference is optional for a minor site plan and mandatory for a major site plan. 

2. 	
All applications for site plan review shall be .led in writing with the Administrator and all established fees paid in full. See 16.2.1, Common Review Procedures. 


C. Review by Administrator 
1. 	
The Administrator may refer the application to other a.ected or interested agencies for review and comment. 

2. 	
The Administrator shall provide notice as set out in 16.2.1, Common Review Procedures. 


D. 	Minor Site Plan Decision by Administrator 
1. 	
In deciding to approve with conditions or disapprove the proposed site plan, the Administrator shall consider relevant comments of all interested parties and the review criteria below. 

2. 	
The Administrator may attach any condition to the site plan necessary to ensure compliance with the standards of this zoning development code. 



E. Major Site Plan Decision by Planning Commission 
1. 	
Following notice and a public hearing as required in 16.2.1, Common Review Procedures, the Planning Commission shall approve or disapprove the major site plan. 

2. 	
In deciding, the Planning Commission shall consider the 
recommendation of the Administrator, relevant comments of all 
interested parties and the review criteria below. 


3. 	
The Planning Commission may attach any condition to the site plan necessary to ensure compliance with the standards of this zoning development code. 



F.	 Review Criteria 
The Administrator and Planning Commission shall consider the following criteria in approving or disapproving a site plan: 
1. 	
The proposed development is consistent with the pertinent elements of the City of Bastrop Master Land Use Plan and any other adopted plans. 

2. 	
The proposed development meets the requirements of this zoning development code; 

3. 	
The proposed development will reinforce the existing or planned character of the neighborhood. 

4. 	
The site plan demonstrates: 

a. 	
Compliance with any prior approvals; 

b. 	
Site design and development intensity appropriate for and tailored to the unique natural characteristics of the site; 





Supp. No. 1 
SEC. 16.2 PROCEDURES 
16.2.8 Site Plan Review 
c. 	
Adequate, safe and convenient arrangement of access, pedestrian circulation facilities, bicycle facilities, roadways, driveways, and o.­street parking, stacking and loading space; 

d. 	
Adequate design of grades, paving, gutters, drainage and treatment of turf to handle stormwater, and 

e. 	
Adequate access for disabled or handicapped residents through the provision of special parking spaces, accessible routes between parking areas and buildings, passenger loading zones and access to other facilities. 


5. 	Any adverse impacts on adjacent properties have been minimized or mitigated. 

G. Building Permit 
No building permit shall be issued for development requiring a site plan until the site plan has been approved. 

H. Modi.caOon of Approved Site Plan 
The Administrator is authorized to approve  minor modi.cations to an approved site plan. All modi.cations not listed as minor below shall be considered by the body that approved the original site plan. The following modi.cations shall be considered minor: 
1. 	
Up to a 10 percent increase or any decrease in gross .oor area of a single building. 

2. 	
Up to a 10 percent reduction or any increase in the approved setbacks from exterior property lines. 

3. 	
Relocation of parking areas, internal streets or structures where such relocation occurs more than 100 feet from exterior property lines. 



I. Appeal 
1. 	
A .nal decision by the Administrator on a minor site plan may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment. See 16.2.6, Appeal of Administrative Decision. 

2.
 A .nal decision by the Planning Commission on a major site plan may be appealed to Board of Adjustment. 



J.	 ExpiraOon 
A site plan expires after one year if a building permit application has not been .led. 



16.2.9 Special Use Permit 
16.2.9 Special Use Permit 
Planning Commission 
Decision 
Public Hearing 


A.	 When Required 
A special use permit is also required for any accessory structures associated with the following building types, as noted in their descriptions: Apartment, General Shopfront, Warehouse, or Civic.3 
B. ApplicaOon and Fees 
1. 	
A pre-application conference with the Administrator is required. 

2. 	
All applications for a special use permit shall be .led in writing with the 



16-18 | City of Bastrop 
ARTICLE 16. ADMINISTRATION 
Administrator and all established fees paid in full. See 16.2.1, Common Review Procedures. 

C. Review by Administrator 
1. 	
The Administrator may refer the application to other a. ected or 
interested agencies for review and comment. 


2. 	
The Administrator shall provide notice as set out in 16.2.1, Common Review Procedures. 



D. 	Public Hearing and Decision by Planning Commission 
1. 	
Following notice and a public hearing as required in 16.2.1, Common Review Procedures, the Planning Commission shall approve or disapprove the special use permit. 

2. 	
In deciding, the Planning Commission shall consider the 
recommendation of the Administrator, relevant comments of all 
interested parties and the review criteria below. 


3. 	
The Planning Commission may attach any condition to the special use permit necessary to ensure compliance with the standards of this zoning development code. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to: additional screening or bu.ering, or limitation in scale or intensity or hours of operation. 



E. Review Criteria 
The Planning Commission shall consider the following criteria in approving or disapproving a special use permit: 

1. 	
The proposed special use permit is consistent with the pertinent elements of the City of Bastrop Master Land Use Plan and any other adopted plans; 

2. 	
The proposed development meets the requirements of this zoning development code; 

3. 	
The proposed special use permit will reinforce the existing or planned character of the neighborhood; 

4. 	
The special use permit complies with any speci.c use standards or limitations in Article 7, Use Provisions; and 



Supp. No. 1 
ARTICLE 16. ADMINISTRATION 
16.2.9 Special Use Permit 
5. 	The special use permit will not substantially or permanently injure the 
appropriate use of adjacent conforming properties. 


F.	 Appeal 
A .nal decision by the Planning Commission on a special use permit may be 
appealed to the Board of Adjustment. 


G. E.ect of Denial 
The denial of a special use permit application shall ban the subsequent 
application for the same or similar use for a period of 12 months. 


H. ExpiraOon 
A special use permit shall expire after one year if a building permit 
application has not been .led. Once the use is constructed, the special use 
permit runs with the land and does not expire. 


I. RevocaOon of Special Use Permit 
If any conditions of a special use permit or other requirements of this zoning 
development code are violated, the special use permit may be revoked by 
the Planning Commission. 

(Ord. No. 12-4209, §1, 6-14-12) 

16.2.10 Zoning Map Amendment 
16.2.10 Zoning Map Amendment 
City Council 

A.	 When Allowed 
The boundaries of zoning districts as shown on the O.  cial Zoning Map may, from time to time, be amended or modi.ed, as determined by the Bastrop City Council. 

16-20 | City of Bastrop 
ARTICLE 16. ADMINISTRATION 

B. ApplicaOon and Fees 
1. 	
A pre-application conference with the Administrator is required. 

2. 	
All applications for a zoning map amendment shall be .led in writing with the Administrator and all established fees paid in full. See 16.2.1, Common Review Procedures. 



C. Review by Administrator 
1. 	
The Administrator may refer the application to other a. ected or 
interested agencies for review and comment. 


2. 	
The Administrator shall provide notice as set out in 16.2.1, Common Review Procedures. 



D. 	Review by Planning Commission 
1. 	
Following notice and a public hearing as required in 16.2.1, Common Review Procedures, the Planning Commission shall recommend approval or disapproval of the zoning map amendment. 

2. 	
In recommending, the Planning Commission shall consider the 
recommendation of the Administrator, relevant comments of all 
interested parties and the review criteria below. 




E. Public Hearing and Decision by Bastrop City Council 
1. 	
Following notice and a public hearing as required in 16.2.1, Common Review Procedures, the Bastrop City Council shall approve or disapprove the zoning map amendment. 

2. 	
In deciding, the Bastrop City Council shall consider the recommendations of the Administrator and Planning Commission, relevant comments of all interested parties and the review criteria below. 

3. 	
In case of a protest duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of 20 percent or more of either of the areas of land (exclusive of streets and alleys) included in a proposed change or within an area determined by lines drawn parallel to and two hundred feet distant from the boundaries of the district proposed to be changed, the amendment 



16.2.10 Zoning Map Amendment 
shall not become e.ective except by the favorable vote of a majority of 
the members of the entire Bastrop City Council.  

F.	 Review Criteria 
The Bastrop City Council shall consider the following criteria in approving or disapproving a zoning map amendment: 

1. 	
The proposed zoning map amendment is consistent with the pertinent elements of the City of Bastrop Master Land Use Plan and any other adopted plans; 

2. 	
The proposed zoning map amendment is consistent with the area's designated context; 

3. 	
The proposed zoning map amendment will reinforce the existing or planned character of the neighborhood; 


4. 	
The site is appropriate for the development allowed in the proposed district; 

5. 	
There are substantial reasons why the property cannot be used 
according to the existing zoning; 


6. 	
Public facilities and services including schools, roads, recreation facilities, wastewater treatment, water supply and stormwater facilities, police, .re and emergency medical services are adequate for the development allowed in the proposed district; and 


7. 	
The zoning map amendment will not substantially or permanently injure the appropriate use of adjacent conforming properties. 


G. Appeal 
A .nal decision by the Bastrop City Council on a zoning map amendment may be appealed to District Court. 

H. E.ect of Denial 
The denial of a zoning map amendment application shall ban the 
subsequent application for the same or similar use for a period of 12 
months. 


I. ExpiraOon 
A zoning map amendment does not expire. 


ARTICLE 16. ADMINISTRATION 

16.2.12 Planned Development (PD) 
2. 	All applications for a zoning text amendment shall be .led in writing with the Administrator and all established fees paid in full. See 16.2.1, Common Review Procedures. 
C. Review by Administrator 

1. 	
The Administrator may refer the application to other a.ected or inter­ested agencies for review and comment. 

2. 	
The Administrator shall provide notice as set out in 16.2.1, Common Review Procedures. 



D. 	Review by Planning Commission 

1. 	
Following notice and a public hearing as required in 16.2.1, Common Re­view Procedures, the Planning Commission shall recommend approval or disapproval of the zoning text amendment. 

2. 	
In recommending, the Planning Commission shall consider the recom­mendation of the Administrator, relevant comments of all interested parties and the review criteria below. 


E. Public Hearing and Decision by Bastrop City Council 

1. 	
Following notice and a public hearing as required in 16.2.1, Common Review Procedures, the Bastrop City Council shall approve or disapprove the zoning text amendment. 

2. 	
In deciding, the Bastrop City Council shall consider the recommenda­tions of the Administrator, Planning Commission, relevant comments of all interested parties and the review criteria below.  


F.	 Review Criteria 

The regulations of this zoning development code may, from time to time, The Bastrop City Council shall consider the following criteria in approving or be amended, supplemented, changed, modi.ed or repealed, as determined disapproving a zoning text amendment: 
by the Bastrop City Council. 

1. 	The proposed zoning text amendment is consistent with the pertinent 
B. ApplicaOon and Fees elements of the City of Bastrop Master Land Use Plan and any other adopted plans;
1. 	A pre-application conference is optional. 

16.2.12 Planned Development (PD) 

2. 	
The extent to which the zoning text amendment is consistent with the remainder of this zoning development code; 

3. 	
The extent to which the zoning text amendment represents a new idea not considered in the existing code, or represents revisions necessi­tated by changing conditions over time; whether or not the zoning text amendment corrects an error in this zoning development code; and 

4. 	
Whether or not the zoning text amendment revises this zoning devel­opment code to comply with state or federal statutes or case law. 


G. ExpiraOon 
A zoning text amendment does not expire. 



16.2.11 Zoning Text Amendment 
16.2.12 Planned Development (PD) 
A Planned Development is a zoning district that allows for deviation from the standards of this zoning development code in exchange for higher quality development. 
City Council 

A. 	Components of PD Approval 
A PD approval consists of two separate steps: 

16-24 | City of Bastrop 
ARTICLE 16. ADMINISTRATION 
1. 	
Approval of a rezoning and concept plan by the Bastrop City Council; and 

2. 	
Approval of subsequent site plans consistent with the PD concept plan. 



B. When Allowed 
A PD is intended for projects that demonstrate a higher quality of site design that is more sensitive to the existing context, both built and natural, than is possible under other available zoning districts. 

C. ApplicaOon and Fees 
1. 	
A pre-application conference with the Administrator is required. 

2. 	
All applications for a PD shall be .led in writing with the Administrator and all established fees paid in full. See 16.2.1, Common Review Procedures. 

3. 	
The application shall, at a minimum, include the following additional materials. Other information may be required by the Administrator in the application forms: 


a. 	
A narrative explaining and tabulating the land uses by net acre, number of dwelling units by housing type, residential density, square footage of non-residential uses per net acre, open space acreage, the relationship of the proposed development to existing development in the area and other related development features. 

b. 	
A concept plan establishing the following aspects of the proposed PD:

 i. 	The location of all street and alley types, major utilities, access to existing streets, and conceptual drainage plan;
 ii. 	The perimeter and block face length of all blocks; 
iii. The layout and size of all lots with anticipated land use and building types; and 
iv. 	The location and type of any open space. 

c. 	
A speci.c list of all requested deviations from the provisions of this zoning development code. 


4. 	The applicant may provide concurrent applications for site plan review. 

D. 	Rezoning and Concept Plan Review by Administrator 
1. 	
The Administrator may refer the application to other a. ected or 
interested agencies for review and comment. 


2. 	
The Administrator shall recommend approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval of the PD rezoning and concept plan. 

3. 	
The Administrator shall provide notice as set out in 16.2.1, Common Review Procedures. 



E. Rezoning and Concept Plan Review by Planning Commission 
1. 	
Following notice and a public hearing as required in 16.2.1, Common Review Procedures, the Planning Commission shall recommend approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval of the PD rezoning and concept plan. 

2. 	
In recommending, the Planning Commission shall consider the 
recommendation of the Administrator, relevant comments of all 
interested parties and the review criteria below. 




F. 	Public Hearing and Decision by Bastrop City Council 
1. 	
Following notice and a public hearing as required in 16.2.1, Common Review Procedures, the Bastrop City Council shall approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the PD rezoning and concept plan. 

2. 	
In deciding, the Bastrop City Council shall consider the recommendations of the Administrator and Planning Commission, relevant comments of all interested parties and the review criteria below. 

3. 	
In case of a protest duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of 20 percent or more of either of the areas of land (exclusive of streets and alleys) included in a proposed change or within an area determined by lines drawn parallel to and two hundred feet distant from the boundaries of the district proposed to be changed, the amendment shall not become e.ective except by the favorable vote of a majority of the members of the entire Bastrop City Council.  


SEC. 16.2 PROCEDURES 
16.2.11 Zoning Text Amendment 

G. Review Criteria 
The Planning Commission and the Bastrop City Council shall consider the following criteria in approving, approving with conditions or disapproving a PD rezoning and concept plan: 
1. 	
The proposed PD is consistent with the pertinent elements of the City of Bastrop Master Land Use Plan and any other adopted plans; 

2. 	
The proposed PD is consistent with the standards and uses of the context area within which it is located; 

3. 	
The proposed PD meets the requirements of this zoning development code or is granted a speci.c deviation by the Bastrop City Council; 

4. 	
The proposed PD will reinforce the existing or planned character of the neighborhood; 

5. 	
The site is appropriate for the development allowed in the proposed PD; 

6. 	
The PD demonstrates a higher quality of site design that is more sensitive to the existing context, both built and natural, than is possible under other available zoning districts. 

7. 	
Public facilities and services including schools, roads, recreation facilities, wastewater treatment, water supply and stormwater facilities are adequate for the development allowed in the proposed PD; and 

8. 	
The PD will not substantially or permanently injure the appropriate use of adjacent conforming properties. 



H. Allowed DeviaOons 
Unless otherwise expressly approved by the Bastrop City Council as part of the approved rezoning and concept plan, all planned developments shall be subject to all applicable standards of this zoning development code. In order to approve modi.cations of otherwise applicable standards, the Bastrop City Council must . nd that: 
1. 	Requested deviations from applicable building type standards, allowed uses, or other development standards that otherwise would apply are justi.ed by the compensating bene.ts of the planned development; and 

ARTICLE 16. ADMINISTRATION 


16.2.12 Planned Industrial Development (PID) 
2. 	The requested deviations do not detract from the established character 
or form of any surrounding properties. 


I. Appeal 
A .nal decision by the Bastrop City Council on a PD may be appealed in 
District Court. 


J.	 AcOon Following Approval 
Approval of a PD rezoning and concept authorizes the submission of site 
plans consistent with the PD approval. 


K. Modi.caOon of Adopted Concept Plan 
The Administrator is authorized to approve  minor modi.cations to an 
approved concept plan. All modi.cations not listed as minor below shall be 
considered by the Bastrop City Council consistent with the original approval 
of the PD. The following modi.cations shall be considered minor: 

1. 	
Up to a 10 percent increase or any decrease in gross .oor area of a 
single building. 


2. 	
Up to a 10 percent reduction or any increase in the approved setbacks 
from exterior property lines. 


3. 	
Relocation of parking areas, internal streets or structures where such 
relocation occurs more than 100 feet from exterior property lines. 




L. E.ect of Denial 
The denial of a PD application shall ban the subsequent application for the 
same or similar use for a period of 12 months. 


M. ExpiraOon 
A PD rezoning does not expire. A PD concept plan expires after three years 
if no site plan or building permit has been .led. 



16.2.13 Planned Industrial Development (PID) 
A Planned Industrial Development is a zoning district that is allowed within the Special context consistent with the standards of Article 6, Special. The district allows flexibility in site design and building type standards approved by the Bastrop City Council. 
City Council 
SEC. 16.2 PROCEDURES 
16.2.12 Planned Industrial Development (PID) 

A. 	Components of PID Approval 
A PID approval consists of two separate steps: 
1. 	
Approval of a rezoning and concept plan by the Bastrop City Council; and 

2. 	
The subsequent approval of a site plan consistent with the PID concept plan. 



B. When Allowed 
1. 	
A PID is intended for industrial projects that demonstrate a higher quality of site design that is more sensitive to the surrounding land uses, both built and natural, than is possible under other available zoning districts. 

2. 	
A PID is only allowed in the Special Context provided it meets the 
requirements of 6.5.1, Special Planned Industrial Development. 




C. ApplicaOon and Fees 
1. 	
A pre-application conference with the Administrator is required. 

2. 	
All applications for a PID shall be .led in writing with the Administrator and all established fees paid in full. See 16.2.1, Common Review Procedures. 

3. 	
The application shall, at a minimum, include the following additional materials. Other information may be required by the Administrator in the application forms: 


a. 	
A narrative explaining in detail the exact uses that will occur on the site, the square footage of structures and uses, open space acreage, the relationship of the proposed development to surrounding land uses in the area and other related development features. 

b. 	
Concept plan schematically showing all streets, utilities, land uses, access to existing streets, major open space and a conceptual drainage plan. 

c. 	
A speci.c list of all requested deviations from the provisions of this zoning development code. 


4. The applicant may provide concurrent applications for site plan review. 

D. 	Rezoning and Concept Plan Review by Administrator 
1. 	
The Administrator may refer the application to other a. ected or 
interested agencies for review and comment. 


2. 	
The Administrator shall recommend approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval of the PID rezoning and concept plan. 


Zoning Development Code | 16-27 

SEC. 16.2 PROCEDURES 

16.2.12 Planned Industrial Development (PID) 
3. 	The Administrator shall provide notice as set out in 16.2.1, Common Review Procedures. 

E. Rezoning and Concept Plan Review by Planning Commission 
1. 	
Following notice and a public hearing as required in 16.2.1, Common Review Procedures, the Planning Commission shall recommend approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval of the PID rezoning and concept plan. 

2. 	
In recommending, the Planning Commission shall consider the 
recommendation of the Administrator, relevant comments of all 
interested parties and the review criteria below. 




F. 	Public Hearing and Decision by Bastrop City Council 
1. 	
Following notice and a public hearing as required in 16.2.1, Common Review Procedures, the Bastrop City Council shall approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the PID rezoning and concept plan. 

2. 	
In deciding, the Bastrop City Council shall consider the recommendations of the Administrator and Planning Commission, relevant comments of all interested parties and the review criteria below. 

3. 	
In case of a protest duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of 20 percent or more of either of the areas of land (exclusive of streets and alleys) included in a proposed change or within an area determined by lines drawn parallel to and two hundred feet distant from the boundaries of the district proposed to be changed, the amendment shall not become e.ective except by the favorable vote of a majority of the members of the entire Bastrop City Council.  



G. Review Criteria 
The Planning Commission and the Bastrop City Council shall consider the following criteria in approving, approving with conditions or disapproving a PID rezoning and concept plan: 
1. 	
The proposed PID is consistent with the pertinent elements of the City of Bastrop Master Land Use Plan and any other adopted plans; 

2. 	
The proposed PID meets the requirements of this zoning development code or is granted a speci.c deviation by the Bastrop City Council; 



16-28 | City of Bastrop 
ARTICLE 16. ADMINISTRATION 
3. 	
The proposed PID will reinforce the existing or planned character of the area; 

4. 	
The site is appropriate for the development allowed in the proposed PID; 

5. 	
The PID demonstrates a higher quality of site design that is more sensitive to the existing context, both built and natural, than is possible under other available zoning districts. 

6. 	
Public facilities and services including schools, roads, recreation facilities, wastewater treatment, water supply and stormwater facilities are adequate for the development allowed in the proposed PD; and 

7. 	
The PID will not substantially or permanently injure the appropriate use of adjacent conforming properties. 



H. Allowed DeviaOons 
Unless otherwise expressly approved by the Bastrop City Council as part of the approved rezoning and concept plan, all planned industrial developments shall be subject to all applicable standards of this zoning development code. In order to approve modi.cations of otherwise applicable standards, the Bastrop City Council must . nd that: 
1. 	
Requested deviations from applicable building type standards, allowed uses, or other development standards that otherwise would apply are justi. ed by the compensating bene.ts of the planned industrial development; and 

2. 	
The requested deviations do not detract from the established character or form of any surrounding properties. 



I. Appeal 
A .nal decision by the Bastrop City Council on a PID may be appealed in District Court. 

J.	 AcOon Following Approval 
Approval of a PID rezoning and concept authorizes the submission of site plans consistent with the PID approval. 

ARTICLE 16. ADMINISTRATION 
16.2.12 Planned Industrial Development (PID) 

K. Modi.caOon of Adopted Concept Plan 
The Administrator is authorized to approve  minor modi.cations to an 
approved concept plan. All modi.cations not listed as minor below shall be 
considered by the Bastrop City Council consistent with the original approval 
of the PID. The following modi.cations shall be considered minor: 

1. 	
Up to a 10 percent increase or any decrease in gross .oor area of a 
single building. 


2. 	
Up to a 10 percent reduction or any increase in the approved setbacks 
from exterior property lines. 


3. 	
Relocation of parking areas, internal streets or structures where such 
relocation occurs more than 100 feet from exterior property lines. 




L. E.ect of Denial 
The denial of a PID application shall ban the subsequent application for the 
same or similar use for a period of 12 months. 


M. ExpiraOon 
A PID rezoning does not expire. A PID concept plan expires after three years 
if no site plan or building permit has been .led. 



16.2.14 CerO.cate of Appropriateness 
16.2.14 CerO.cate of Appropriateness 
Historic District  
Commission 

Decision 

A.	 When Required 
1. 	A Certi.cate of Appropriateness issued by the Historic District Commission shall be required before a building permit or demolition permit is issued for any property within the Bastrop Historic District. A certi.cate is required if any building, structure or site, including outbuildings, party walls, courtyards, sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, fences and signs will be erected, constructed, altered, repaired, relocated or demolished. 

16-30 | City of Bastrop 
ARTICLE 16. ADMINISTRATION 
2. 	An exception to the Certi.cate of Appropriateness may be made if the applicant demonstrates to the Historic District Commission that a failure to grant the certi.cate will cause an imminent threat to life, health or property. 

B. ApplicaOon and Fees 
1. 	
A pre-application conference with the Administrator is required. 

2. 	
All applications for Certi.cates of Appropriateness shall be . led in writing with the Administrator, and established fees, if any, paid in full. 



C. Review by Administrator 
1. 	
The Administrator shall review the application to ensure compliance with the standards of this zoning development code. 

2. 	
The Administrator shall then refer the application to the Historic District Commission for review and decision. 



D. 	Review and Decision by Historic District Commission 
In making a determination whether to approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for a Certi.cate of Appropriateness, the Commission shall review the application according to stated design guidelines in Ordinance 99-3872, including any amendments thereto.  All decisions rendered by the Commission shall also comply with any prior approvals, conditions or standards of this zoning development code. 

E. Appeal 
Any person or persons aggrieved by any decision, act or proceeding of the Historic District Commission shall have the right to appeal in accordance with the appeal procedures of Ordinance 99-3872. 

Sec. 16.3 NonconformiOes 
16.3.1 In General 
A.	 ConOnuaOon 
A nonconformity may be continued in accordance with this article. 

B. Types of Nonconformity 
There are several types of nonconformities that may exist, as follows: 
1. 	
Nonconforming uses (see 16.3.2, Nonconforming Uses) 

2. 	
Nonconforming structures (see 16.3.3, Nonconforming Structures) 

3. 	
Nonconforming sites (see 16.3.4, Nonconforming Sites) 

4. 	
Nonconforming lots of record (see 16.3.5, Nonconforming Lots of Record) 

5. 	
Nonconforming signs (see Sec. 16.3.6, Nonconforming Signs) 



C. Evidence of Status 
Evidence of the status of a nonconforming use shall be supplied by the owner of the property upon request of the Administrator. 

D.	 Time Extensions 
The Board of Adjustment may permit one extension of up to 12 additional months to the time periods for abandonment, obtaining a building permit or completing construction, provided the applicant can demonstrate circumstances out of his or her control have prevented a good faith attempt to reestablish or rebuild the nonconformity. Such circumstances may include the health of the applicant, court proceedings, failure to reach an insurance settlement, acts of God, or similar hardships. 

E. Variance 
The Board of Adjustment may vary the provisions of this article in 
accordance with the provisions for variances. 


Supp. No. 1 
SEC. 16.3 NONCONFORMITIES 
16.3.2 Nonconforming Uses 

16.3.2 Nonconforming Uses 
A.	 ConOnuaOon 
A lawful use made nonconforming by the adoption of this zoning development code or other ordinances may continue only for so long as such use is not expanded, increased or changed. 

B. Change of Use 
No use shall be changed to a conforming use until the Administrator has determined that the requirements of the applicable district will be met. The Board of Adjustment may approve a di.erent nonconforming use, provided such use is deemed by the Board to be less intense than the existing use. No change to a more intense nonconforming use is allowed. 

C. Abandonment 
Any nonconforming use that has been discontinued for any 12-month period for whatever reason, shall be considered to be abandoned and shall not be reestablished, except that a nonconforming use that is a Mobile Home referenced in 7.3.7 of the Bastrop Zoning Development Code that has been discontinued for any six-month period for whatever reason, shall be considered to be abandoned and shall not be reestablished; however the existence of extenuating circumstances may warrant extending the six-month period limitation imposed on Mobile Home for an additional period of time. 

(Ord. No. 14-4222, §1, 6-12-14) 
D.	 DestrucOon 
A nonconforming use that is damaged may be rebuilt following approval by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the following: 
1. 	
A nonconforming use may only be reestablished within a conforming structure. 

2. 	
All restorative and other work must be within adopted building codes. 

3. 	
A building permit must be issued within one year from the date of the damage. 

4.
 The certi.cate of occupancy must be issued as provided by adopted codes. 


Zoning Development Code | 16-31 

SEC. 16.3 NONCONFORMITIES 
16.3.3 Nonconforming Structures 
E. Special Standards for ResidenO al Uses 
As used in this paragraph, a “nonconforming residential use” is a structure which contains more dwellings than allowed by the district or a dwelling located in a district that does not permit residential uses. 
1. Abandonment 
a. 	
A nonconforming residential use other than a single-family living (single-family house and side yard house) that has not been occupied for a continuous period of 12 months, for whatever reason, shall be considered to be abandoned and shall not be reoccupied except in conformance with all applicable provisions of this zoning development code. Evidence of intent to abandon the nonconforming use is not required. 

b. 	
A nonconforming single-family dwelling that has not been occupied for a continuous period of 12 months or longer shall not be considered to be abandoned and may be reoccupied at any time, provided the structure has not been changed, legally or illegally, to a nonresidential use or multiple-unit residential use. 

c. 	
Removal of a nonconforming mobile home or manufactured home, not in a mobile home park, from its foundation or pad for a continuous period of 12 months shall constitute abandonment of the use and placement of a new unit must comply with the provisions of this zoning development code. Evidence of intent to abandon the nonconforming mobile home or manufactured home use is not required. 


2. DestrucOon 
Nonconforming residential uses that are damaged may be rebuilt in 
accordance with the following: 
a. 	
All portions of the structure being restored are not and were not on or over a property line; 

b. 	
The number of dwelling units does not increase; 

c. 	
All construction is in compliance with current construction codes, such as the .re and building codes; 

d. 	
A building permit is obtained within one year from the date of the damage; and 



16-32 | City of Bastrop 
ARTICLE 16. ADMINISTRATION 
e. The certi.cate of occupancy (or other .nal inspection) is issued within two years of the issuance of the building permit. 

(Ord. No. 14-4222, §1, 6-12-14) 
16.3.3 Nonconforming Structures 
A.	 ConOnuaOon 
A lawful structure existing as of the e.ective date of this zoning development code or any amendment to this zoning development code may continue to be used for any purposes permitted in the district provided it is in conformance with the provisions of this section. 

B. Maintenance and RestoraOon 
A nonconforming structure may be maintained or restored provided no expansion of the nonconformity occurs and complies with 16.4.4 below. 

C. Expansion 
A nonconforming structure may be expanded, provided that no increase in the nonconformity occurs. For example, an addition may be constructed, provided it meets the dimensional requirements for the district and complies with 16.4.4 below. 

16.3.4 Nonconforming Sites 
A.	 ConOnuaOon 
A site existing as of the e.ective date of this zoning development code that is nonconforming due solely to failure to meet the development standards of this zoning development code may be used for any purposes permitted in the district provided the use is in conformance with the provisions of this section. 

B. Maintenance and RestoraOon 
A nonconforming site may be maintained or restored provided no 
expansion of the nonconformity occurs. 


C. Expansion 
Additions to structures or additional paving, parking or outdoor storage on nonconforming sites shall require correction of existing nonconforming parking, landscaping and screening. 
Supp. No. 1 

1. 	
Complete redevelopment or expansions that result in a 25 percent or greater increase of the gross square footage of the existing structure require the entire property to meet all of the landscaping and screening requirements of this zoning development code. 

2. 	
Expansions that result in less than a 25 percent increase of the gross square footage of the existing structure require a corresponding percentage increase in compliance for landscaping and screening requirements of this zoning development code until the site achieves 100 percent compliance. 

3. 	
Expansions that require an increase in the number of parking spaces shall be required to provide 100 percent of the required parking spaces for the additional .oor area in accordance with this zoning development code. The additional parking area shall comply with all associated landscaping and drainage requirements of this zoning development code, as required in Sec. 10.3, Parking Area Design Standards. 

4. 	
Properties that are physically constrained from complying with these provisions shall comply to the maximum extent practicable as determined by the Administrator. 



D. 	Change of Use 
Changes of use that require an increase in the number of parking spaces shall be required to provide the di.erence between the required parking for the prior use and that required for the proposed use in accordance with 10.2, Parking Requirements. Where this calculation results in the addition of less than .ve spaces, no additional spaces shall be required. Any additional parking area shall comply with all associated landscaping and drainage requirements of 10.3, Parking Area Design Standards. 

E. DestrucOon 
1. 	A nonconforming residential structure which is damaged may be restored within the existing footprint provided that all portions of the structure being restored are not and were not on or over a property line; all construction is in compliance with current construction codes, such as the Fire and Building Codes; a building permit is obtained within one 
SEC. 16.3 NONCONFORMITIES 
16.3.6 Nonconforming Signs 
year from the date of the damage; and the certi.cate of occupancy is 
issued within two years of the issuance of the building permit. 
2. 	A nonconforming nonresidential structure which is damaged to 50 percent or less of its fair market value, based on a market appraisal performed by a certi.ed appraiser, may be restored within the existing footprint provided that all portions of the structure being restored are not and were not on or over a property line; all construction is in compliance with current construction codes, such as the Fire and Building Codes; a building permit is obtained within one year from the date of the damage; and the certi.cate of occupancy (or other .nal inspection) is issued within two years of the issuance of the building permit. If damage exceeds 50 percent or more, restoration or improvement shall not be permitted unless the restoration results in a structure and site conforming to all applicable requirements of this zoning development code. 

16.3.5 Nonconforming Lots of Record 
A.	 ResidenOal Lots of Record 
1. 	
All undeveloped lots of record in a residential district that were recorded prior to the e.ective date of this zoning development code that do not meet the minimum zoning district lot standards shall be allowed one single-family house or side yard house. 

2. 	
The building type standards of the closest applicable zoning district as determined by the Administrator shall be applied to qualifying lots. 



B. Other Lots of Record 
All undeveloped lots of record in a non-residential district that were recorded prior to the e.ective date of this zoning development code that do not meet the minimum zoning district lot standards may be used for any purpose allowed in the district provided the use meets all other regulations prescribed for the district. 

16.3.6 Nonconforming Signs 
All nonconforming signs shall comply with the requirements of Sec. 14.5, 
Nonconforming Signs. 
Zoning Development Code | 16-33 

SEC. 16.4 ENFORCEMENT 
16.4.1 ViolaOons 
Sec. 16.4 Enforcement 

16.4.1 ViolaOons 
In case any building or structure is erected, structurally altered, or maintained, or any building, structure or land is used in violation of this zoning development code, the proper local authorities of the municipality, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, structural alteration, maintenance, or use; to restrain, correct, or abate such violation; to prevent the occupancy of the building, structure, or land; or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use in or about such premises.  

16.4.2 Enforcement Powers 
This zoning development code shall be enforced by the Administrator, who is empowered to: 
A. 	Cause any building, structure, place or premises to be inspected and examined; and 
B. 	Order in writing the remedying of any condition found to exist in violation of any provision of this zoning development code. 

16.4.3 NoOce of ViolaOon 
If the Administrator finds that any of the provisions of this zoning development code are being violated, the Administrator shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. 

16.4.4 Enforcement AcOons 
The Administrator shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or of illegal additions, alterations or structural changes; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by this statute to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions. 

16.4.5 PenalOes 
Whenever in this zoning development code or in any ordinance or resolution of City of Bastrop any act or omission is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such code or ordinance the doing of any act or the 
16-34 | City of Bastrop 
failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor or is prohibited, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, and state law does not provide otherwise or for a greater penalty, the violation of any such provision of this zoning development code or any ordinance shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a term of imprisonment of up to 30 days in the Parish jail or a fine of up to $500, or both. Unless specifically provided otherwise, or the context thereof so dictates, each day any violation of any provision of this zoning development code or any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate off ense. 
ARTICLE 17. DEFINITIONS 

This page left intentionally blank 
ARTICLE 17. DEFINITIONS 
Sec. 17.1 General .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 17-1 Sec. 17.2 De.ned Terms .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 17-1 
This page left intentionally blank 
Sec. 17.1 General 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases in this zoning development code shall be interpreted giving them the same meaning as they have in common usage and so as to give this code its most reasonable application. 
Sec. 17.2 De. ned Terms 
Abutting - The property directly touches another piece of property. 
Accessory Dwelling Unit - A dwelling that exists as part of a principal dwelling or on the same lot as the principal dwelling and is subordinate in size to the principal dwelling. 
Accessory Use or Structure - A use or structure on the same lot with and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or structure. 
Addition - Any act or process which changes one or more of the exterior archi­tectural features of a structure by adding to, joining with or increas­ing the size or capacity of the structure. 
Adjacent - see Abutting. 
Adult Day Care - A facility, operated for pro.t or not, in which care basic ser­vices are provided through its ownership or management for part of a day to three or more persons who are 18 years of age or older, not related to the owner or operator by blood or marriage, and who require such services. 
Alley - A public way, or approved private way, that provides a secondary means of access to abutting property, normally located behind the building. 
Animal Boarding - The use of land for boarding, selling, training or breeding cats or dogs for compensation, or the keeping of more than 12 dogs or cats in combination for any purpose. 
Animal Shelter - A structure that is owned, operated or maintained by a public body, established humane society or other private or nonpro. t orga­nization used for the care of lost, abandoned or neglected pets. 
Supp. No. 1 
SEC. 17.2 DEFINED TERMS 

Apartment -A building type containing three or more dwelling units consoli­dated in a single structure. An apartment contains internal common walls. Dwelling units within a building may be situated either wholly or partially over or under other dwelling units. 
Apartment House -A building type with up to four dwelling units consolidated in a single structure on a single lot. An apartment house contains common internal walls. Dwelling units may be situated either wholly or partially over or under other dwelling units. The building looks like a large single-family house with a single primary entrance. 
Arterial Street -An arterial street is a moderate or high-capacity road, provid­ing access to many commercial and industrial uses and with limited residential entrances directly onto the road. For the purposes of this zoning development code, the following streets shall be designated as arterial streets: W Madison Avenue, E Madison Avenue, W Je. er­son Avenue, E Je.erson Avenue, N Washington Street, S Washing­ton Street,  N Franklin Street, S Franklin Street, Na. Avenue, Airport Road, and Marlatt Street. 
Assisted Living Facility -Any group housing and services program for two or more unrelated adults, by whatever name it is called, that makes avail­able, at a minimum, one meal a day and housekeeping services and provides personal care services directly or through a formal written agreement with one or more licensed home care or hospice agencies. 
Attached House -A building type containing two principal dwelling units on a single lot with private yards on all four sides. Each unit has its own external entrance. Unit can be located on separate . oors, side-to­side, or back-to-back. 
Banner Sign -Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is not per­manently mounted to a pole or a building by a permanent frame at one or more edges. 
Bed and Breakfast - A transient accommodation that is typically a house, or portion of a house, where lodging rooms and meals are provided. 
Bu.er -Landscaping, open space, fences or walls located parallel to and within the outer perimeter of a lot and extending to the lot line. A bu. er is used to physically separate or screen, one use or property from an­other so as to visually shield or block noise, lights, or other nuisances. 
Building - Any structure created for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind and which is permanently a.xed to the land. 
Caliper - The diameter of plant material, measured at six inches above grade. 
Car-Share Program - A program providing shared vehicles available only to members, with a speci.c location associated with reduction of park­ing for a development project. 
Certi. cate of Appropriateness - A certi.cate from the Historic District Com­mission authorizing plans for alterations, construction, removal or demolition of a landmark or site within a designated historic district. 
Clear Sight Distance -The length of street visible to a driver at an intersection or driveway required to make a safe turning movement onto the street. 
Completely Enclosed Building - A building separated on all sides from adjacent open space or other structures by a permanent roof and by exterior walls or party walls, pierced only by windows and doors. 
Common Lot Line - A lot line shared between two private lots, which does not abut a public or private right-of-way. 
Drive-Through, Drive-In - An establishment that by design, physical facilities, service, or by packaging procedures encourages or permits cus­tomers to receive services, or obtain goods while remaining in their motor vehicles. 
Dwelling Unit - A building, or portion thereof, providing complete and perma­nent living facilities for one household. 
Easement - A grant of one or more of the property rights by the owner to, or for the use by, the public, a corporation, or another person or entity. 
Egress - A grant of property rights by the owner to, or for use by, the public, a corporation, or another person or entity to use as an exit from a speci.c parcel of land. 
17-2 | City of Bastrop 
ARTICLE 17. DEFINITIONS 

Entertainment - Entertainment shall include live vocalists, musicians, disc jockeys (whether speaking or not), comedians, karaoke, performers (paid or otherwise, including contestants) and the like, provided at a bar, restaurant, nightclub or other similar commercial establishment also providing food or beverages. Entertainment shall not include "Sexually Oriented Businesses." 
Erected - The term erected includes built, constructed, reconstructed, moved upon, or any physical operation on the premises required for build­ing. Evacuation, .ll, drainage, demolition of an existing structure, and the like shall be considered part of erection. 
Exterior Architectural Appearance - The architectural and general composi­tion of the exterior of a structure, including, but not limited to the kind, color, and the texture of the building material and the type, design and character of all windows, doors, light .xtures, signs, and appurtenant elements. 
FAA - Federal Aviation Administration 
Family - One or more persons living as a single housekeeping unit. 
Flag - Any fabric or other material containing distinctive colors, patterns or symbols, used as a symbol of government, political subdivision, corporation, lodge, fraternity or sorority, political party, nonpro.t organization, charity, club, association or other entity designed to be .own from a .agpole or similar device. 
Floodplain - Any normally dry land area that is susceptible to being inundated by waters of the 1% annual chance .ood, that is, the 100-year .ood. 
Floodway -The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land area that must be reserved in order to discharge the velocity waters of the regulatory .ood. 
Group Living - A residence, operated by a public or private agency, which may provide a program of services in addition to room and board to per­sons on a voluntary basis under continuous protective supervision. 
Home Occupation - An occupation carried on in a dwelling unit by a resident of the unit; provided that the use is limited in extent and incidental and 
Supp. No. 1 

secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes and does not change the character of the dwelling unit. 

Household - One or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit. No such household shall contain more than four members not related by law, blood, adoption, marriage, or judicial order for foster care. A house­hold consisting of individuals protected by the Fair Housing Act shall not contain more than six persons. 
Livestock - One or more domesticated animals raised or kept for husbandry or to produce commodities such as food or .ber such as cattle, sheep, goats, horses, mules, donkeys, burros, llamas, emus, bu. alo, rabbits and fowl. 
Lot - A lot is a parcel of land of at least su.cient size to meet the minimum requirements of this zoning development code for use, coverage and area. 
Manufactured Home - A factory-built structure constructed after June 15, 1976 and under the authority of 42 U.S.C. § 5403 on an integral chassis and designed for residential occupancy when connected to the required utilities. For the purposes of this development code, a manufactured home is a single-family home. 
Mobile Home - A factory-built home on an integral chassis that is 1) built before June 15, 1976, and 2) not built to a uniform construction code. A mo­bile home is designed to be transported for installation or assembly at the building site. 
Mobile Home Park -A parcel of land under single ownership which has been planned and improved for the placement of three or more mobile homes or manufactured homes for more or less permanent use. 
Modular Home -A structure designed for residential occupancy, built to the standards of the Louisiana State Uniform Construction Code, which is manufactured in one or more sections in a factory for installation on a permanent foundation at its .nal location. For the purposes of this zoning development code, a modular home is a single-family home. 
Supp. No. 1 
SEC. 17.2 DEFINED TERMS 

Nonconformities - Uses, sites, signs or other structures which were legally es­tablished, but because of the application of this zoning development code, or changes to the code, are no longer in compliance. 
Open Space -An area unobstructed by buildings from the ground upward, except for walks, paths, landscaping or other site features in public, common or other private ownership. Yards of individual lots occu­pied by dwellings shall not constitute open space. 
Overlay District - A district classi.cation superimposed in addition to another (base) district classi.cation, further regulating or limiting structures and uses otherwise permitted and regulated pursuant to the basic district classi.cation. 
Owner of Record - The person, corporation, or other legal entity listed as owner on the records of the Parish Recorder of Deeds. 
Pervious Parking Surface - Parking surface which is engineered to allow the in.ltration of water, air and nutrients to root systems of adjacent plant material which lie directly under the ground. Loose gravel is not a pervious parking surface. 
Pitched Roof - Any roof with a gradient greater than 15 degrees or a slope greater than 3.215 inches. 
Primary Structure - The main use of a lot, or the building or structure in or on which the main use of the lot takes place. 
Private Street -A privately owned and maintained thoroughfare, avenue, road, highway, boulevard, parkway, way, drive, lane or court and generally providing the primary means of ingress and egress from the prop­erty abutting along its length to the public street network. 
Rowhouse - A building type consisting of three or more attached structures. Each structure shares a common side wall. Each structure may contain up to two principal dwelling units which may be stacked vertically. Each unit has its own external street facing entrance. 
Sandwich Board Sign - A self-supporting A-shaped freestanding sign with only two visible sides that is situated adjacent to a business, typically on a sidewalk or walkway, that contains commercial speech. 
Sexually Oriented Business - any establishment that is an adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater or semi-nude model studio as de.ned in this section, as well as any other establishment that regularly features or regularly shows any sexually oriented entertainment activity. 
Adult Bookstore, Adult Novelty Store, or Adult Video Store - A commercial establishment which has signi.cant or substantial por­tion of its stock-in trade or derives a signi.cant or substantial portion of its revenues or devotes a signi.cant or substantial portion of its interior business or advertising, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or display space to the sale or rental, for any form of consid­eration, of any one or more of the following: 
a. 
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, .lms, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides, or other visual representations which are charac­terized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of "speci.ed sexual activities" or "speci.ed anatomical areas"; 

b. 
Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of themselves or others. 


Adult Bookstore, Adult Novelty Store, or Adult Video Store shall also include a commercial establishment which regularly maintains one or more "Adult Arcades." "Adult Arcade" means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to .ve or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon matter exhibiting or describing " speci. ed sexual activities" or speci.ed "anatomical areas." 

Adult Cabaret - A nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant, bottle club, or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served, which regularly features persons who appear semi-nude. 
17-4 | City of Bastrop 
ARTICLE 17. DEFINITIONS 
Adult Hotel - A motel, hotel, or similar commercial establishment which: 
a. 
o.ers public accommodations, for any form of consideration, and which regularly provides patrons with closed-circuit televi­sion transmissions, .lms, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of "speci­.ed sexual activities" or "speci.ed anatomical areas" and which regularly advertises the availability of such material by means of a sign visible from the public right-of-way, or by means of any o.­premises advertising, including but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or lea.ets, radio or television, and 

b. 
o.ers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time less than ten (10) hours. 


Adult Motion Picture Theater - A commercial establishment where .lms, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photograph­ic reproductions which are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of "speci.ed sexual activities" or "speci.ed anatomical areas" are regularly shown for any form of consideration. 
Nudity or a State of Nudity - The showing of the human male or fe­male genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple and areola. 
Regularly Features or Regularly Shows - A consistent or substantial course of conduct, such that the .lms or performances exhibited constitute a substantial portion of the .lms or performances o.ered as a part of the ongoing business of the sexually oriented business. 
Semi-Nude or State of Semi-Nudity - A state of dress in which opaque clothing covers no more than the genitals, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, pubic area, vulva, and nipple and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. This de.nition shall not include any portion of the cleav­age of the human female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel provided that the areola and nipple are not exposed in whole or in part. 
Supp. No. 1 

Semi-Nude Model Studio - Any place where a person, who regularly appears in a state of semi-nudity is provided for money or any form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculp­tured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons. 
It is a defense to prosecution for any violation of this ordinance that a person appearing in a state of semi-nudity or semi-nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
a. 
by a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 

b. 
by a private college or university which maintains and oper­ates educational programs in which credited are transferable to college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or: 

c. 
In a structure which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a semi-nude person is available for viewing; and where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class 


Sexually Oriented Entertainment Activity - The sale, rental, or exhibition for any form of consideration, of books, . lms, video cassettes, magazines, periodicals, or live performances which are characterized by an emphasis on the exposure or display of speci.c sexual activity. 
Speci.ed Anatomical Area - Human genitals, anus, cleft of the but­tocks, or the female breast. 
Speci. ed Sexual Activity - Any of the following: 
a. 
sex acts, normal or perverted, including intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy; or 

b.
 excretory functions as a part of or in connection with any of the activities described in a. above. 



Supp. No. 1 
SEC. 17.2 DEFINED TERMS 

Side Yard House - A building type containing one principal dwelling unit located on a single lot with private yards on three sides. A side yard house is located on one side lot line, with the equivalent of the two side yards for a single-family house located on the other side. 
Single-Family House - A building type containing one principal dwelling unit located on a single lot with private yards on all four sides. 
Story -A .oor of a structure where .fty percent or more of the enclosed space is greater than seven feet six inches in clear height; measured from the .nished .oor to the . nished ceiling. 
Structure - Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires perma­nent or temporary location on or in the ground, including buildings, fences, gazebos, signs, radio and television antennae (including sup­porting towers), swimming pools, satellite dishes, solar panels and wind generation equipment. 
Structural Change - Any change or repair in the supporting members of a build­ing, structure, roof or exterior walls which would expand the build­ing in height, width or bulk of the building. 
(Ord. No. 12-4209, §1, 6-14-12) 
This page left intentionally blank 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE  
ORDINANCES  
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since December 13, 2010.  
Ord. No.  AdopO on Date  SecOon  SecOon this Code  
10-4197  12-13-2010  Arts. 1—17  Arts. 1—17  
11-4200  6 - 8-2011  16.1.2 (a), (c)  
16.1.3 (a), (c)  
12-4209  6-14-2012  5.4.4, 5.4.7-5.4.9, 16.2.9  
14-4222  6-12-2014  7.3.7, 16.3.2  

Supp. No. 1 Zoning Development Code Comparative Table | CCT: 1 
This page intentionally left blank 
BASTROP ZONING DEVELOPMENT INDEX 

This page left intentionally blank 
ADMINISTRATION
    Enforcement ................................................................................. 16.4
         Enforcement Actions ................................................................. 16.4.4
         Enforcement Powers ................................................................. 16.4.2 
         Notice of Violation ..................................................................... 16.4.3
         Penalties.................................................................................... 16.4.5 
Violations .................................................................................. 16.4.1
 Nonconformities ........................................................................... 16.3
         In General ..................................................................................  16.3.1
         Nonconforming Lots of Record ..................................................  16.3.5
         Nonconforming Signs ................................................................  16.3.6
         Nonconforming Sites .................................................................  16.3.4
         Nonconforming Structures ......................................................... 16.3.3
         Nonconforming Uses .................................................................  16.3.2
 Procedures ................................................................................... 16.2 
Administrative Adjustment ........................................................  16.2.4 
Administrative Interpretation .................................................... 16.2.5 
Appeal of Administrative Decision .............................................  16.2.6 
Certi.cate of Appropriateness ...................................................  16.2.14 
Certi.cate of Occupancy ............................................................  16.2.3 
Common Review Procedures .....................................................  16.2.1
         Planned Development (PD) .......................................................  16.2.12
         Planned Industrial Development (PID) .......................................  16.2.13 
Site Plan Review ........................................................................  16.2.8 
Special Use Permit .....................................................................  16.2.9 
Variance ..................................................................................... 16.2.7 
Zoning Map Amendment ...........................................................  16.2.10 
Zoning Permit ............................................................................  16.2.2 
Zoning Text Amendment ............................................................  16.2.11
     Review Bodies ...............................................................................  16.1 
Administrator ............................................................................. 16.1.4
         Bastrop City Council ....................................................................  16.1.1
         Board of Adjustment ...................................................................  16.1.3
         Planning Commission ..................................................................  16.1.2 
Summary of Authority .................................................................  16.1.5 

AGRICULTURE Use provisions Open Use Standards ......................................................................  7.7.1 
ANIMAL AND FOWL Use provisions Accessory Uses              Keeping of Livestock in Residential Districts ..............................  7.8.5 
BICYCLES    Parking, site access and o.-street Bicycle Parking .............................................................................. 10.4 
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS    Board of Adjustment .........................................................................  16.1.3    Historic District Commission .............................................................  9.1.4    Planning Commission ........................................................................  16.1.2 
BUFFERS Landscaping and screening ............................................................... 11.3.3 
BUILDING TYPE AND DIMENSIONS Special Special Context ..............................................................................  6.1.3 Suburban Suburban Context ..........................................................................  3.1.3 
BUILDING TYPES Center ............................................................................................... 5.4 Code components Code Approach ..............................................................................2.1.4, 2.4 Special ............................................................................................... 6.4 Suburban ........................................................................................... 3.4 Suburban Context ..........................................................................  3.1.2 Urban ................................................................................................ 4.4 
Zoning Development Code | I-3 

BUILDING TYPES, RULES FOR 
Accessory Structures ........................................................................ 8.3 
Accessory Structure Separation ................................................... 8.3.2 
General ......................................................................................... 8.3.1
 Measurement & Exceptions.............................................................. 8.1
         Blank Wall Area ........................................................................... 8.1.7
         Building Coverage ....................................................................... 8.1.1
         Building Entrances ...................................................................... 8.1.8
 Height ......................................................................................... 8.1.5
         Lot Width .................................................................................... 8.1.3
         Primary, Side & Service Street Designation  .................................. 8.1.2 
Setbacks ............................................................................................. 8.1.4 
Transparency  .............................................................................. 8.1.6 
Other Building Types, Rules for  ....................................................... 8.5 
Civic Building Type ....................................................................... 8.5.1 
Open Lot Building Type ................................................................ 8.5 
Principal Buildings per Lot .............................................................. 8.2
 Multiple Principal Buildings on a Lot ........................................... 8.2.2 
One Principal Building Per Tract or Lot ......................................... 8.2.1
    Residential Building Types, Rules for ................................................ 8.4
         Foundation .................................................................................. 8.4.2 
Garage and Carport Placement  ................................................... 8.4.1
 In. ll Standards ............................................................................ 8.4.4 
Side Yard House  .......................................................................... 8.4.3 

CENTER 
Allowed Uses  .................................................................................. 5.3 
Allowed Use Table  ....................................................................... 5.3.2 
General Provisions ...................................................................... 5.3.1
    Building Types  ................................................................................ 5.4 
Apartment .................................................................................. 5.4.6 
Apartment House ....................................................................... 5.4.4 
Attached House .......................................................................... 5.4.3 
Civic ............................................................................................ 5.4.9 
General Shopfront ....................................................................... 5.4.7 
Open Lot .................................................................................... 5.4.10

I-4 | City of Bastrop 
         Row House  ................................................................................. 5.4.5 
Side Yard House  .......................................................................... 5.4.2 
Single-Family House ................................................................... 5.4.1 
Workshop  ................................................................................... 5.4.8 
Center Context  ............................................................................... 5.1
 Block Patterns ............................................................................ 5.1.4
         Building Type and Dimensions  .................................................... 5.1.3 
General Character  ....................................................................... 5.1.1
 Parking ....................................................................................... 5.1.5 
Zoning Districts .......................................................................... 5.1.2 
Special Development Standards  ..................................................... 5.5 
Center Planned Development (C-PD)  .......................................... 5.5.1 
Zoning Districts .............................................................................. 5.2 
Community (C-CD)  ...................................................................... 5.2.6
         Light Industrial (C-LI)  .................................................................. 5.2.5
         Main Street (C-MS-3)  .................................................................. 5.2.4
         Mixed Use (C-MX-2, -3)  ............................................................... 5.2.3
         Planned Development (C-PD)  ..................................................... 5.2.7
         Residential Mixed Use (C-RMX-2)  ................................................ 5.2.2
         Residential Two-Family (C-RT-2)  ................................................. 5.2.1 

CENTER PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (C-PD) Special Development Standards  ..................................................5.5.1 et seq. See: CENTER Zoning Districts ............................................................................5.2.7 et seq. 
CITY COUNCIL Administration ............................................................................... 16.1.1 
CODE COMPONENTS
    Building Types  ................................................................................ 2.4
 Established ................................................................................. 2.4.1 
Code Approach  ............................................................................... 2.1
         Building Types  ............................................................................ 2.1.4 
Context Areas  ............................................................................. 2.1.2 

Generally .....................................................................................  2.1.1  
Zoning Districts ..........................................................................  2.1.3  
Context Areas  .................................................................................  2.2 
 Established .................................................................................  2.2.1  
Zoning Districts ..............................................................................  2.3 
         Established by Context Area  .......................................................  2.3.1  
Zoning Map ....................................................................................  2.5 
 Incorporated ...............................................................................  2.5.1  
O.cial Zoning Map Interpretation  ..............................................  2.5.2  
COMMERCE USE STANDARDS  

Use provisions ..................................................................................7.5 et seq. 

COMMERCIAL CORRIDOR (S-CC-2) Zoning Districts ............................................................................3.2.3 et seq. See: SUBURBAN 
COMMUNITY (C-CD) Zoning Districts ............................................................................5.2.6 et seq. See: CENTER 
COMMUNITY (S-CD) Zoning Districts ............................................................................3.2.6 et seq. See: SUBURBAN 
COMMUNITY (U-CD) Zoning Districts ............................................................................4.2.6 et seq. See: URBAN 
CURBS    Parking, site access and o.-street         Parking Area Design Standards  ................................................... 10.3.6 
DEFINITIONS De.ned Terms  ................................................................................  17.2 
General ........................................................................................... 17.1 

DRAINAGE    Parking, site access and o.-street    Parking Area Design Standards ....................................................... 10.3.7 
FENCES, WALLS AND ENCLOSURES Landscaping and screening ............................................................ 11.5 
GENERAL 
General Provisions .......................................................................... 1.1 
Applicability ................................................................................ 1.1.3 
Authority .................................................................................... 1.1.2 
Con.icting Provisions ................................................................. 1.1.8
 E.ective Date ............................................................................. 1.1.4
 Intent .......................................................................................... 1.1.6
         Minimum Requirements  ............................................................. 1.1.7
 Purpose ...................................................................................... 1.1.5 
Severability ................................................................................. 1.1.9 
Title ............................................................................................ 1.1.1 

HEAVY INDUSTRIAL (S-HI) Zoning Districts ......................................................................3.2.5 et seq. See: SUBURBAN 
HISTORIC DISTRICT OVERLAY. See: OVERLAY DISTRICTS 
INDUSTRIAL USE STANDARDS Use provisions .................................................................................7.6 et seq. 
IRRIGATION Landscaping and screening ............................................................ 11.6.5 
LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING 
Alternative Landscape Plan ............................................................ 11.7 
Applicability ................................................................................... 11.1
 Design and Installation ................................................................... 11.6 
Credit for Existing Plant Material ................................................ 11.6.2
 Irrigation ..................................................................................... 11.6.5
         Issuance of Certi.cate of Occupancy  ........................................... 11.6.7
 Plant Material ............................................................................. 11.6.1 
Sight Distance Planting .............................................................. 11.6.4 
Tree Protection During Construction  ........................................... 11.6.6 
Tree Removal  .............................................................................. 11.6.3
    Fences and Walls  ............................................................................ 11.5
 Maintenance .................................................................................. 11.8
 Failure to Maintain ...................................................................... 11.8.3
 Maintenance ................................................................................ 11.8.2
         Responsibility  ............................................................................. 11.8.1 
Other Building Type Requirements  ................................................. 11.3 
General Landscaped Area  ........................................................... 11.3.2
         Required Bu. ers ......................................................................... 11.3.3 
Street Trees  ................................................................................ 11.3.1
    Residential Building Type Requirements (Except Apartments)  ........ 11.2 
Screening ....................................................................................... 11.4
         Loading Areas  ............................................................................. 11.4.2
 Mechanical Equipment ............................................................... 11.4.3 
Service Areas  .............................................................................. 11.4.1 
Utilities ....................................................................................... 11.4.4 

LICENSES AND PERMITS Administration Zoning Permit  ............................................................................. 6.2.2 Use provisions Temporary Uses  .............................................................................. 7.9         Exempt from Permit  ................................................................... 7.9.1         Permit Required  .......................................................................... 7.9.2 
I-6 | City of Bastrop 
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL (C-LI) Zoning Districts ...........................................................................5.2.5 et seq. See: CENTER 
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL (S-LI) Zoning Districts ............................................................................3.2.4 et seq. See: SUBURBAN 
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL (U-IL) Zoning Districts ............................................................................4.2.5 et seq. See: URBAN 
LIGHTS AND LIGHTING 
Outdoor lighting 
Applicability ................................................................................ 12.1
         Design Requirements  ................................................................ 12.3
 Fixture Height ........................................................................ 12.3.2
              Fixture (Luminaire)  ................................................................ 12.3.1
              Light Source (Lamp)  .............................................................. 12.3.3
              Limit Lighting to Periods of Activity  ....................................... 12.3.5
 Mounting ................................................................................ 12.3.4
 Excessive Illumination ............................................................. 12.4.6
         Prohibited Sources  ..................................................................... 12.2 
Speci.c Lighting ......................................................................... 12.4 
Accent Lighting  ....................................................................... 12.4.2 
Canopy Area Lighting  .............................................................. 12.4.3 
Commercial Parking Area Lighting  .......................................... 12.4.4
 Entrances ................................................................................ 12.4.4 
Outdoor Recreation  ................................................................ 12.4.5 
Security Lighting ..................................................................... 12.4.1
    Parking, site access and o.-street
         Parking Area Design Standards  ................................................... 10.3.4 

LIVESTOCK Use provisions Accessory Uses 
   Keeping of Livestock in Residential Districts  .................................... 7.8.5 


LOADING AND UNLOADING    Parking, site access and o.-street O.-Street Loading  ......................................................................... 10.8 
MAIN STREET (C-MS-3) Zoning District ............................................................................. 5.2.4 et seq. See: CENTER 
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK Use provisions         Residential Use Standards  .......................................................... 7.3.5 
MAPS Administration Zoning Map Amendment  ............................................................ 16.2.10 Code components Zoning Map ................................................................................ 2.5 
MIXED USE (C-MX-2, -3) Zoning Districts ............................................................................ 5.2.3 et seq. See: CENTER 
MIXED USE (U-MX-2, -3) Zoning Districts ...........................................................................4.2.4 et seq. See: URBAN 
MOBILE HOME OR TRAILER Use provisions Temporary Uses  .......................................................................... 7.9.3 
OVERLAY DISTRICTS
    Historic District Overlay (-H)  ........................................................... 9.1 
Application ................................................................................. 9.1.3 
Certi.cate of Appropriateness Required  ...................................... 9.1.5
         Design Standards  ....................................................................... 9.1.6

 Established ................................................................................. 9.1.2
         Historic District Commission  ....................................................... 9.1.4
 Purpose ...................................................................................... 9.1.1 


PARKING Center Urban Context  ............................................................................ 5.1.5 Suburban Suburban Context  ....................................................................... 3.1.5 Urban Urban Context  ............................................................................ 4.1.5 
PARKING, SITE ACCESS AND OFF-STREET 
Alternative Parking Plan ................................................................. 10.5 
Amendments .............................................................................. 10.5.6 
Applicant-Submitted Parking Data  ............................................. 10.5.1 
O.-Site Parking  .......................................................................... 10.5.2
         Recording of Approved Plans  ...................................................... 10.5.5 
Shared Parking ........................................................................... 10.5.3 
Valet Parking ............................................................................... 10.5.4 
Applicability ................................................................................... 10.1
 Bicycle Parking ............................................................................... 10.4 
O.-Street Loading  ......................................................................... 10.8
 Design and Layout ...................................................................... 10.8.2
         Loading Facilities Required  ......................................................... 10.8.1
    Parking Area Design Standards ....................................................... 10.3 
Curbs .......................................................................................... 10.3.6
 Dimensions ................................................................................. 10.3.1
 Drainage ..................................................................................... 10.3.7
 Lighting ...................................................................................... 10.3.4 
Setback ...................................................................................... 10.3.3 
Striping ....................................................................................... 10.3.5 
Surfacing .................................................................................... 10.3.2
    Parking Requirements ..................................................................... 10.2 
Credit for On-Street Spaces  ........................................................ 10.2.3 
General Provisions ...................................................................... 10.2.1
         Large Vehicle Parking in Residential Districts  .............................. 10.2.5 

Zoning Development Code | I-7

 Parking Ratios ............................................................................ 10.2.2
         Parking Reductions  ..................................................................... 10.2.4 
Site Access  ..................................................................................... 10.6 
Access to Arterial Streets  ............................................................ 10.6.2 
Clear Sight Distance  .................................................................... 10.6.5
         Driveways for Other Building Types  ............................................ 10.6.4
         Driveways for Residential Building Types  .................................... 10.6.3 
General Standards  ...................................................................... 10.6.1 
Stacking and Queuing Spaces  ......................................................... 10.7 

PARKS AND RECREATION Outdoor lighting Speci.c Lighting ......................................................................... 12.4.5 
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (C-PD) Zoning Districts .......................................................................... 5.2.7 et seq. See: CENTER 
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (PD) Administration ............................................................................... 16.2.12 
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (S-PD) Zoning Districts ............................................................................3.2.7 et seq. See: SUBURBAN 
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (U-PD) Zoning Districts ............................................................................4.2.7 et seq. See: URBAN 
PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT (PID) Administration ...............................................................................       16.2.13 
PLANNING COMMISSION Administration ............................................................................... 16.1.2 
PUBLIC USE STANDARDS Use provisions ................................................................................. 7.4 et seq. 
I-8 | City of Bastrop
REAL ESTATE DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS Use provisions Temporary Uses  .......................................................................... 7.9.4 
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS Use provisions Accessory Uses         Keeping of Livestock in Residential Districts  .............................. 7.8.5 
RESIDENTIAL MIXED USE (C-RMX-2) Zoning Districts ............................................................................5.2.2 et seq. See: CENTER 
RESIDENTIAL MIXED USE (U-RMX-2) Zoning Districts ............................................................................4.2.3 et seq. See: URBAN 
RESIDENTIAL MULTIFAMILY (S-RM-2) Zoning Districts ............................................................................3.2.2 et seq. See: SUBURBAN 
RESIDENTIAL SINGLE-FAMILY (S-RS-15, -10, -6) Zoning Districts ............................................................................3.2.1 et seq. See: SUBURBAN 
RESIDENTIAL SINGLE-FAMILY (U-RS-3) Zoning Districts ............................................................................4.2.1 et seq. See: URBAN 
RESIDENTIAL TWO-FAMILY (C-RT-2) Zoning Districts ............................................................................5.2.1 et seq. See: CENTER 
RESIDENTIAL TWO-FAMILY (U-RT-2) Zoning Districts ............................................................................4.2.2 et seq. See: URBAN 
RESIDENTIAL USE STANDARDS Use provisions ................................................................................. 7.3 et seq. 
SALES Use provisions Commerce Use Standards  ........................................................... 7.5              Retail Sales  ............................................................................. 7.5.7 Vehicle Sales ............................................................................ 7.5.8 
SIGNS 
General ........................................................................................... 14.1 
Applicability ................................................................................ 14.1.1 
Common Sign Plan  ..................................................................... 14.1.6
         Exempt Signs  .............................................................................. 14.1.2
         Existing Signs or Sign Structures  ................................................. 14.1.4
         Noncommercial Message Substitution  ....................................... 14.1.8
         Prohibited Signs  ......................................................................... 14.1.3 
Sign Permit Required  .................................................................. 14.1.5 
Variances Allowed  ....................................................................... 14.1.7 
General Sign Regulations  ................................................................ 14.3 
Computation of Sign Area  ........................................................... 14.3.1 
Construction Standards ............................................................... 14.3.2
         Height of Sign  ............................................................................. 14.3.3
    Nonconforming Signs  ..................................................................... 14.5
         Enforcement of Removal  ............................................................ 14.5.5
 Forfeiture ................................................................................... 14.5.6
         Removal by Abandonment or Change of Business  ...................... 14.5.1
         Removal by Damage or Destruction  ........................................... 14.5.2
         Removal Upon Change of Principal Use  ....................................... 14.5.4
         Removal When Not Repaired Within 60 days  .............................. 14.5.3 
Sign Maintenance and Removal  ...................................................... 14.4
         Removal of Obsolete, Abandoned, or Deteriorated Signs  ........... 14.4.2 
Sign Maintenance ....................................................................... 14.4.1 
Types of Signs  ................................................................................. 14.2
         Building Signs  ............................................................................. 14.2.1
         Freestanding Signs  ..................................................................... 14.2.2

         Historic Signs .............................................................................. 14.2.4 
O.-Premises Signs  ..................................................................... 14.2.3 


SOLID WASTE Use provisions          Industrial Use Standards Waste Related Services  .......................................................... 7.6.4 
SPECIAL 
Allowed Uses  .................................................................................. 6.3 
Allowed Use Table  ....................................................................... 6.3.2 
General Provisions ....................................................................... 6.3.1
    Building Types  ................................................................................ 6.4 
Civic ............................................................................................ 6.4.4 
General Shopfront  ...................................................................... 6.4.1
         Large Format Shopfront  ............................................................. 6.4.2 
Open Lot .................................................................................... 6.4.5 
Workshop  ................................................................................... 6.4.3 
Special Context ............................................................................... 6.1
 Block Patterns ............................................................................ 6.1.3
         Building Type and Dimensions  .................................................... 6.1.3 
General Character  ....................................................................... 6.1.1
 Parking ....................................................................................... 6.1.3 
Zoning Districts .......................................................................... 6.1.2 
Special Development Standards  ..................................................... 6.5 
Special Planned Industrial Development (SP-PID)  ....................... 6.5.1 
Zoning Districts .............................................................................. 6.2 
Special Community (SP-CD)  ........................................................ 6.2.1 
Special Heavy Industrial (SP-HI) ................................................... 6.2.2 
Special Planned Industrial Development (SP-PID)  ....................... 6.2.3 

SPECIAL COMMUNITY (SP-CD) Zoning Districts ..........................................................................6.2.1 et seq. 
SPECIAL HEAVY INDUSTRIAL (SP-HI) Zoning Districts ..........................................................................6.2.2 et seq. 
SPECIAL PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT (SP-PID) Zoning Districts ............................................................................ 6.2.3 et seq. 
STORAGE Outdoor storage and display Applicability ................................................................................ 13.1 Outdoor Display .........................................................................   13.3 Outdoor Storage .........................................................................   13.2 General ...................................................................................         13.2.2 Limited ................................................................................... 13.2.1 
SUBURBAN 
Allowed Uses  .................................................................................. 3.3 
Allowed Use Table  ....................................................................... 3.3.2 
General Provisions ...................................................................... 3.3.1
    Building Types  ................................................................................ 3.4 
Apartment .................................................................................. 3.4.6 
Apartment House ....................................................................... 3.4.4 
Attached House .......................................................................... 3.4.3 
Civic ............................................................................................ 3.4.10 
General Shopfront  ...................................................................... 3.4.7
         Large Format Shopfront  ............................................................. 3.4.8 
Open Lot .................................................................................... 3.4.11
         Row House  ................................................................................. 3.4.5 
Side Yard House  .......................................................................... 3.4.2 
Single-Family House ................................................................... 3.4.1 
Workshop  ................................................................................... 3.4.9 
Special Development Standards  ..................................................... 3.5 
Suburban Planned Development (S-PD)  ..................................... 3.5.1 
Suburban Context  ........................................................................... 3.1
 Block Patterns ............................................................................ 3.1.4
         Building Type and Dimensions  .................................................... 3.1.3 
General Character ........................................................................ 3.1.1
 Parking ....................................................................................... 3.1.5 
Zoning Districts .......................................................................... 3.1.2 

I-10 | City of Bastrop 
Zoning Districts .............................................................................. 3.2 
Commercial Corridor (S-CC-2)  ..................................................... 3.2.3 
Community (S-CD)  ...................................................................... 3.2.6
         Heavy Industrial (S-HI)  ................................................................ 3.2.5
         Light Industrial (S-LI)  .................................................................. 3.2.4
         Planned Development (S-PD)  ..................................................... 3.2.7
         Residential Multifamily (S-RM-2)  ............................................... 3.2.2
         Residential Single-Family (S-RS-15, -10, -6)  ................................ 3.2.1 

SUBURBAN PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (S-PD) Special Development Standards ................................................... 3.5.1 et seq. See: SUBURBAN Zoning Districts .............................................................................3.2.7 et seq. 
SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS 
Clear Sight Distance  ........................................................................ 15.1
 Modi.cation of Clear Sight Distance  ............................................ 15.1.2 
Obstruction of View at Intersection ............................................... 15.1.1
    Hours of Operation .......................................................................... 15.2 

SURVEYS AND PLATS Administration Site Plan Review  .......................................................................... 16.2.8 
TREES AND SHRUBBERY Landscaping and screening ............................................................11.1 et seq. See: LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING 
URBAN 
Allowed Uses  ................................................................................... 4.3 
Allowed Use Table  ........................................................................ 4.3.2 
General Provisions ....................................................................... 4.3.1
    Building Types  ................................................................................. 4.4 
Apartment ................................................................................... 4.4.6 

Apartment House ....................................................................... 4.4.4 
Attached House .......................................................................... 4.4.3 
Civic ............................................................................................ 4.4.9 
General Shopfront  ...................................................................... 4.4.7 
Open Lot .................................................................................... 4.4.10
         Row House  ................................................................................. 4.4.5 
Side Yard House  .......................................................................... 4.4.2 
Single-Family House ................................................................... 4.4.1 
Workshop  ................................................................................... 4.4.8 
Special Development Standards  ..................................................... 4.5 
Urban Planned Development (U-PD) ........................................... 4.5.1 
Urban Context  ................................................................................ 4.1
 Block Patterns ............................................................................ 4.1.4
         Building Type and Dimensions  .................................................... 4.1.3 
General Character  ....................................................................... 4.1.1
 Parking ....................................................................................... 4.1.5 
Zoning Districts .......................................................................... 4.1.2 
Zoning Districts .............................................................................. 4.2 
Community (U-CD)  ..................................................................... 4.2.6
 Light Industrial (U-IL) .................................................................. 4.2.5
         Mixed Use (U-MX-2, -3)  ............................................................... 4.2.4
         Planned Development (U-PD)  ..................................................... 4.2.7
         Residential Mixed Use (U-RMX-2)  ............................................... 4.2.3
         Residential Single-Family (U-RS-3)  ............................................. 4.2.1
         Residential Two-Family (U-RT-2)  ................................................. 4.2.2 

URBAN PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (U-PD) Special Development Standards ...................................................4.5.1 et seq. See: URBAN Zoning Districts ............................................................................ 4.2.7 et seq. 
USE CATEGORIES Use provisions ................................................................................. 7.2 et seq. 
USE PROVISIONS Accessory Uses  ............................................................................... 7.8 
Accessory Dwellings Units  .......................................................... 7.8.3
          Drive-Through Facilities  ............................................................. 7.8.4 
General ...................................................................................... 7.8.1
          Home Occupations  .................................................................... 7.8.2
          Keeping of Livestock in Residential Districts  .............................. 7.8.5 
Commerce Use Standards ............................................................... 7.5
          Day Care  .................................................................................... 7.5.1
          Indoor Recreation  ...................................................................... 7.5.2 
O.  ce ......................................................................................... 7.5.3 
Outdoor Recreation  ................................................................... 7.5.4
          Personal Service  ......................................................................... 7.5.5
          Restaurant/Bar  ........................................................................... 7.5.6
          Retail Sales  ................................................................................ 7.5.7 
Vehicle Sales  .............................................................................. 7.5.8 
General Provisions .......................................................................... 7.1 
Accessory Uses  ........................................................................... 7.1.3
         Principal Uses  ............................................................................. 7.1.2 
Temporary Uses  .......................................................................... 7.1.4 
Use Categories  ............................................................................ 7.1.1 
Uses Not Listed .......................................................................... 7.1.5
    Industrial Use Standards  ................................................................. 7.6
 Heavy Industrial .......................................................................... 7.6.1 
Self-service Storage  .................................................................... 7.6.2 
Vehicle Service  ............................................................................ 7.6.3 
Waste Related Services  ................................................................ 7.6.4 
Open Use Standards  ....................................................................... 7.7 
Agriculture .................................................................................. 7.7.1
    Public Use Standards ....................................................................... 7.4 
Civic ............................................................................................ 7.4.1
         Major Utilities  ............................................................................. 7.4.4
         Minor Utilities  ............................................................................. 7.4.3
         Parks and Open Space  ................................................................ 7.4.2
    Residential Use Standards  .............................................................. 7.3 
Attached Living .......................................................................... 7.3.2
 Detached Living .......................................................................... 7.3.1 

Group Living ............................................................................... 7.3.6
 Manufactured Home Park ........................................................... 7.3.5
 Multifamily Living ....................................................................... 7.3.3 
Upper Story Living  ...................................................................... 7.3.4 
Temporary Uses  .............................................................................. 7.9
         Exempt from Permit  ................................................................... 7.9.1
        Mobile Home or Trailer for Temporary Use  ................................... 7.9.3
        Permit Required  .......................................................................... 7.9.2
        Real Estate Development Projects  ............................................... 7.9.4 
Use Categories  ............................................................................... 7.2 
Commerce Use Categories  .......................................................... 7.2.3
         Industrial Use Categories  ............................................................ 7.2.4 
Open Use Categories  .................................................................. 7.2.5
         Public Use Categories  ................................................................. 7.2.2
         Residential Use Categories  .......................................................... 7.2.1 

UTILITIES Landscaping and screening ............................................................ 11.4.4 
VARIANCES Administration ............................................................................... 16.2.7 Signs Variances Allowed  .......................................................................... 14.1.7 
ZONING DISTRICTS Center ............................................................................................ 5.2 Code components Code Approach  ............................................................................... 2.1.3, 2.3 Special ............................................................................................ 6.2 Suburban ........................................................................................ 3.1.2 Urban ............................................................................................. 4.2 






