ORDINANCE CODE of JONESBORO, LOUISIANA 
____________ 
Published in 2019 by Order of the Mayor and Board of Aldermen 
____________ 
  
TOWN OFFICIALS 
____________ 
James E. Bradford 
Mayor 
____________ 
Nia Evans Johnson 
Devin Flowers 
Janet Martin 
Robbie Siadek 
Aaron Stringer 
Board of Aldermen 
____________ 
Doug Stokes 
Town Attorney 
____________ 
Kenisha Raybon-Smith 
Town Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a publication of the general and permanent ordinances of the Town of Jonesboro, Louisiana. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1981 Code, as updated through May 8, 2018, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the mayor and board of aldermen. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1981 Code, as updated, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been divided into parts, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and, at the same time, new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CHARTER INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Jim Jenkins, Senior Code Attorney, and Amanda Heath, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Kenisha Raybon-Smith, Town Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the town readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the town's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Jonesboro, Louisiana. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Jonesboro, Louisiana. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Jonesboro, Louisiana. 2019.  
Subpart A - GENERAL CODE OF ORDINANCES  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Ordinance Code of Jonesboro, Louisiana," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as "Ordinance Code" or "O.C." 
(Code 1981, § 1-1) 
State Law reference— Method and procedure in adopting a code of ordinances, R.S. 33:1361 et seq.  
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the rules and definitions set out in this section shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the mayor and board of aldermen. The rules of construction and definitions set out herein shall not be applied to any section of this Code which shall contain any express provisions excluding such construction, or where the subject matter or context of such section may be repugnant thereto. 
Generally. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the mayor and board of aldermen may be fully carried out. 
Aldermen. The terms "aldermen," "board," "board of aldermen," and "town board" mean the board of aldermen of the Town of Jonesboro, Louisiana, or members thereof. 
Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient. 
C.C. The abbreviation "C.C." refers to the Louisiana Civil Code, as amended. 
C.C.P. The abbreviation "C.C.P." refers to the Louisiana Code of Civil Procedure, as amended. 
C.Cr.P. The abbreviation "C.Cr.P." refers to the Louisiana Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended. 
Ch.C. The abbreviation "Ch.C." refers to the Louisiana Children's Code, as amended. 
Code. The term "Code" or "this Code" means the Code of General Ordinances, Town of Jonesboro, Louisiana, as designated in section 1-1 above. 
Computation of time. In computing a period of time allowed or prescribed by ordinance, the date of the act, event, or default after which the period begins to run is not to be included. The last day of the period is to be included, unless it is a legal holiday, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day which is not a legal holiday. 
Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either … or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, except that in appropriate cases the terms "or" and "and" are interchangeable: 
(1)  "And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
(2)  "Or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  "Either … or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly but not in combination. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or some other town officer to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize the head of the department or other officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise. 
Gender. Words used in one gender apply also to the other genders, except as otherwise clearly indicated by the context. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 1:8. 
In the town or of the town. The term "in the town" or "of the town" means within the corporate limits of the town as may be now or hereafter established. 
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Joint authority. All terms giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
Legal holiday. A half-holiday is considered as a legal holiday. A legal holiday is to be included in the computation of a period of time allowed or prescribed, except when: 
(1)  It is expressly excluded; 
(2)  It would otherwise be the last day of the period; or 
(3)  The period is less than seven days. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, C.C.P. art. 5059. 
May. The term "may" is permissive. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, R.S. 1:3. 
Mayor and board of aldermen. The term "mayor and board of aldermen" shall refer to the mayor and board of aldermen of the Town of Jonesboro, Louisiana. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Must. The term "must" shall be construed as being mandatory. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, R.S. 1:7. 
Number. Words used in the singular number include the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 1:7. 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Officers, generally. Whenever any officer is referred to by title, such as "town clerk," such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the Town of Jonesboro." 
Parish. The term "parish" shall be taken to mean Jackson Parish in the State of Louisiana. 
Person. The term "person" shall extend and be applied to unincorporated associations, associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, R.S. 1:10. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Public place. The term "public place" means any street, alley, square, highway, grounds, house or premises; or any hotel, restaurant, boardinghouse, grocery, saloon, garden, workshop or other place, or part of the same, to which people usually resort, or have a right to resort, for business or pleasure. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, moveable, and immovable, and moveable immobilized thereto. 
Revised Statutes or R.S. The term "Revised Statutes" or "R.S." shall refer to the Louisiana Revised Statutes of 1950, as amended. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, R.S. 1:1. 
Shall. The term "shall" is mandatory. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, R.S. 1:3. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of the street between the curblines, or the lateral lines of the roadway and the adjacent property lines, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark when a person cannot write. 
State. The term "state," "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Louisiana. 
Street. The term "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, alleys, lanes, viaducts, bridges and other ways of public passage. 
Substantial compliance. A substantial compliance with any requirement of this Code or ordinances amendatory of this Code, especially on the part of public officers, shall be deemed and held sufficient; and no proceeding shall be declared void for want of such compliance unless expressly so provided. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Town. The term "the town" or "this town" means the Town of Jonesboro in the Parish of Jackson, State of Louisiana. 
Written, writing, or in writing. The term "written," "writing" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1981, § 1-2)  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes, etc.; references to Code. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Cross references and state law references which appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, or sections are to the chapters, articles, and sections of this Code unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 1981, § 1-3)  
Sec. 1-4. - Severability of parts of Code. 
(a)  It is hereby declared that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable; and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the mayor and board of aldermen without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(b)  If any provision of this Code or the application thereof to any person, fact, situation or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this Code and the application of such provision to other persons, facts, situations or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. 
(Code 1981, § 1-4)  
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect, unless specifically so provided therein. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1981, § 1-5)  
Sec. 1-6. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the town to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 hereof. 
(Code 1981, § 1-6)  
Sec. 1-7. - Offenses punishable under separate provisions. 
In all cases where the same offenses may be made punishable or may be created by different clauses or sections of the ordinances of the town, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not more than one sentence shall be imposed against the same person for the same offense. 
(Code 1981, § 1-7)  
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section, "violation of this Code" means any of the following: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code, or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a town officer or town employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(1)  Unless a higher penalty is otherwise specified, whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the town an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in this Code or any ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or of any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or by imprisonment for not more than 60 days, or both. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(2)  If a person attempts to commit such an act, he shall be punished by fine and imprisonment, or both, not exceeding one-half the amounts and times specified in subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
(Code 1981, § 1-8; Ord. No. 475, § 1, 7-14-1987; Ord. No. 507, § 1, 5-11-1993) 
State Law reference— Penalty for ordinance violations generally, R.S. 33:362(A)(2)(b), 33:1236(25).  
Sec. 1-9. - Officers and employees not to be punished for failure to do duty. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise, no town officer or employee shall be subject to a fine or punishment under the provisions of this Code for his failure to do any official act required by same. 
(Code 1981, § 1-9)  
Sec. 1-10. - Fines recoverable by civil action. 
All fines shall be recoverable by civil action before any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1981, § 1-10)  
Sec. 1-11. - Forfeiture of weapons. 
The magistrate of mayor's court or the mayor, when acting as presiding officer of the mayor's court may, when a defendant is sentenced, in addition to the penalties otherwise prescribed by this Code, order the forfeiture of any weapon used in connection with the offense or violation or any weapon found in the possession or under the immediate control of the defendant at the time of his arrest. The magistrate or mayor may also provide for the destruction, sale or other disposition of the weapons ordered forfeited. 
(Code 1981, § 1-11; Ord. No. 507, § 1, 5-11-1993)  
Sec. 1-12. - Court costs. 
Any individual convicted of a violation of a municipal ordinance may be assessed court costs in an amount not to exceed $30.00 for each offense. 
(Code 1981, § 1-12; Ord. No. 486, § 1, 11-15-1988)  
Sec. 1-13. - Interpretation of Code. 
In all interpretations of this Code and town ordinances, the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the board of aldermen, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil, and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands.  
Sec. 1-14. - Substantive compliance with Code. 
A substantial compliance with any requirement of this Code and town ordinances, especially on the part of public officers, shall be deemed and held sufficient, and no proceeding shall be declared void for want of such compliance, unless expressly so provided by the enactment.  
Sec. 1-15. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance of the town in effect on the date of adoption of this Code.  
Sec. 1-16. - Prior offenses, penalties and rights not affected by adoption of Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty of forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the town repealed in this chapter, and all general ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be continuing and not a new enactment of the same ordinance. This chapter shall not be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue or as affecting the liability of any person or as waiving any right of the town under any ordinance or section thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this Code.  
Sec. 1-17. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments.  
Sec. 1-18. - Officers, employees not liable to fine or punishment for failure to perform duties. 
No provision of this Code designating the duties of any town officer or employee shall be construed so as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine or penalty provided in this Code for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of the mayor and board of aldermen to impose such a fine or penalty on such officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty.  
Sec. 1-19. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages. Subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, shall be prima facie evidence of this content until such time as the Code is readopted to reflect same. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section ___ of the Ordinance Code of Jonesboro, Louisiana, is hereby amended to read as follows: …." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  In the event that new sections not heretofore existing in this Code are to be added, the following language may be used: "The Ordinance Code of Jonesboro, Louisiana, is hereby amended by adding section ___, which shall read as follows: …." The new section may then be set out in full as desired.  
Sec. 1-20. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by town personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the mayor and board of aldermen. A supplement to the Code shall include substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the mayor and board of aldermen or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, non-substantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ___ to ___" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections or the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other non-substantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(d)  The publisher, editor or codifier shall omit all titles of ordinances; all enacting, resolving and repealing clauses; all appropriation measures; all temporary ordinances; all declarations of emergency; and all validity, declaration of policy and construction clauses; except when the retention thereof is necessary to preserve the full meaning and intent of the law. Whenever any validity, declaration of policy or construction clause is omitted, proper notation of the omission may be made.  
Sec. 1-21. - Rates, charges, deposits, and fees established. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided for, all rates, charges, deposits, or fees necessary for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this Code shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution or ordinance of the mayor and board of aldermen, from time to time. Any rates, charges, deposits, or fees established by the town pursuant to the regulations or requirements established herein may be changed from time to time by the mayor and board of aldermen, and such changes shall be considered an amendment to this Code. 
(b)  Whenever any provision of this Code provides that a rate, charge, deposit, or fee shall be established by the mayor and board of aldermen, from time to time, and the amount of such rate, charge, deposit, or fee is not expressed in this Code in any dollar amount, then the amount of such rate, charge, deposit, or fee shall be the most recent and latest amount established, set or fixed by the mayor and board of aldermen by ordinance, resolution or motion.  
Sec. 1-22. - Ordinances not affected by adoption of Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the town or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the town or any evidence of the town's indebtedness; 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the town; 
(4)  Any ordinance or resolution fixing the salary of any town officer or employee, unless superseded; 
(5)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing and/or prescribing employment, benefits, and/or personnel policies and procedures; 
(6)  Any right of franchise granted by the town to any person, firm, or corporation; 
(7)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, closing, opening, widening, paving, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the town; 
(8)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the town; 
(9)  Any appropriation ordinance; 
(10)  Any ordinance or resolution which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term; 
(11)  Any ordinance or resolution providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(12)  Any specific rezoning ordinance or amendments thereto; 
(13)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat or providing for subdivision regulations; 
(14)  Any ordinance or resolution describing or altering the boundaries of the town or annexing property to the town; 
(15)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the town not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code; 
(16)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code; 
(17)  Any ordinance or regulation prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations concerning through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic, or limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones, not in conflict or inconsistent with this Code; 
(18)  Any ordinance or resolution of agreement with another political subdivision; 
(19)  Pertaining to any specific election, or the calling of regular or special elections, or promulgating the results of such elections; 
(20)  Any other ordinance or resolution, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature; or which is referred to elsewhere in this Code as continuing in effect. 
(b)  Nor shall the repeal of any such ordinance or resolution be construed to revive any ordinance, resolution or part thereof that has been repealed or superseded by a subsequent ordinance or resolution which is repealed or superseded by this chapter. All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code.  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Hiring, employment, discipline and discharge of employees. 
(a)  Policy. It is the policy of the town to hire, employ, discipline and discharge persons on a merit and equal employment opportunity basis. There shall be no discrimination with respect to race, color, sex, retaliation, age, religion or national origin. 
(b)  Procedures. Except as otherwise provided by law, the mayor is hereby authorized to establish, by executive order, the appropriate procedures to be followed with respect to the hiring, employment, discipline and discharge of employees of the town. 
(Code 1981, § 2-1; Ord. No. 468, §§ 1, 2, 2-11-1986)  
Sec. 2-2. - Authorized personnel uses. 
For purposes of this article, the chief of police of the town, the chief of the fire department, the director of public works, the designated animal control officer and the mayor of the town will be considered as on-call 24 hours per day. 
(Ord. No. 713, § I, 2013)  
Sec. 2-3. - Vehicle use logs to be maintained. 
Each employee of the town having access to or using a town vehicle for any reason shall be required to radio into public works to log mileage with the purchasing agent, if the mileage odometer works, at the time of gas fill up. 
(Ord. No. 791, § I(2-5), 10-11-2016)  
Sec. 2-4. - Surplus property. 
(a)  The mayor and town council shall establish and fix the minimum price for all adjudicated properties from time to time. This fixed minimum price shall be inclusive of filing fees, recording fees, certified copy fees, and administrative fees. 
(b)  The town establishes these terms of sale for all adjudicated properties. 
(1)  Disposition of surplus property. Surplus property shall be disposed of by public, sealed bids. Bids submitted for a property are binding once accepted by the town. 
(2)  Filing fees and court costs. The party awarded the property shall assume any and all filing fees and/or other court costs necessary for delivery of the awarded property. Filing fees relating to the delivery of the awarded property shall be included in the fixed minimum price. 
(3)  Payment. Payment for an awarded property is due immediately once a bid is accepted and approved by the town. Personal check, business check, money order or cashier's check shall exclusively be the form of payment. Credit shall not be extended to any interested party whatsoever. 
(4)  Guarantees and warranties. The town does not provide any guarantees or warranties for the properties described herein. 
(5)  Delivery. The town shall have 30 days to deliver the sold property to the awarded party. 
(6)  Governing laws. The laws of the state, parish, town shall govern the terms of any sale related hereto. 
(Ord. No. 797, §§ II, III, 5-8-2018)  
Secs. 2-5—2-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND BOARD OF ALDERMEN  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-46. - Regular meeting. 
(a)  Number of meetings. There shall be one regular meeting of the mayor and board of aldermen of the town each month. 
(b)  Time and place of meetings. The meeting shall be on the second Tuesday of each month, shall begin at 6:00 p.m. and shall be at the town hall. 
(Code 1981, § 2-16; Ord. No. 469, §§ 1, 2, 2-11-1986; Ord. No. 702, § I, 3-8-2011)  
Sec. 2-47. - Manner of notice of special meetings. 
Written notice of special meetings of the mayor and board of aldermen shall be served on the mayor and each member of the board of aldermen. The notice may be served by any officer or employee of the town, who shall make his return thereof. The notice shall be by personal service unless the mayor or member cannot be located, in which case, the notice may be by domiciliary service. 
(Code 1981, § 2-17; Ord. No. 469, § 3, 2-11-1986)  
Secs. 2-48—2-67. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ALDERMEN 
 
Sec. 2-68. - Election districts. 
(a)  District A. The point of beginning being the intersection of Gansville Rd and Dark Street; thence east along Dark Street to its intersection with Hill Street; thence north along Hill Street to its intersection with Elm Street; thence east along Elm Street to its intersection with Pine Street; thence south along Pine Street to its intersection with Oak Street; thence east along Oak Street to its intersection with Anna Street; thence south along Anna Street to its intersection with Gilbert Street; thence east along Gilbert Street to its intersection with South Polk Avenue; thence north along South Polk Avenue to its intersection with 12th Street; thence east along 12th Street to its intersection with an un-named creek; thence southeasterly along said un-named creek to its intersection with Hickory Street; thence northerly along Hickory Street to its intersection with Gimber Avenue; thence northeasterly along Gimber Avenue to its intersection with Old Winnfield Road; thence southerly along Old Winnfield Road to its intersection with Alford Street; thence east along Alford Street to its intersection with Lawrence Street; thence north along Lawrence Street to its intersection with Walker Road; thence northwesterly along Walker Road to its intersection with Old Winnfield Road; thence northwesterly along Old Winnfield Road to its intersection with Louisiana Highway 4; thence easterly along Louisiana Highway 4 to its intersection with the corporate boundaries of Jonesboro, Louisiana; thence a generally southerly, westerly and northerly direction along said corporate boundaries of Jonesboro, Louisiana, to its intersection with Tyler Street; thence west along Tyler Street to its intersection with Gansville Road; thence northerly along Gansville Road and back to the point of beginning. 
(b)  District B. The point of beginning being the intersection of Dark Street and Gansville Road; thence northerly along Gansville Road to its intersection with the corporate boundaries of Jonesboro, Louisiana; thence west, northerly, and easterly along the corporate boundaries of Jonesboro, Louisiana, to its intersection with Pershing Highway; thence southerly along Pershing Highway to its intersection with Harrison Street; thence west along Harrison Street to its intersection with North Michigan Avenue; thence southerly along North Michigan Avenue to its intersection with 1st Street; thence east along 1st Street to its intersection with North Cooper Avenue; thence north along North Cooper Avenue to its intersection with Pershing Highway; thence east along Pershing Highway to its intersection with North Allen Avenue; thence south along North Allen Avenue to its intersection with 2nd Street; thence east along 2nd Street to its intersection with Hudson Avenue; thence south along Hudson Avenue to its intersection with an un-named creek; thence northwesterly along said un-named creek to its intersection with South Polk Avenue; thence south along South Polk Avenue to its intersection with Gilbert Street; thence west along Gilbert Street to its intersection with Anna Street; thence north along Anna Street to its intersection with Oak Street; thence west along Oak Street to its intersection with Pine Street; thence north along Pine Street to its intersection with Elm Street; thence west along Elm Street to its intersection with Hill Street; thence south along Hill Street to its intersection with Dark Street; thence west along Dark Street and back to the point of beginning. 
(c)  District C. The point of beginning being the intersection of Pershing Highway and the corporate boundaries of Jonesboro, Louisiana (northern point); thence proceed in a generally easterly direction along said corporate boundaries of Jonesboro, Louisiana, to its intersection with Beech Springs Road; thence east along Beech Springs Road to its intersection with Talbot Street; thence south along Talbot Street to its intersection with Northeast Street; thence east along Northeast Street to its intersection with Cedar Street; thence south along Cedar Street to its intersection with Congo Street; thence east along Congo Street to its intersection with Perry Street; thence south along Perry Street to its intersection with Harvey Place; thence east along Harvey Place to its intersection with Leon Street; thence south along Leon Street to its intersection with Louisiana Highway 4; thence west along Louisiana Highway 4 to its intersection with Old Winnfield Road; thence southerly along Old Winnfield Road to its intersection with Walker Road; thence southeasterly along Walker Road to its intersection with Lawrence Street; thence south along Lawrence Street to its intersection with Alford Street; thence west along Alford Street to its intersection with Old Winnfield Road; thence northerly along Old Winnfield Road to its intersection with Gimber Avenue; thence westerly and southerly along Gimber Avenue to its intersection with Hickory Street; thence southerly along Hickory Street to its intersection with an un-named creek; thence westerly along said un-named creek to its intersection with South Hudson Avenue; thence northerly along South Hudson Avenue to its intersection with 2nd Street; thence west along 2nd Street to its intersection with North Allen Avenue; thence northerly along North Allen Avenue to its intersection with Pershing Highway; thence west along Pershing Highway to its intersection with Cooper Avenue; thence south along Cooper Avenue to its intersection with 1st Street; thence west along 1st Street to its intersection with North Michigan Avenue; thence north along North Michigan Avenue to its intersection with Harrison Street; thence east along Harrison Street to its intersection with Pershing Highway; thence northwesterly along Pershing Highway and back to the point of beginning. 
(d)  District D. The point of beginning being the intersection of Talbot Street and Beech Springs Road; thence northeasterly along Beech Springs Road to its intersection with Leon Drive; thence south along Leon Drive to its intersection with Toni Street and the corporate boundaries of Jonesboro, Louisiana; thence in a generally easterly and southerly direction along said corporate boundaries of Jonesboro, Louisiana, to its intersection with East Main Street; thence west along East Main Street to its intersection with Leon Drive; thence north along Leon Drive to its intersection with Harvey Place; thence west along Harvey Place to its intersection with Perry Street; thence north along Perry Street to its intersection with Congo Street; thence west along Congo Street to its intersection with Cedar Street; thence north along Cedar Street to its intersection with Northeast Street; thence west along Northeast Street to its intersection with Talbot Street; thence north along Talbot Street and back to the point of beginning. 
(Code 1981, § 2-23; Ord. No. 390, § 1, 1-28-1974; Ord. No. 506, § 1, 9-1-1993; Ord. No. 1234, exh. A, 8-8-2014) 
State Law reference— Division of town into wards, R.S. 33:382.  
Sec. 2-69. - Election. 
(a)  One member of the board of aldermen shall be elected from each of the election districts or wards and one member shall be elected at large from the whole of the corporate limits. 
(b)  When qualifying as a candidate for any office of alderman, each candidate shall specify whether he is a candidate for a district or ward office, or for the at-large office. 
(Code 1981, § 2-24; Ord. No. 390, §§ 2, 3, 1-28-1974) 
State Law reference— Election of aldermen by ward, R.S. 33:381.  
Sec. 2-70. - Board of aldermen compensation. 
Members of the board of aldermen shall be paid at the sum of $500.00 per month during their period of service. 
(Ord. No. 538, § I, 7-11-2000)  
Sec. 2-71. - Mayor compensation. 
The annual salary for the mayor of the town shall be $52,000.00 per year. As used herein, the term "salary" shall not include fringe benefits or retirement benefits. 
(Ord. No. 538, § II, 7-11-2000; Ord. No. 701, § I, 1-11-2011; Ord. No. 721, § I, 2-18-2014)  
Secs. 2-72—2-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TOURIST PROMOTION AGENCY 
 
Sec. 2-101. - Established. 
The mayor and board of aldermen of the town are hereby established as a tourist promotion agency and designated as the tourist promotion agency within the municipality. 
(Code 1981, § 2-31; Ord. No. 457, § 1, 6-28-1983)  
Sec. 2-102. - Authorization to apply and receive grants. 
The mayor and board of aldermen, as the tourist promotion agency of the municipality, are hereby authorized and empowered to make application to and receive grants from the Louisiana Tourist Development Commission, for the purposes specified by Act No. 455 of 1970. 
(Code 1981, § 2-32; Ord. No. 457, § 2, 6-28-1983)  
Secs. 2-103—2-132. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS 
 
Sec. 2-133. - Municipal elections held every four years. 
Municipal elections in the town shall be held every four years, and the officers shall be elected at the same time as members of Congress, as provided by R.S. 18:402(C), as amended. 
(Code 1981, § 2-41; Ord. No. 465, § I, 1-22-1985)  
Sec. 2-134. - Terms of elected officers. 
The officers elected shall take office on January 1 following their election and shall hold office for four years. 
(Code 1981, § 2-42; Ord. No. 465, § II, 1-22-1985)  
Sec. 2-135. - Filling of vacancy. 
If no election is held on the day herein prescribed or if a vacancy in any municipal office elected by the people occurs or if an officer elected fails to qualify, such vacancy shall be filled in accordance with the provisions of article IV, section 13 of the state constitution or as otherwise provided by law. 
(Code 1981, § 2-43; Ord. No. 465, § III, 1-22-1985)  
Sec. 2-136. - Current terms unaffected by this article. 
The terms of office of municipal officers in office on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall not be decreased by the passage of this article, and those officers serving on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall continue to serve until their successors are sworn into office. 
(Code 1981, § 2-44; Ord. No. 465, § IV, 1-22-1985)  
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— The Alcoholic Beverage Control Law, R.S. 26:1 et seq.; local alcoholic beverage permits, R.S. 26:74, 26:274; local taxation and regulations, R.S. 26:491 et seq.; local election on sale of alcoholic beverages, R.S. 26:581 et seq.; suspension or revocation of permits, R.S. 33:4785 et seq.; certain exemptions from municipal license tax, R.S. 47:360. 
 
Sec. 4-1. - State law adopted. 
The board of aldermen hereby adopts Title 26 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes cited as the Alcoholic Beverage Control Law, except to the extent that the same is inconsistent with the other provisions of this chapter as set forth in sections 4-2 through 4-22. 
(Code 1981, ch. 4; Ord. No. 511, pt. II, 3-8-1994)  
Sec. 4-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverage means any fluid or any solid capable of being converted into fluid suitable for human consumption and containing more than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume, including malt, vinous, spirituous, alcoholic or intoxicating liquors, beer, porter, ale, stout, fruit juices, ciders or wine. 
Beverages of high alcoholic content means alcoholic beverages containing more than six percent alcohol by volume. 
Beverages of low alcoholic content means alcoholic beverages containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume. 
Alcoholic beverage permit means a permit required by and issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
Bottle club means any establishment wherein the owner or any employee of the owner, does not sell, serve, handle, dispense or store alcoholic beverages, but in which patrons are allowed to consume alcoholic beverages on the premises either from the patron's own store, stock or supplies of alcoholic beverages or from any other source. Further, the establishment's principal commodity and main business transactions are related to alcoholic beverages. 
Collector means the collector of revenue for the state or his duly authorized agent. 
Handle means to sell, use, distribute, store, consume or otherwise handle. 
Package house means a place where a person sells alcoholic beverages in closed containers, prepared for transportation and consumption off the premises. 
Private club means an organization with limited and restricted membership which is either: 
(1)  Nonprofit in nature and classified as exempt from the payment of state and federal income taxes; or 
(2)  Charges members dues or other charges for membership of at least $50.00 per month, requires that the dues of any member must be fully paid in order to be a member and exists for a fraternal, educational or social purpose. 
Retail dealer means every person, other than a manufacturer or wholesale dealer, who offers for sale, exposes for sale, has in his possession for sale or distribution or sells alcoholic beverages in any quantity. 
Wholesale dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other licensed wholesale dealers or to licensed retail dealers. 
(Code 1981, § 4-2; Ord. No. 511, pt. III(4-2), 3-8-1994)  
Sec. 4-3. - Low alcoholic content beverages annual fee. 
There is hereby levied an annual permit fee for each business location against all persons, firms, corporations, etc., who may engage in the business of selling, either retail or wholesale, in the town, beverages of low alcoholic content, as follows, to wit: 
Wholesale 	$75.00 
Class A retail dealer (on-premises consumption) 	$47.00 
Class B retail dealer (off-premises consumption) 	$25.00 
 
(Code 1981, § 4-3; Ord. No. 511, pt. III(4-3), 3-8-1994)  
Sec. 4-4. - High alcoholic content beverages annual fee. 
There is hereby levied an annual permit fee for each business location against all persons, firms, corporations, etc., who may engage in the business of selling, either at retail or wholesale in the town, beverages of high alcoholic content or whose principal commodity and main business transactions within the town are related to alcoholic beverages of high or low alcoholic content, as follows, to wit: 
Wholesale dealer 	$500.00 
Retail dealer 	$500.00 
Bottle club 	$500.00 
Private club 	$50.00 
 
(Code 1981, § 4-4; Ord. No. 511, pt. III(4-4), 3-8-1994)  
Sec. 4-5. - Annual permit. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, before engaging in the business of dealing in alcoholic beverages, all persons shall obtain, as set forth in this chapter, an annual permit to conduct each separate business. 
(b)  Any person not otherwise a dealer in alcoholic beverages commencing into possession of any alcoholic beverages as executor, administrator, trustee or other fiduciary, as security for or in payment of a debt, or as an insurer, or its transferee or assignee for the salvage or liquidation of an insured damage or loss may sell the beverages in one lot or parcel to a duly licensed wholesale or retail dealer without qualifying as a dealer. Before doing so, that person shall fully comply with the requirements of R.S. 26:71(B). 
(c)  No person shall do any acts for which a permit is required by this chapter unless he holds the proper state and parish permits. Each day's business by a wholesaler or retailer without such a valid, unsuspended permit constitutes a separate violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 4-5; Ord. No. 511, pt. III(4-5), 3-8-1994)  
Sec. 4-6. - Assignability. 
(a)  Permits issued under this chapter are not assignable or heritable and are good only from the time of issuance to December 31 of the year for which issued, unless sooner suspended or revoked. 
(b)  Where the location of the business is changed, the change shall be noted on the permit by the issuing authority. 
(Code 1981, § 4-6; Ord. No. 511, pt. III(4-6), 3-8-1994)  
Sec. 4-7. - Payment of fees. 
(a)  All the applications for the permits for new businesses shall be filed with the town and shall be accompanied by a cashier's check or money order in the proper amount payable to the town. 
(b)  All applications for renewal of a license and permit shall be filed with the town's office on or November 1 each year and the remittance must accompany all applications. 
(Code 1981, § 4-7; Ord. No. 511, pt. III(4-7), 3-8-1994)  
Sec. 4-8. - Partial fees. 
In the event a business shall commence prior to July 1 of any year, a whole year's permit fee shall be paid and collected and if said business shall commence subsequent to July 1 of any year, two-thirds of the annual permit fee shall be paid and collected. 
(Code 1981, § 4-8; Ord. No. 511, pt. III(4-8), 3-8-1994)  
Sec. 4-9. - Renewal penalties. 
Should any retail dealer or wholesale dealer fail to file his application for renewal of the permit for any ensuing year on or before November 1 of each year, a penalty shall be imposed of 25 percent of the amount due for the permit applied for. If the application for the renewal of a permit is not filed until, on or after January 1 of the year for which the permit is required, the application shall be denied without notice or hearing and the applicant's right to do business suspended. 
(Code 1981, § 4-9; Ord. No. 511, pt. III(4-9), 3-8-1994)  
Sec. 4-10. - Qualifications. 
(a)  Applicants for permits of all kinds shall meet the following qualifications and conditions: 
(1)  Is a person of good character and reputation and over 18 years of age. 
(2)  Is a citizen of the United States and of the state, and a resident of the state continuously for a period of not less than two years next preceding the date of the filing of the application. 
(3)  Is the owner of the premises or has a bona fide written lease therefor. 
(4)  Has not been convicted of distributing or possessing with the intent to distribute any controlled dangerous substance classified in Schedule I of R.S. 40:964, on any premises licensed pursuant to this chapter, where the applicant held or holds an interest in the licensed business. The prohibition provided for in this subsection shall be for the lifetime of the offender. 
(5)  Has not been convicted of a felony under the laws of the United States, this state or any other state. 
(6)  Has not been convicted in this or any other state or by the United States of soliciting for prostitution, pandering, letting premises for prostitution, contributing to the delinquency of juveniles, keeping a disorderly place or illegal dealing in narcotics. 
(7)  Has not had a revoked license or permit to sell or deal in alcoholic beverages issued by the United States or any other state for five years prior to application, or been convicted or had judgment against him involving alcoholic beverages by this state or any other state or the United States for five years prior to the application. 
(9)  Has not had a revoked license or permit to sell or deal in alcoholic beverages, issued by the United States, any state, or by any political subdivision of a state authorized to issue permits or licenses, revoked within two years prior to the application, or been convicted or had a judgment of court rendered against the applicant involving the sale or service of alcoholic beverages by this or any other state or by the United States for two years prior to the application. 
(10)  Has not been convicted of violating any of the provisions of the state laws regulating the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(11)  Has not been convicted of violation of the provisions of this chapter. In such case, the granting or denial of a permit is within the discretion of the board of aldermen. 
(12)  Is not the spouse of a person whose application has been denied or whose permit has been revoked, unless judicially separated or divorced. Is not the spouse of a person who does not meet the requirements of subsections (1) and (3) through (9) of this section; however, in such cases, the age of the ineligible spouse shall be immaterial. For purposes of this subsection, the term "spouse" also includes persons who are considered married outside of the United States, persons who ordinarily hold themselves out as husband and wife, or persons who file their state and federal income tax returns as either "married filing jointly" or "married filing separate." 
(b)  Partnerships, corporations, limited liability companies, etc. 
(1)  If the applicant is a partnership or anyone in such partnership with or financed by another, all members of the partnership or all persons furnishing the money shall also possess all of the qualifications required by the applicant. The application shall name all partners or financial backers and furnish their social security numbers and proper addresses. If a partner of a partnership applying for retail or manufacturer's permits is a corporation or limited liability company, the requirements as to citizenship and residence shall not apply to officers, directors, and stockholders of the corporation or members of the limited liability company. The corporation or limited liability company shall either be organized under the laws of the state or qualified to do business within the state. 
(2)  If the applicant is a corporation or a limited liability company, all officers and directors and all stockholders or members owning in the aggregate more than five percent of the stock or of the membership interest in a limited liability company, and the person or persons who shall conduct or manage the business shall possess the qualifications required of an applicant and shall furnish their federal identification number, their state department of revenue business account number, their social security number, and their correct home address. However, the requirement as to residency does not apply to officers, directors and stockholders of corporations. The corporation or limited liability company shall be either organized under the laws of the state or qualified to do business within the state. 
(3)  If the applicant's business is to be conducted wholly or partly by one or more managers, agents, servants, employees or other representatives, that person shall also possess the qualifications required of the applicant and shall furnish verification of suitability in accordance with subsection (a)(6) of this section; however, convicted felons may be employed by an applicant if, in the applicant's business, alcoholic beverages are not the principal commodities sold, handled, or given away. 
(c)  If the applicant, or any other person required to have the same qualifications, does not possess the required qualifications, the permit shall be denied; however, if a sales tax clearance is not issued, the permit shall be denied. Nevertheless, if the sales tax clearance request is not processed within the time limitations provided in R.S. 26:78, the permit shall be issued if all other qualifications are met by the applicant. 
(Code 1981, § 4-10; Ord. No. 511, pt. III(4-10), 3-8-1994)  
Sec. 4-11. - Permitted locations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or otherwise dispose of any alcoholic beverages from, and no permit shall be granted for, any premises situated within 500 feet or less distance of a building occupied exclusively as a bona fide church, synagogue, public library, public playground or school, (except a school for business education as a business college or school) or any Head Start or other state or federally financed learning center for the pre-kindergarten education of children. The 500 feet shall be interpreted to mean as a person walks using sidewalks from the nearest point of the property line of the church, synagogue, public playground, public library, school or learning center to the nearest point of the premises for which an alcoholic beverage permit is sought, as described in the application for the permit. 
(Code 1981, § 4-11; Ord. No. 511, pt. III(4-11), 3-8-1994)  
Sec. 4-12. - Purchase by or for minors. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to purchase any alcoholic beverage, either of high or low alcoholic content. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person under age 17 to purchase any alcoholic beverage, either of high or low alcoholic content. Whoever is charged with violation of this subsection shall be remanded to the juvenile court for hearing and disposition of the case. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any adult to purchase, on behalf of any person under the age of 18, any alcoholic beverage, either of high or low alcoholic content. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as relieving any retail dealer in alcoholic beverages, either of high or low alcoholic content, of any of the responsibilities imposed on him under the provisions of this chapter or under the provisions of title 26 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes, as amended. 
(Code 1981, § 4-12; Ord. No. 511, pt. III(4-12), 3-8-1994)  
Sec. 4-13. - Sign required relative to sales to minors. 
Each and every place or establishment where alcoholic beverages are sold or dispensed in the parish, at retail or otherwise, shall have a sign displayed in a prominent place, clearly visible to all, stating that no beverages of low or high alcoholic content will be sold or dispensed to persons under 18 years of age. Such sign shall be not less than two feet long and one foot wide, in prominent letters sharply contrasting in color with the background of the sign. 
(Code 1981, § 4-13; Ord. No. 511, pt. III(4-13), 3-8-1994)  
Sec. 4-14. - Signs required relative to firearms and controlled dangerous substances. 
Each and every place or establishment where alcoholic beverages are sold or dispensed in the parish, at retail or otherwise, shall have a sign displayed in a prominent place near the entrance, clearly visible to all, stating the fact that, upon entering the premises, a person shall be deemed to have consented to a reasonable search of his person by law enforcement for any firearm. The sign should also include a statement that no controlled dangerous substances are allowed upon the premises. 
(Code 1981, § 4-14; Ord. No. 511, pt. III(4-14), 3-8-1994)  
Sec. 4-15. - Hours of operation of retail and wholesale dealers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any retail or wholesale dealer to sell or otherwise dispense of alcoholic beverages or to permit or admit any member of the public into an establishment, or part thereof, where alcoholic beverages are the principal commodity sold, between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. on weekdays and between the hours of midnight on Saturday until 6:00 a.m. the following Monday. 
(b)  In any establishment, or part hereof, where alcoholic beverages are the principal commodities sold or handled, the alcoholic beverage permit holder shall remove all patrons and members of the public from the premises by 12:01 a.m. and all doors to such premises will be locked. The permit holder and his employees or agents may enter the closed premises for the purpose of cleaning, taking stock or other work in the establishment. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase or solicit any other person to sell beverages of high or low alcoholic content within the town at such times and places when and where such sales are prohibited. 
(Code 1981, § 4-15; Ord. No. 511, pt. III(4-15), 3-8-1994)  
Sec. 4-16. - Hours of operation for bottle clubs. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any bottle club to permit or admit any member of the public into an establishment or part thereof, between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on weekdays and between the hours of 12:01 a.m. on Sunday until 6:00 a.m. the following Monday. 
(b)  In any bottle club, the permit holder shall remove all patrons and members of the public from the premises by 12:01 a.m. and all doors to such premises will be locked. The permit holder and his employees or agents may enter the closed premises for the purpose of cleaning, taking stock or other work in the establishment. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any bottle club to permit members of the public to remain in its parking lot for more than 30 minutes after its closing until two hours prior to its opening. 
(Code 1981, § 4-16; Ord. No. 511, pt. III(4-16), 3-8-1994)  
Sec. 4-17. - Sunday sales. 
It shall be unlawful for any retail or wholesale dealer to sell, barter, give or otherwise dispense alcoholic beverages of high or low alcoholic content between the hours of midnight Saturday until 6:00 a.m. the following Monday. 
(Code 1981, § 4-17; Ord. No. 511, pt. III(4-17), 3-8-1994)  
Sec. 4-18. - Display or consumption during prohibited hours. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the following acts when the sale of alcoholic beverages is prohibited in any place where alcoholic beverages are sold: 
(1)  To display or allow to be displayed to the view of the public any whiskey, beer or alcoholic beverages after the bottle has been opened, in any bottle, can, glass, cup, vessel or article of any nature. 
(2)  To consume or allow the consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
(3)  For the permit holder, his employees or agents to permit any person to display to view of the public any whiskey, beer or alcoholic beverages after the bottle has been opened in any bottle, can, glass, cup, vessel or article of any nature or allow the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises. 
(Code 1981, § 4-18; Ord. No. 511, pt. III(4-18), 3-8-1994)  
Sec. 4-19. - Refusal to allow inspection. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to allow the law enforcement authorities of the town to make an inspection at any time of any place or business where alcoholic beverages are stored, sold or handled, or otherwise hinder or prevent the inspection. This inspection shall include, but is not limited to, the inspection of coolers and storage rooms. The inspection allowed under this section is authorized solely for the purpose of ascertaining whether the business is operating as licensed. 
(Code 1981, § 4-19; Ord. No. 511, pt. III(4-19), 3-8-1994)  
Sec. 4-20. - Acts prohibited on licensed premises; suspension or revocation of alcoholic beverage permits. 
(a)  No person holding a retail dealer's permit and no agent, associate, employee, representative or servant of any such person shall knowingly do or permit any of the following acts to be done on or about the licensed premises: 
(1)  Sell or serve beverages of low alcoholic content to any person under the age of 21 years, unless such person submits any one of the following: 
a.  A valid, current, state driver's license which contains a photograph of the person presenting the driver's license. 
b.  A valid, current, driver's license of another state which contains a photograph of the person and birth date of the person submitting the driver's license. 
c.  A valid, current, special identification card issued by the state pursuant to R.S. 40:1321 containing a photograph of the person submitting the identification card. 
d.  A valid, current, passport or visa issued by the federal government or another country or nation, that contains a permanently attached photograph of the person and the date of birth of the person submitting the passport or visa. 
e.  A valid, current, military or federal identification card issued by the federal government containing a photograph of the person and date of birth of the person submitting the identification card. 
f.  A valid, current, special identification card of another state which contains a photograph of the person and birth date of the person submitting the identification card. 
g.  Each form of identification listed above must, on its face, establish the age of the person as 21 years or older, and there must be no reason to doubt the authenticity or correctness of the identification. No form of identification mentioned above shall be accepted as proof of age if it is expired, defaced, mutilated, or altered. If the state identification card or lawful identification submitted is a duplicate, the person shall submit additional information which contains the name, date of birth, and picture of the person. A duplicate driver's license shall be considered lawful identification for the purposes of this subsection, and a person shall not be required to submit additional information containing the name, date of birth, and picture of the person. In addition, an educational institution identification card, check cashing identification card, or employee identification card shall not be considered as lawful identification for the purposes of this subsection. 
(2)  Sell or serve alcoholic beverages to any intoxicated person. 
(3)  Permitting minors on premises. 
a.  Intentionally entice, aid or permit any person under the age of 18 years to visit or loiter in or about any place where alcoholic beverages are principal commodities sold, handled or given away. However, the provisions of this section shall in no way prohibit the presence of any person under the age of 18 years on or about a licensed premises for any function sponsored by a religious or charitable organization with tax exempt status under section 501(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of the United States, or by a fraternal beneficiary society with tax exempt status under 501(8) of the said code, and no alcoholic beverages are sold, handled, given away, or accessible during the presence of any such person. 
b.  Permit any person under 18 years of age to work in any capacity unless that person is a musician performing in a band on the premises under written contract for a specified period of time by the permittee, and the musician is under direct supervision of his parent or legal guardian. 
(4)  Permit any prostitute to frequent the licensed premises, or to solicit patrons for prostitution on the licensed premises. 
(5)  Permit any disturbance of the peace, or obscenity, or any lewd, immoral or improper entertainment, conduct or practices, or any violations of Louisiana Revised Statutes title 40 et seq. of the controlled dangerous substance laws of the state on the licensed premises. Acts, attire, visual displays or conduct on licensed premises in violation of this section are deemed to constitute lewd, immoral or improper entertainment as prohibited by this section and therefore no on-sale permit for beverages of high or low alcoholic content shall be held at any premises where such conduct and acts are permitted. 
(6)  Sell, offer for sale, possess or permit the consumption on the licensed premises of any kind or type of alcoholic beverages, the sale or possession of which is not authorized under this permit. 
(7)  Intentionally conduct illegal gambling, as defined by law, on the premises described in the application for the permit. 
(8)  Engage in the practice, employ or permit individuals to solicit patrons for drinks and to accept drinks from patrons and receive therefor any commission or any remuneration in any other way. 
a.  Employ anyone under the age of 18 years in any capacity in an establishment where the sale of alcoholic beverages constitutes its main business unless the minor is a musician performing in a band on the premises under written contract with the permittee for a specified time period and is under the direct supervision of his parent or guardian during such time. If the sale of alcoholic beverages does not constitute the main business of the establishment, anyone under the age of 18 years may be employed as long as the minor's employment does not involve the sale, mixing, dispensing, or serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. 
b.  If the sale or handling of alcoholic beverages does not constitute the main business and alcoholic beverages are not sold for consumption on the premises, an employee under the age of 18 years may be permitted to participate in the sale of packaged alcoholic beverages to collect the price and taxes and issue receipts therefor, or may be permitted to bag packaged alcoholic beverages, or both, where immediate supervision is provided. 
(9)  Allow the sale, dispensing or distribution of beverages of low alcoholic content in any type of automatic mechanical vending machine activated by the use of a coin, token or similar instrument, except in Class A establishments in accordance with rules promulgated pursuant to the Administrative Procedure Act. Such rules shall include procedures for the prevention of access to the machines by underage or intoxicated persons. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to establishments exempt from holding permits under this chapter. 
(10)  Permit the playing of pool or billiards by any person under 18 years of age or permit such a person to frequent the licensed premises operating a pool or billiard hall, except in a structure where the position of the pool or billiards playing area is separate and distinct from the area where alcoholic beverages are dispensed to patrons. 
(11)  Illegally sell, offer for sale, possess or permit the consumption on or about the licensed premises of any kind or type of narcotics or habit-forming drugs as described in R.S. title 40 et seq. of the controlled dangerous substances laws of the state. 
(12)  Accept Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program "SNAP" electronic benefit transfer cards (e.g., food stamp coupons) as payment for alcoholic beverages. 
(13)  Permit or allow any alcoholic beverage handling employee, regardless of gender, or the permit holder, his agents and representatives directly or indirectly by use of advertisements, cards and printed matter, to solicit patrons for drinks for themselves, other employees, agents and representatives of permit holder. 
(14)  Fail to keep the premises clean and sanitary. 
(15)  Permit or allow alcoholic beverage employee to work without a valid alcoholic beverage handling card. 
(16)  Permit gambling, except as authorized by state or federal law, by patrons, members of the public, employees or agents on the licensed premises or premises parking lot. In this regard gambling is defined as the intentional conducting or directly assisting in the conducting of, or participating in, any game, contest, lottery or contrivance of change whereby a person risks the loss of anything of value in order to realize a profit. 
(17)  Violate the closing requirements set forth in sections 4-15 through 4-17. A criminal conviction is not required. 
(18)  Fail to report any criminal activity on the premises, either felony or misdemeanor. 
(19)  Permit music which is unreasonably intrusive or offensive. 
a.  Play live or recorded music which is so unreasonably intrusive or offensive as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of the property of a person residing within two hundred feet of the premises. This prohibition shall not apply to any licensed premises which are not located within 200 feet of a residence or which were not located within 200 feet of a residence on the date that the first permit was granted for the premises or to any licensed premises which are not located in an unzoned unincorporated area. This prohibition shall not apply to any premises which provide an entry area with two separate doors or sets of doors separating the exterior of the entrance from the area where music is played. Any licensed premises which are not, on the effective date of this subsection, in compliance with the provisions of this subsection, shall have a reasonable time either to modify the premises to comply with this subsection or to cease the playing of music as described herein. 
b.  Any person residing within 200 feet of licensed premises on which is played live or recorded music which is so unreasonably intrusive or offensive as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of his property shall have a cause of action for damages and may obtain injunctive relief if the premises are not in compliance with the provisions of this subsection. 
(b)  Violation of this section by a retail dealer's agent, employee, representative or servant shall be considered the retail dealer's act for purposes of suspension or revocation of the permit. 
(c)  Violation of this section is punishable as provided in R.S. 26:521 and is also sufficient cause for the suspension or revocation of a permit. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the issuance of a permit by way of renewal, the board of aldermen may revoke or suspend such permit as prescribed by this chapter for violations of this section occurring during the permit period immediately preceding the issuance of such permit. 
(Code 1981, § 4-20; Ord. No. 511, pt. III(4-20), 3-8-1994)  
Sec. 4-21. - Additional causes for suspension or revocation of permits. 
In addition to any other causes enumerated in this chapter, the board of aldermen may suspend or revoke any permit for any of the following causes: 
(1)  If there was any misstatement or suppression of fact in the application for the permit. 
(2)  If the permit was granted to any person who is or has been engaged in an alcoholic beverage business with a person whose application for a permit has been denied or whose permit has been revoked. 
(3)  If the permittee has been found guilty by any court of competent jurisdiction, of any of the following offenses: 
a.  Violation of the Sunday closing law; 
b.  Violation of any municipal or parish or other ordinance providing for Sunday closing hours; and 
c.  Violation of any municipal or parish ordinance relating to beverages of low alcoholic content enacted pursuant to the authorization of title 26 of Louisiana Revised Statutes, as amended. 
(4)  If any retail dealer fails to pay excise taxes and/or sales taxes due by any regulated business to the state or to any parish or municipality. 
(5)  If the applicant, or any persons who must possess the same qualifications, fails to possess the qualifications required in R.S. 26:80 and 26:280 at the time of application or fails to maintain such qualifications during the licensed year. 
(6)  If the permit was issued to an interposed person in contravention of R.S. 26:81. 
(7)  If, without a proper license, a retailer allows any person to consume any alcoholic beverage on the licensed premises or on any parking lot or open or closed space within or contiguous to the licensed premises. 
(8)  If any dealer or any applicant violates or has violated any provisions of Revised Statute title 26, as amended, or this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 4-21; Ord. No. 511, pt. III(4-21), 3-8-1994)  
Sec. 4-22. - Penalties, revocation or suspension procedure. 
Before any alcoholic beverage permit is suspended or revoked, the holder thereof shall be entitled to a hearing and no such permit shall be suspended or revoked unless such a hearing has been held. 
(Code 1981, § 4-22; Ord. No. 511, pt. III(4-22), 3-8-1994)  
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Diseases of animals, R.S. 3:2091 et seq.; cruelty to animals, R.S. 3:2361 et seq., R.S. 14:102 et seq.; minimum standards for animal shelters, R.S. 3:2461 et seq.; animals running at large, R.S. 3:2531 et seq.; local regulation of dogs, R.S. 3:2731 et seq.; dog license tax, R.S. 3:2771 et seq.; veterinarians, R.S. 37:1511 et seq.; Rabies Control Law, R.S. 40:1275 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Livestock or fowl running at large. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to suffer or permit any livestock or fowl which he owns or which are under his care, custody or control to run at large. Livestock and fowl running at large shall be impounded under rules and regulations promulgated by the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(Code 1981, § 5-1; Ord. No. 83, §§ 1—6, 12-1-1925; Ord. No. 105, §§ 1—3, 6-4-1930)  
Sec. 6-2. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)  Cruelty to animals is the intentional or criminally negligent mistreatment of any animal by any act or omission whereby unjustifiable physical pain, suffering or death is caused or permitted upon said animal. 
(b)  Whoever commits an act of cruelty to animals shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1981, § 5-2) 
State Law reference— Cruelty to animals generally, R.S. 3:2361, 14:102.  
Secs. 6-3—6-22. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DOGS, CATS AND OTHER ANIMALS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 6-23. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal control officer means the person designated by the mayor to represent and act for the town in the impoundment of animals, controlling of animals running at large, and as otherwise provided and required in this chapter. 
Animal shelter means the facility operated at the town's discretion, by either the town or a private entity acting under contract with the town, for the purpose of impounding and caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter. 
Cat means any member of the feline family or species and is intended to mean both male and female. 
Dog means any member of the canine family or species and is intended to mean both male and female. 
Excessive barking means loud and frequent barking and howling sufficient to disturb the peace and quiet of any person who may reside within reasonable proximity of the place where a dog is kept. 
Inoculation means the injection, subcutaneously or otherwise, of animal anti-rabies vaccine, as approved by the state board of health. 
License means a certificate of ownership or tag upon the annual payment of a license fee in an amount as established by the mayor and board of aldermen from time to time. 
Owner means any person owning, keeping or harboring a dog or cat, or who acts as its custodian, or who permits a dog or cat to remain on or about his premises. 
Running at large means off the premises of the owner and not under the control of the owner, or other persons authorized by the owner to care for the animal, by leash, cord, chain, or otherwise. 
(Code 1981, § 5-16; Ord. No. 498, § 2, 6-11-1991)  
Sec. 6-24. - Animal shelter advisory committee. 
(a)  The mayor may appoint an advisory committee to serve in an advisory capacity in the operation of the animal shelter. 
(b)  The committee shall be comprised of three members, one member of the town council, the chief of police or his designated representative and one member appointed by the mayor. The mayor or his designee may act as an ex officio member. 
(c)  The committee shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and shall advise the town on matters relevant to animal control. 
(Code 1981, § 5-17; Ord. No. 498, § 2, 6-11-1991)  
Sec. 6-25. - Interference with animal control officer. 
It shall be a violation of this chapter for the owner or any other person to hinder, obstruct, or attempt to obstruct in any manner, or to refuse to permit the animal control officer or his representative, when such person is acting in his official capacity, from picking up for impounding purposes any animal not wearing the current official vaccination and license tags or running loose or suspected of having rabies or any other infectious or communicable disease or any other animal which has attacked or bitten any person, or killed another animal, whether such animal may be running at large or enclosed on the owner's premises. 
(Code 1981, § 5-18; Ord. No. 498, § 2, 6-11-1991)  
Sec. 6-26. - Town designated bird sanctuary. 
(a)  Designation. The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the town shall be and the same is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. 
(b)  Trapping, hunting, etc., prohibited; proviso. It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot or molest in any manner any bird or wild fowl or to rob bird nests or wild fowl nests; provided, however, if starlings or similar birds are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or a menace to health or property in the opinion of the proper health authorities of the town, then, in such event, such health authorities shall meet with representatives of the Audubon Society, bird club, garden club or humane society, or as many of such clubs as are found to exist in the town after having given at least three days' actual notice of the time and place of such meeting to the representatives of such clubs. If, as a result of such meeting, no satisfactory alternative is found to abate such nuisance, then such birds may be destroyed in such numbers and in a manner as is deemed advisable by such health authorities under the supervision of the chief of police. 
(Code 1981, § 5-19; Ord. No. 498, § 2, 6-11-1991)  
Sec. 6-27. - Sanitation of animal pens. 
Every owner or person in control of property where pets or animals are kept shall maintain said premises in a clean and sanitary condition at all times, and no unpleasant odors shall exude from said property. When, in the opinion of the health officer, such areas are not being maintained in a clean and sanitary condition or are otherwise creating a health hazard, the health officer shall declare the conditions a nuisance as defined in in section 12-2 and cause the violation to be abated according to procedures set forth in section 12-4. 
(Code 1981, § 5-20; Ord. No. 498, § 2, 6-11-1991; Ord. No. 534, § 2, 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 6-28. - Excessive barking declared public nuisance. 
(a)  No owner shall fail to exercise proper care and control of his animals to prevent them from becoming a public nuisance. Excessive, continuous or untimely barking shall be deemed a public nuisance. 
(b)  The animal control officer and/or the police department shall be responsible for effective control of such public nuisance. 
(Code 1981, § 5-21; Ord. No. 498, § 2, 6-11-1991)  
Secs. 6-29—6-46. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DOGS AND CATS 
 
Sec. 6-47. - Prohibited at large. 
(a)  No owner or keeper of any dog or cat, licensed or unlicensed, shall permit such dog or cat to run at large on any street, alley or any other place of the town off the premises of the custodian of the dog or cat except on a leash. 
(b)  No dog or cat shall be allowed to run loose on school grounds at any time. 
(Code 1981, § 5-26; Ord. No. 498, § 2, 6-11-1991)  
Sec. 6-48. - Impoundment of dogs and cats in violation of section 6-47; registry. 
It shall be the duty of the animal control officer or his authorized representative to apprehend any dog or cat found running at large contrary to the provisions of section 6-47 and to impound such dog or cat at the animal shelter or other suitable place. The animal control officer or his authorized representative, upon receiving any dog or cat, shall make a complete registry, entering the breed, color, and sex of such dog or cat and whether licensed. If licensed, he shall enter the name and address of the owner and the number of the license tag. 
(Code 1981, § 5-27; Ord. No. 498, § 2, 6-11-1991)  
Sec. 6-49. - Notice to owner upon impoundment; redemption. 
(a)  Licensed dogs and cats. Not later than three days after the impounding of any dog or cat, the animal control officer or his authorized representative shall notify the owner of the dog or cat wearing a valid rabies and license tag. The owner of any dog or cat so impounded may reclaim such dog or cat upon payment of the license fee, if unpaid, and a fee for daily board services. The owner shall also pay a fine for the first offense of allowing his dog or cat to run at large and a separate fine for the second and all subsequent offenses. 
(b)  Unlicensed dogs and cats or dogs and cats of unknown owners. Not later than three days after the impounding of any untagged dog or cat whose owner is unknown, the animal control officer or his authorized representative shall cause written notice to be posted for seven days at three or more conspicuous places in the town describing the dog or cat and the place and time of taking. The owner of any dog or cat so impounded may reclaim such dog or cat upon payment of the license fee, if unpaid, and a fee for daily board services, unless the animal is being held for rabies observation, in which event, the daily board shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and board of aldermen from time to time. The owner shall also pay a fine for the first offense of allowing his dog or cat to run at large and a separate fine for the second and all subsequent offenses. 
(c)  Fees and fines. The fees and fines described in this section shall be in amounts as established by the mayor and board of aldermen from time to time. 
(Code 1981, § 5-28; Ord. No. 498, § 2, 6-11-1991; Ord. No. 501, § 1, 5-12-1992)  
Sec. 6-50. - Disposition of unclaimed dogs or cats. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to keep all dogs or cats impounded for a period of seven days. If, at the expiration of seven days from the date of the notice to the owner or the posting of notice pursuant to section 6-49, a dog or cat shall not have been redeemed, it may be humanely destroyed or become available for adoption. 
(b)  Any dog or cat so held for a period of seven days and unclaimed may, after proper licensing, be adopted by any citizen for a fee plus the cost of the license and boarding fees. The fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and board of aldermen from time to time. 
(c)  Any dog or cat impounded and suffering from serious injury or disease with probability of recovery remote, or having an infectious disease which would endanger the health of people or of other dogs or cats may be humanely destroyed after reasonable efforts to determine ownership have failed without waiting for a lapse of seven days; however, no dog or cat under observation for a biting incident or suspected of having rabies shall be destroyed until it has been released from observation by a licensed veterinarian. 
(d)  No unclaimed impounded dog or cat with a known record of biting shall be available for adoption. 
(e)  A dog or cat may be humanely disposed of or made available for adoption under 72 hours from the time of impoundment if the owner states that he does not wish to redeem the dog or cat and subsequently releases, in writing, the dog or cat to the custody of the animal control officer. 
(Code 1981, § 5-29; Ord. No. 498, § 2, 6-11-1991; Ord. No. 501, § 1, 5-12-1992)  
Sec. 6-51. - Enclosure requirements. 
(a)  Every owner of a dog or cat shall confine it in secure confinement to prevent its running at large and such enclosure shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. The animal control officer may examine any premises where inhumane confinement is suspected. 
(b)  When dogs or cats are off the owner's premises, they must, at all times, be under the direct control of a responsible person either by means of a secure leash not over six feet in length or by some other equivalent means of positive physical control. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any unspayed female dog or cat, while such dog or cat is in season, to allow same to remain upon his premises unless kept in secure confinement, or to be upon the streets or other public or private places of the town. 
(Code 1981, § 5-30; Ord. No. 498, § 2, 6-11-1991)  
Secs. 6-52—6-75. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - LICENSE AND REGISTRATION 
 
Sec. 6-76. - Required; fee; due date. 
All dogs or cats kept harbored or maintained by their owners in the town shall be licensed and registered if over six months of age. Dog and cat licenses shall be issued by the town hall upon the payment of an annual license tax for each dog or cat. All license taxes are due on the first day of January of each year and shall be paid within 30 days of the first day of each year; provided that as soon as a dog or cat becomes six months of age, the owner shall be liable for the license tax for the year in which it reaches such age. The annual license tax shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and board of aldermen from time to time. 
(Code 1981, § 5-41; Ord. No. 498, § 2, 6-11-1991)  
Sec. 6-77. - Application; required information. 
At the time the application is made for the license required by this division, the owner shall state upon printed forms provided for such purpose his name and address and the name, breed, color and sex of each dog or cat owned or kept by him. 
(Code 1981, § 5-42; Ord. No. 498, § 2, 6-11-1991)  
Sec. 6-78. - Proof of rabies inoculation prerequisite to issuance. 
Before any license and tag required by this division shall be issued to any dog or cat owner, the dog or cat owner must first present satisfactory proof to town hall that the dog or cat has been inoculated for rabies in compliance with R.S. 40:1275 et seq., commonly known as the Rabies Control Law. The presentation of a proper, valid certificate or tag provided by the state board of health shall be sufficient evidence attesting to proper compliance with the Rabies Control Law. 
(Code 1981, § 5-43; Ord. No. 498, § 2, 6-11-1991)  
Sec. 6-79. - Certificates and tags. 
(a)  Upon the payment of the annual license fee for the license required by this division, the town hall shall issue to the owner a license certificate and a metallic tag for each dog or cat so licensed. The shape of the tag may be changed every year and shall have stamped thereon the year for which it was issued and the number corresponding with the number on the certificate. Every owner shall be required to provide each dog or cat with a collar to which the license tag must be affixed and shall see that the collar and tag are constantly worn. In the case the dog or cat tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate will be issued by the town hall upon presentation of a receipt showing the payment of a license fee for the current year and the payment of a fee for such duplicate. Dog or cat tags shall not be transferable from one dog or cat to another, and no refund shall be made on any dog or cat license because of death of the dog or cat or the owners leaving the town before expiration of the license period. The fee for the animal license tag shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and board of aldermen from time to time. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog or cat to permit such dog or cat to wear any rabies inoculation tag or license tag not issued to that particular dog or cat and, any owner violating this provision shall be punished by a $10.00 fine. 
(Code 1981, § 5-44; Ord. No. 498, § 2, 6-11-1991)  
Sec. 6-80. - Removal of tags. 
Whoever removes from any dog or cat a collar bearing a license tag or a rabies inoculation tag or alters or removes any such license tag or rabies inoculation tag from a dog or cat properly registered as herein provided shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1981, § 5-45; Ord. No. 498, § 2, 6-11-1991)  
Sec. 6-81. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this division shall not be intended to apply to dogs or cats whose owners are nonresidents temporarily within the town, nor to dogs or cats brought into the town for the purpose of participation in any dog or cat show, nor to seeing-eye dogs, properly trained to assist blind persons when such dogs are actually being used by blind persons for the purpose of aiding them in going from place to place. 
(Code 1981, § 5-46; Ord. No. 498, § 2, 6-11-1991)  
Secs. 6-82—6-105. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - VICIOUS DOGS 
 
Sec. 6-106. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Owner means any person, firm, corporation, organization or department processing or harboring or having the care or custody of a dog. 
Unconfined means the vicious dog is not securely confined indoors or confined in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure upon the premises of the owner of the dog. The pen or structure must have secure sides and a secure top attached to the sides. If the pen or structure has no bottom secured to the sides, the sides must be embedded into the ground no less than one foot. All such pens or structures must be adequately lighted and kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
Vicious dog means: 
(1)  Any dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury to, or otherwise threaten the safety of human beings or domestic animals; 
(2)  Any dog which, because of its size, physical nature, or vicious propensity, is capable of inflicting serious physical harm or death to humans and which would constitute a danger to human life or property if it were not kept in the manner required by this division; 
(3)  Any dog which, without provocation, attacks or bites, or has attacked or bitten, a human being or domestic animal; 
(4)  Any dog owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of dog fighting, or any dog trained for dog fighting. 
(Code 1981, § 5-50; Ord. No. 483, § 1, 6-14-1988; Ord. No. 707, § I, 11-8-2011)  
Sec. 6-107. - Confinement. 
The owner of a vicious dog shall not suffer or permit the dog to go unconfined. 
(Code 1981, § 5-51; Ord. No. 483, § 1, 6-14-1988)  
Sec. 6-108. - Leash and muzzle. 
The owner of a vicious dog shall not suffer or permit the dog to go beyond the premises of the owner unless the dog is securely muzzled and restrained by a chain or leash, and under the physical restraint of a person. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration, but shall prevent it from biting any human or animal. 
(Code 1981, § 5-52; Ord. No. 483, § 1, 6-14-1988)  
Sec. 6-109. - Signs. 
The owner of a vicious dog shall display in a prominent place on his or her premises a clearly visible warning sign indicating that there is a vicious dog on the premises. A similar sign is required to be posted on the pen or kennel of the animal. 
(Code 1981, § 5-53; Ord. No. 483, § 1, 6-14-1988)  
Sec. 6-110. - Dog fighting. 
No person, firm, corporation, organization or department shall possess or harbor or maintain care or custody of any dog for the purpose of dog fighting, or train, torment, badger, bait or use any dog for the purpose of causing or encouraging the dog to attack human beings or domestic animals. 
(Code 1981, § 5-54; Ord. No. 483, § 1, 6-14-1988)  
Sec. 6-111. - Insurance. 
Owners of vicious dogs must, within 20 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived, provide proof to the town clerk of public liability insurance in the amount of at least $20,000.00, insuring the owner for any personal injuries inflicted by his or her vicious dog. 
(Code 1981, § 5-55; Ord. No. 483, § 1, 6-14-1988)  
Secs. 6-112—6-135. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - RABIES CONTROL 
 
Sec. 6-136. - Animal bites. 
Any dog, cat or other animal which has bitten a person or other animal, and such dog, cat or other animal is suspected of having rabies, shall be confined at the animal shelter established by this division under veterinary or health department supervision for a period of not less than ten days, or for such other period as the supervising veterinarian or health department supervisor shall determine is required. Such dog, cat or other animal may thereafter be released, upon payment of the boarding fee for that observation when the supervising veterinarian or the public sanitarian is satisfied that rabies is not present. 
(Code 1981, § 5-61; Ord. No. 501, § 2, 5-12-1992)  
Sec. 6-137. - Quarantine. 
The animal control officer may place a strict quarantine on all domestic pets whenever, in his judgment, it is necessary to do so as a rabies control measure. The quarantine period shall in no event be less than 30 days subsequent to the last reported case of rabies in animals. 
(Code 1981, § 5-62; Ord. No. 501, § 2, 5-12-1992)  
Sec. 6-138. - Responsible persons. 
The owner or keeper of any dog, cat or other animal shall be the person responsible for the confinement of the same and the control thereof in any manner required by the animal control officer during any strict quarantine imposed as a rabies control measure. 
(Code 1981, § 5-63; Ord. No. 501, § 2, 5-12-1992)  
Sec. 6-139. - Impoundment or destruction of animals exposed to rabies. 
Dogs, cats or other domestic animals known to have been exposed to rabies shall be destroyed humanely or shall be kept confined as required by the animal control officer for a period of not less than six months. The head of every dog, cat or other animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies shall be delivered to the most accessible state health department laboratory for examination immediately after the dog, cat or other animal has died or has been humanely destroyed in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1981, § 5-64; Ord. No. 501, § 2, 5-12-1992)  
Chapter 8 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Louisiana Emergency Assistance and Disaster Act, R.S. 29:721 et seq. 
 
Sec. 8-1. - Created. 
There is hereby created a local organization for civil defense. 
(Code 1981, § 7-16; Ord. No. 317, § I, 11-1-1958)  
Sec. 8-2. - Director. 
(a)  The local organization for civil defense shall have a director who shall be appointed as provided by law and who shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of such local organization for civil defense, subject to the direction and control of the local governing body under the general direction and control of the governor through the appropriate state agency. 
(b)  The director shall execute and enforce such order, rules and regulations as may be made by the governor through the appropriate state agency. 
(Code 1981, § 7-17; Ord. No. 317, § II, 11-1-1958)  
Sec. 8-3. - Gifts, grants, etc. 
When the federal or state government or any agency or officer thereof shall offer this town service, equipment, supplies, materials, or funds by way of gift, grant or loan for purposes of civil defense, the director, on behalf of the governor, with the consent of the board of aldermen, may accept such offer and receive such aid and assistance. 
(Code 1981, § 7-18; Ord. No. 317, § III, 11-1-1958)  
Sec. 8-4. - Plan. 
The director is hereby authorized and directed to prepare a detailed plan for civil defense operations in this town, and to recruit and train personnel in accordance with the plan, to the end that when disaster strikes, each member of the local organization for civil defense will know his part and duty. 
(Code 1981, § 7-19; Ord. No. 317, § IV, 11-1-1958)  
Sec. 8-5. - Utilization of existing services and facilities. 
The director is hereby authorized to utilize the services of equipment supplies and facilities of existing departments, offices and agencies of this town to the maximum extent practicable, and the officers and personnel of all such departments and agencies are directed to cooperate and extend such services and facilities to the mayor and the director upon request. 
(Code 1981, § 7-20; Ord. No. 317, § V, 11-1-1958)  
Chapter 10 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Fires and fire prevention, R.S. 33:4741 et seq., 40:1491 et seq.; state fire regulations and power of state fire marshal to enforce, R.S. 40:1561 et seq.; authority of local governments and officials to enforce the state's Fire Marshal Law, R.S. 40:1591. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Fire department. 
(a)  There is hereby established a fire department which shall be governed as provided by the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(b)  There is hereby established the position of chief of the fire department. The chief shall have charge of all fire department equipment and the use thereof. 
(Code 1981, § 9-1; Ord. No. 274, 9-13-1949)  
Sec. 10-2. - Obstruction of firefighter. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to in any way interfere, meddle with, or obstruct a firefighter in the discharge of his duties at a fire or on the way to a fire. 
(Code 1981, § 9-2)  
Sec. 10-3. - Obstruction of fire prevention. 
It shall further be unlawful to interfere with fire prevention by the intentional performance of any of the following acts: 
(1)  Defacing or destroying fire warning notices or posters. 
(2)  Injuring, destroying, removing or in any manner interfering with the use of any tools, equipment, towers, buildings or telephone lines used in the detection, reporting or suppression of fire. 
(Code 1981, § 9-3)  
Sec. 10-4. - Authority to establish burning ban; penalties for violation thereof. 
(a)  The town does hereby authorize the fire chief to impose a temporary burn ban within the town when conditions so warrant and when the fire index reaches "high" as determined by the state department of agriculture and forestry. 
(b)  Any temporary burn ban so imposed by the fire district shall prohibit all outdoor burning until such time as the fire district determines that the weather conditions are safe enough to cancel the burn ban. 
(c)  Any person, company, corporation or any person who is individually representing or acting as an agent for any person, company or corporation who violates this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 plus costs of court and a jail sentence not to exceed six months, or both. 
(d)  Prosecution under this article shall not affect any violator's civil liability to any party damaged as a result of any fire set by the violator. 
(e)  This article shall not apply to prescribed burns by the United States Forest Service, by the state department of agriculture and forestry, by those trained and certified by the department of agriculture and forestry, or by those who conduct prescribed burning as a "generally accepted agriculture practice," as defined by the Louisiana Right To Farm Law (R.S. 3:3601 et seq.). 
(f)  Upon issuance of a burn ban, the following agencies shall be notified. These agencies shall also be notified at such time the burn ban is lifted. 
(1)  The Town of Jonesboro. 
(2)  The parish sheriff's department. 
(3)  State department of agriculture and forestry. 
(4)  All local news media. 
(Ord. No. 705, § I, 11-8-2011)  
Secs. 10-5—10-26. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 
 
Sec. 10-27. - Adopted. 
There is hereby adopted, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, that certain code known as the National Fire Prevention Code, known as the NFPA 1, 1997 edition, in its entirety, and also any further amendments thereto published by the National Fire Protection Association, thereof and the whole thereof, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, of which code, not less than three copies have been and now are filed in the office of the town clerk and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the town. 
(Code 1981, § 9-16; Ord. No. 356, § 1, 2-14-1967)  
Sec. 10-28. - Definition. 
Wherever the term "municipality" is used in the code herein adopted, it shall be held to mean the Town of Jonesboro, Louisiana. 
(Code 1981, § 9-17; Ord. No. 356, § 2, 2-14-1967)  
Sec. 10-29. - Enforcement. 
The code herein adopted shall be enforced by the chief of the fire department. 
(Code 1981, § 9-18; Ord. No. 356, § 3, 2-14-1967)  
Sec. 10-30. - Establishment of limits of districts in which storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks, bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases and storage of explosives are restricted. 
The limits referred to in section 73 of the code herein adopted in which storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited, the limits referred to in section 103 of the code herein adopted, in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, and the limits referred to in section 53b of the code herein adopted, in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, are hereby established as follows: beginning on the west right-of-way line of the CRI&P Railroad at a point that is intersected by the eastward extension of the center line of 3rd Street; thence run west across Hudson Avenue on said extended line and continue west along and with the center line of 3rd Street to its intersection with the center line of Cooper Avenue; thence run south along the center line of Cooper Avenue to its intersection with the center line of 7th Street; thence run east along and with the center line of 7th Street to its intersection with the center line of Polk Avenue; thence run south along and with the center line of Polk Avenue to its intersection with the center line of 8th Street; thence run east along and with the center line of 8th Street to its intersection with the west right-of-way of the CRI&P Railroad; thence run in a northerwesterly and northerly direction along and with the west right-of-way line of the CRI&P Railroad to the point of beginning. 
(Code 1981, § 9-19; Ord. No. 356, § 4, 2-14-1967)  
Sec. 10-31. - Modifications. 
The chief of the fire department shall have the power to modify any of the provisions of the code herein adopted upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of such code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification, when granted or allowed, and the decision of the chief thereon, shall be entered upon the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(Code 1981, § 9-20; Ord. No. 356, § 5, 2-14-1967)  
Sec. 10-32. - Appeals. 
Whenever the chief of the fire department disapproves an application or refuses to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code adopted herein do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of it have been misinterpreted or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the chief of the fire department to the mayor and board of aldermen within 30 days from the date of such decision. 
(Code 1981, § 9-21; Ord. No. 356, § 6, 2-14-1967)  
Sec. 10-33. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code herein adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate of permit issued thereunder and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the mayor and board of aldermen or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severally, for each and every such violation and non-compliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time. When not otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Code 1981, § 9-22; Ord. No. 356, § 7, 2-14-1967)  
Chapter 12 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Public health and safety, R.S. title 40; municipal health units and departments, R.S. 40:5(13). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 12-1. - Purposes, authority, and general requirements. 
(a)  The intent of this chapter is to foster harmonious relationships between citizens and promote the health, safety, and prosperity of all town citizens by specifying the rights and responsibilities of property owners and others in the town limits for maintaining property under their control. 
(b)  Provisions in this chapter, when not governed by other statutes as specified herein, were adopted pursuant to R.S. 33:361, as amended. 
(c)  Property owners, lessees, and/or occupants of property in the town shall maintain the properties under their control in a clean, sanitary, and safe condition as required herein. Failure to do so may result in the responsible party being charged with a misdemeanor, being issued an injunction from a court of competent jurisdiction, and/or being subject to abatement and cost recovery action by the town. 
(Ord. No. 534, § 1(12-1), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 12-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned motor vehicle means: 
(1)  A motor vehicle that is inoperable and is left unattended on public property (including the shoulders of highways and roads) for more than three days; 
(2)  A motor vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for more than three days; or 
(3)  Any motor vehicle (whether or not it is operable) that has remained on private property without the consent of the property owner or person in control of the property for more than three days. 
Authorized receptacle means any privately-owned litter storage and collection receptacle. 
Garbage means putrefiable animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food and discarded paper, tin cans, and glass. 
Junk means: 
(1)  Any discarded or abandoned machinery, appliances, furniture, metal, tin, mechanical parts, plastic, rubber, paper, rubble, stone, masonry pieces, glass, trash, debris, wood, lumber, or any other refuse; or 
(2)  Any condition which provides harborage for rats, mice, snakes and/or other vermin. 
Junk, wrecked or used automobile or motor vehicle means any motor vehicle which is totally inoperable, left unattended on any unused portion of any occupied lot, neutral ground, street or sidewalk, and is so damaged or dismantled as to be a total loss. 
Litter means garbage, refuse, debris, and rubbish, as defined herein, and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare. The term "litter" also includes temporary posters, flyers, and notices as specified by law, in public rights-of-way, on utility poles and structures in public rights-of-way or on public property. 
Nuisance means any and all prohibitions contained in articles 664 through 674 of the Louisiana Civil Code. 
Park means a park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any public area in the town, owned or used by the town and devoted to active or passive recreation. 
Private property means any dwelling, house, building or other structure designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, or any commercial establishment, building or structure, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, ground, walks, driveways, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building, commercial establishment or other structure. 
Refuse means all putrefiable and non-putrefiable solid waste (except body waste), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, botanical and yard waste, dead animals, and solid market and industrial waste materials. 
Rubbish and debris means non-putrefiable solid waste consisting of both combustible and noncombustible waste, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, property and similar material. 
Total loss means the cost to repair a damaged or dismantled motor vehicle exceeds the junk value of said vehicle, as determined by any recognized national appraisal book. 
(Ord. No. 534, § 1(12-2), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 12-3. - Illustrative enumeration. 
The maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving, or permitting to be or remain on any public or private property of any of the following items, conditions, or actions, is hereby declared to be and constitute a nuisance and shall be prohibited in the town; provided, however, this enumeration shall not be deemed or construed to be conclusive, limiting, or restrictive: 
(1)  Accumulation of garbage, rubbish, trash, refuse, junk, junk, wrecked or used automobiles or motor vehicles, and other abandoned materials metals, lumber, or other things. 
(2)  Any condition which provides harborage for rats, mice, snakes, and/or other vermin. 
(3)  Any building or other structure which is in such a dilapidated condition that it is unfit for human habitation, or kept in such an unsanitary condition that it is a menace to the health of people in the vicinity thereof or presents a fire hazard. 
(4)  All unnecessary or unauthorized noises and annoying vibrations, including animal noises, as well as the conditions, machinery, or other causes which give rise to such unauthorized noises and annoying vibrations. 
(5)  All disagreeable or obnoxious odors and stenches, as well as the conditions, substances, or other causes which give rise to the emission or generation of such odors and stenches. 
(6)  The carcasses of animals or fowl not disposed of within a reasonable time after death. 
(7)  The pollution of any public well or cistern, ditch, canal, stream, lake, or other body of water, except for legally maintained oxidation ponds, by sewerage, dead animals, creamery or industrial wastes, trash, garbage, refuse, junk, litter, rubbish, chemical or biological wastes, or other illegal substances. 
(8)  Any building, structure, or other place or location where any activity which is in violation of local, state, or federal law is conducted, performed, or maintained. 
(9)  Any accumulation of stagnant water permitted or maintained on any lot or piece of ground. 
(10)  Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, soot, or cinders in unreasonable quantities. 
(Ord. No. 534, § 1(12-3), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 12-4. - Enforcement. 
Unless otherwise specified in specific sections of this chapter for specific types of violations, any of the following procedures, abatement, injunction, and misdemeanor penalties may be used by the town to enforce this chapter's provisions. 
(1)  General abatement procedures. 
a.  In the event that any person, including, but not limited to, the property owner, general agent of the property, lessee or tenant, shall fail or neglect to comply with the provisions of this chapter, the town is authorized, empowered, and directed to cause the violation to be corrected and abated and to assess the charges against the person responsible. 
b.  If the town undertakes abatement action, the property owner shall be notified of the town's intent to abate the violation according to the applicable provisions concerning said violation. 
1.  The town may serve notice on the owner by registered or certified mail, addressed to the owner at his last-known address or through personal delivery by an employee of the town, when appropriate. 
(i)  In the case of right-of-way obstructions, notice may be in the form of a "notice to remove" attached to the obstruction itself. 
(ii)  Litter in public rights-of-way or on public property may be abated without notification. 
2.  Notice of the town's intent to abate a violation shall identify the explicit nature and location of the violation, including the legal property description, the owner thereof who is responsible, and the length of time allowed for voluntary correction. 
3.  The town may extend the time limit for compliance or voluntary abatement through the execution of an abatement contract, signed and duly executed, which specifies the actions to be taken and the time limit allowed. 
c.  All charges, costs, and expenses for abatement or correction of the violations incurred by the town shall be assessed to the person responsible and/or the property owner; and, if said person refuses to reimburse the town's costs within 30 days, the amount thereof may be collected through attachment of a tax lien. 
1.  The privilege and lien may be enforced by ordinary process in the district court within three years after it has been perfected. 
2.  Alternatively, the privilege and lien may be enforced by assessing the amount as a tax against the immovable and collected as any ordinary property tax lien to be assessed against the property and subject to the same civil penalties for delinquencies. 
d.  Abatement actions taken by the town under this chapter shall not preclude the imposition of criminal penalties as otherwise provided by law. 
(2)  Court action. 
a.  The town may petition a court of competent jurisdiction for injunctive relief when responsible parties refuse to comply with the town's lawful order to correct violations of this chapter. 
b.  In addition to the lien and enforcement procedures authorized under this section, the town has a cause of action against the owner personally for the costs incurred by the town, if such owner is not indigent and has the ability to pay a judgment obtained by the town. 
(3)  Misdemeanor penalties. Any person violating any provision of this chapter may be punished by a fine of not less than $25.00 and not more than $500.00, or by imprisonment for a term of not less than three days and not more than six months, or both. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 534, § 1(12-4), 4-13-1999)  
Secs. 12-5—12-26. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SANITARY CODE 
 
Sec. 12-27. - Adopted. 
(a)  There is hereby adopted by reference a certain code known as the sanitary code of the state (R.S. 40:4), promulgated by the state board of health, and the same as is currently in force and as is amended from time to time by the state is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling on all dwellings and premises within the town. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provisions of the code adopted by reference herein, and violators may be subject to the penalties or actions specified in section 12-4. 
(Code 1981, § 12-16; Ord. No. 359, § 1, 2-14-1967; Ord. No. 534, § 1(12-21), 4-13-1999)  
Chapter 14 - HOUSING  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 14-1—14-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FAIR HOUSING 
 
Sec. 14-19. - Statement of policy. 
It is the policy of the town to provide, within constitutional limitations, for fair housing throughout the town. 
(Code 1981, § 12.1-21; Ord. No. 427, § 1, 10-9-1979)  
Sec. 14-20. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under section 14-22, 14-23 or 14-24. 
Dwelling means any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion thereof. 
Family includes a single individual. 
To rent means to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
(Code 1981, § 12.1-22; Ord. No. 427, § 2, 10-9-1979)  
Sec. 14-21. - Scope. 
(a)  Subject to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section and section 14-25, the prohibitions against discrimination in the sale or rental of housing set forth in section 14-22 shall apply to all dwellings except as exempted by subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Nothing in section 14-22, other than subsection (3), shall apply to: 
(1)  Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner; provided that such private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family houses at any one time; provided further, that, in the case of the sale of any such single-family house by a private individual owner not residing in such house at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident of such house prior to such sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any 24-month period; provided further, that such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such single-family houses at any one time. The sale or rental of any such single-family house shall be excepted from the application of this article only if such house is sold or rented without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice of any advertisement or written notice in violation of section 14-22(3); but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstracters, title companies, and other such professional assistance necessary to perfect or transfer the title; or 
(2)  Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other. 
(c)  For the purpose of subsection (b) of this section, a person shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if: 
(1)  He has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or 
(2)  He has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as agent, other than in the sale of his own personal residence in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or 
(3)  He is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families. 
(Code 1981, § 12.1-23; Ord. No. 427, § 3, 10-9-1979)  
Sec. 14-22. - Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing. 
As made applicable by section 14-21 and except as exempted by sections 14-21(b) and 14-25, it shall be unlawful: 
(1)  To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, or national origin. 
(2)  To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, or national origin. 
(3)  To make, print, or publish, or cause to be made, printed, or published any notice, statement, or advertisement with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination based on race, color, religion, or national origin, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation, or discrimination. 
(4)  To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, or national origin that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available. 
(5)  For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person of a particular race, color, religion, or national origin. 
(Code 1981, § 12.1-24; Ord. No. 427, § 4, 10-9-1979)  
Sec. 14-23. - Discrimination in the financing of housing. 
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other corporation, association, firm, or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans, to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate against him in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration, or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance, because of the race, color, religion, or national origin of such person, or of any person associated with him, in connection with such loan or other financial assistance or the purposes of such loan or other financial assistance, or of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants, or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings in relation to which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given; provided that nothing contained in this section shall impair the scope of effectiveness of the exception contained in section 14-21(b). 
(Code 1981, § 12.1-25; Ord. No. 427, § 5, 10-9-1979)  
Sec. 14-24. - Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services. 
It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation, on account of race, color, religion, or national origin. 
(Code 1981, § 12.1-26; Ord. No. 427, § 6, 10-9-1979)  
Sec. 14-25. - Exemption. 
Nothing in this article shall prohibit a religious organization, association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, or national origin. Nor shall anything in this title prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members. 
(Code 1981, § 12.1-27; Ord. No. 427, § 7, 10-9-1979)  
Sec. 14-26. - Interference, coercion, or intimidation. 
It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by sections 14-21 through 14-24. 
(Code 1981, § 12.1-28; Ord. No. 427, § 8, 10-9-1979)  
Chapter 16 - LICENSES AND TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of municipalities to levy occupational license taxes, R.S. 47:341; local regulation of businesses and occupations, R.S. 33:4781 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 16-1. - Occupational license tax. 
(a)  There is hereby levied an occupational license tax for each year, upon each person pursuing and conducting any business, trade, calling, profession or vocation, within the corporate limits of the town subject to license under the constitution and laws of the state. 
(b)  The amount of license tax levied in each case is hereby fixed, determined and ordained to be the same as that fixed, levied and collectable by the governing authority under, and shall be granted in accordance with, the provisions of R.S. 47:341—47:350, both inclusive, and R.S. 47:352 through 47:363, both inclusive, as amended, R.S. 33:4862.14, as amended, and all other applicable laws, all of which, for all purposes of this section, are made a part hereof by reference, as if written herein in extenso. 
(c)  This section shall not be applicable to individuals engaged, on a part time or itinerant basis, in the sale, from nonpermanent locations, of vegetable produce or fruit that was grown by said individuals. 
(d)  Failure to pay the tax levied under the authority of this section shall ipso facto, without demand or putting in default, cause the tax, interest, penalties and costs to become immediately delinquent. The tax collector or other tax collecting official is hereby vested with authority, or motion in a court of competent jurisdiction, to take a rule on the delinquent taxpayer to show cause, in not less than two, nor more than ten days, exclusive of holidays, why the delinquent taxpayer should not be ordered to cease from further pursuit of the business taxed under authority of this section. This rule may be tried out of term and in chambers, and shall be tried by preference. If the rule is made absolute, the order therein rendered shall be considered a judgment in favor of the local governmental subdivision prohibiting the taxpayer from the further pursuit of the business therein until he has paid the delinquent tax, interest, penalties and costs, and every violation of the injunction shall be considered a contempt of court, punishable according to law. 
(Code 1981, § 13-1; Ord. No. 195, §§ 1—3, 11-12-1942; Ord. No. 448, §§ 1—6, 10-27-1981; Ord. No. 453, §§ 1—6, 11-23-1982; Ord. No. 460, § 1, 11-22-1983; Ord. No. 471, §§ 1, 2, 4—7, 6-9-1987; Ord. No. 477, § 1, 9-15-1987; Ord. No. 505, §§ 1, 2, 8-11-1992; Ord. No. 795, § I, 12-28-2017) 
State Law reference— Occupational license tax, R.S. 33:403.  
Sec. 16-2. - Public safety fee. 
(a)  There is hereby fixed, established and levied on every lot, dwelling, building or premises whatsoever situated within the town, a public safety fee in accordance with the terms and conditions hereinafter set forth. 
(b)  The public safety fee assessed herein shall be monthly for each residence situated inside the municipal limits and monthly for each business located inside the municipal limits. The public safety fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and board of aldermen from time to time. 
(c)  The public safety fee imposed herein shall be due on the first of every month. 
(d)  The public safety fee herein levied shall be due and payable by each residence or business on the 15th day of the month in which a bill for the same was mailed by U.S. mail to the residence or business. If the same is not paid on or before the 15th day of the month of the mailing, a penalty of ten percent shall be added to the bill for late payment charges. If the bill has not been paid on or before the 25th day of said month, the public safety fee, together with any penalty, shall constitute a special lien collectable in the same manner as special assessments are collectible by law. In the alternative, the public safety fee, together with any penalty, may be collected by civil action from the residence or business owing the same. In any such suit for collection, the town shall be entitled to collect, in addition to the public safety fee and any penalty owed, all court costs and the reasonable attorney's fees actually incurred in the filing of suit for collection. 
(Ord. No. 516, §§ 1—5, 3-20-1995)  
Sec. 16-3. - Yard and garage sales. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Yard sale or garage sale , hereinafter sometime both referred to as a "yard sale," means a proceeding in which used movable property is offered to the public for sale through the display of such property on private property located within the town that is not a retail dealer as defined in the Town of Jonesboro Sales Tax Ordinance. 
(b)  Permit required. No yard sale shall be conducted within the town unless a permit for that yard sale has been obtained at least two days prior to the commencement of the yard sale. Permits shall be issued to residents of the town without cost. Each permit shall state the location at which the yard sale is to be held, the days upon which the yard sale is to be held and the hours during which the yard sale is to be held. 
(c)  Dates and hours of operation. Each yard sale shall be held on the date or dates reflected in the permit. No yard sale may be held for more than two consecutive dates. No yard sale may take place at a particular location more than three times per year. No yard sale may commence prior to 8:00 a.m. and must end on or before 6:00 p.m. 
(d)  Limitation on items to be sold. All items sold at a yard sale must be used goods or items of the owner, tenant or occupant of the residence at which the yard sale is being conducted. No new items may be sold at a yard sale. 
(e)  Display of permit. The permit for the yard sale must be visible at all hours during which the yard sale is ongoing. It must be posted conspicuously on the porch or door of the home or garage at which the sale is taking place or posted at the table or other site where monetary transactions in connection with the yard sale are taking place. 
(f)  Advertisement limitations. Only one sign advertising the yard sale may be placed near the road. Such a sign may not exceed 25 inches in width or 20 inches in height. The sign may be placed in the ground with a stake but the top of the sign must be within 3½ feet of the ground. All signs advertising the yard sale may not be posted before 6:00 a.m. the date of the sale and must be removed after 8:00 p.m. on the date of the sale. Failure to remove the sign as required by this subsection shall constitute a misdemeanor and may be punished by a fine not to exceed $50.00. 
(g)  Weather postponement. In the event a yard sale cannot, due to the weather, be held on the day or dates authorized by the permit issued under this section, the holder of the permit can reschedule the yard sale. In that event the yard sale that was cancelled due to the weather will not constitute a yard sale which would be included in the three per year limit on yard sales set forth in subsection (c) of this section. 
(h)  Penalties. Any individual holding a yard sale within the town who does violates the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine of not more than $200.00 per day. 
(Ord. No. 792, § I(18-32), 11-6-2017)  
Secs. 16-4—16-22. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CHAIN STORE TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of municipality to levy a chain store tax, R.S. 47:10. 
 
Sec. 16-23. - Levied. 
There is hereby levied an annual license tax upon each person engaged in the business of operating or maintaining, as part of a group or chain, any store within the town where goods, wares, merchandise or commodities of every description whatsoever are sold or offered for sale at retail under the same general management, supervision, ownership or control, or who enjoys the benefits of centralized purchasing, warehousing or advertising, commonly recognized as a member of a chain or as a branch store. 
(Code 1981, § 13-16; Ord. No. 408, § I, 11-9-1976)  
Sec. 16-24. - Amount. 
The license tax for the business described in this section levied upon the store or stores operated within the town shall be based on the number of stores or merchandise establishments included under the same general management, supervision, ownership or control, and who enjoy the benefits of central purchasing, warehousing or advertising, whether within the municipality or not and whether within this state or not. The license for each store or establishment shall be as follows: 
Number of Stores in Group 	License 
At Least 	But Not More Than 	
2 	10 	$10.00 
11 	35 	$15.00 
36 	50 	$20.00 
51 	75 	$25.00 
76 	100 	$30.00 
101 	125 	$50.00 
126 	150 	$100.00 
151 	175 	$150.00 
176 	200 	$200.00 
201 	225 	$250.00 
226 	250 	$300.00 
251 	275 	$350.00 
276 	300 	$400.00 
301 	400 	$450.00 
401 	500 	$500.00 
501 and over 	— 	$550.00 
 
The tax for any store opened after June 30 of any year shall not exceed one-half of the annual amount. 
(Code 1981, § 13-17; Ord. No. 408, § I, 11-9-1976)  
Sec. 16-25. - Reports. 
Every person engaged in business in the town shall, on or before the first day of February of each year, render to the town a report containing a true and complete statement showing the number of stores or establishments operated or maintained in the town as of the report date, indicating the name, location and street address of each store and such other information as may be required by the taxing authority. Whenever a new store is opened which was not included in the above-mentioned report, a supplemental report setting forth the required information shall be filed prior to the expiration of 30 days after the date of opening. 
(Code 1981, § 13-18; Ord. No. 408, § I(C), 11-9-1976)  
Sec. 16-26. - Payment. 
Payment of the license tax required herein shall accompany the required report and shall become delinquent if not paid when due. Interest and penalties shall be assessed and collected together with all taxes due in the same manner as other taxes due the town. 
(Code 1981, § 13-19; Ord. No. 408, § I(D), 11-9-1976)  
Sec. 16-27. - Separate licenses; posting. 
A separate license shall be issued by the taxing authority for each store for which the tax has been paid as above provided, and it shall be the duty of the licensee to post the license in a conspicuous place in each store. 
(Code 1981, § 13-20; Ord. No. 408, § I(D), 11-9-1976)  
Secs. 16-28—16-57. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - INSURANCE LICENSE TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of municipality to levy a chain store tax, R.S. 22:833. 
 
Sec. 16-58. - Levied. 
There is hereby imposed and levied an annual license tax on any insurer engaged in the business of issuing any form of insurance policy or contract, which may now or hereafter be subject to the payment of any license tax of state purposes, all as authorized by section 833 of title 22 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes of 1950 on risks located in this municipality as follows: 
(1)  On any insurer engaged in the business of issuing life or accident or health insurance policies, other than programs of benefits authorized or provided pursuant to the provisions of parts I and II of chapter 12 of title 42 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes of 1950, or other forms of contracts or obligations covering such risks, or issuing endowment or annuity policies, or contracts, or other similar forms of contract obligations in consideration of the payment of a premium or other consideration for the issuance of such policies, contracts or obligations whether such insurer is operating in this state through an agent or other representative or otherwise: 
a.  Ten dollars on gross annual premiums up to $2,000.00 and an additional license thereafter of $70.00 on each $10,000.00, or fractions thereof, of gross annual premiums in excess of $2,000.00; 
b.  The maximum license on such businesses, payable to this municipality by any one insurer, shall be $21,000.00. 
(2)  On any insurer engaged in the business of issuing policies, contracts or other forms of obligations covering the risk of fire, marine, transportation, surety, fidelity, indemnity, guaranty, workers' compensation, employers' liability, property damage, livestock, vehicle, automatic sprinkler, burglary, or insurance business of any other kind whatsoever in this state, whether such insurer is operating in this state through agents or other representatives or otherwise, not more than the following: 
a.  First class. When the gross receipts are not more than $2,000.00, the license shall be $40.00; 
b.  Second class. When the gross receipts are more than $2,000.00, and not more than $4,000.00, the license shall be $60.00; 
c.  Third class. When the gross receipts are more than $4,000.00, and not more than $6,000.00, the license shall be $80.00; 
d.  Fourth class. When the gross receipts exceed $6,000.00, the additional license thereafter shall be $70.00 for each $10,000.00, or fraction thereof, in excess of $6,000.00; 
e.  The maximum license tax on such businesses, payable to this municipality by any insurer, shall be $9,000.00, provided that plate glass and steam boiler inspection insurers shall pay only one-third of the above rates provided in subsection (2) of this section. 
(3)  The amount of license payable to this municipality as fixed by this article shall be one-third of the amount so fixed if the payer shall file a sworn statement with the annual report required by R.S. title 22, chapter 1, part XXIII, showing that at least one-sixth of the total admitted assets of the payer are invested and maintained in qualifying state investments as defined in R.S. 22:832(C). 
(Code 1981, § 13-31; Ord. No. 297, §§ I, II, 2-8-1955; Ord. No. 472, § 1, 6-9-1987; Ord. No. 553, § 1, 10-12-2004)  
Sec. 16-59. - Due and delinquent dates. 
All license taxes levied herein shall be due and payable on January 1 of each year and all unpaid license taxes shall become delinquent on June 1. A penalty of five percent per month shall be added to the amount of tax due and payable to this municipality along with the tax due. The amount of any monetary penalty assessed pursuant to this section shall not be greater than 25 percent of the total amount of the tax due. The collection of delinquent accounts shall be enforced in accordance with state law. 
(Code 1981, § 13-32; Ord. No. 297, § III, 2-8-1955; Ord. No. 472, § 2, 6-9-1987; Ord. No. 553, § 2, 10-12-2004)  
Sec. 16-60. - Penalty for late payment. 
The penalties for delinquent license taxes provided for in this article shall be the same as provided for under state law, insofar as same can apply to the town. 
(Code 1981, § 13-33)  
Secs. 16-61—16-78. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SALES AND USE TAX[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Sales taxes generally, R.S. 33:2711 et seq.; Uniform Local Sales Tax Code, R.S. 47:337.1 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 16-79. - Adoption of uniform local sales tax code. 
Pursuant to the authority conferred by R.S. 47:337.4 (Levy of Sales and Use Tax), the provisions of R.S. 47:337.1 et seq., as amended, commonly referred to as the " Uniform Local Sales Tax Code," are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if set out fully.  
Sec. 16-80. - Application of state law. 
The definitions set forth in R.S. 47:301 (Sales Tax Definitions), as amended, shall be effective as definitions of the words, terms and phrases used in this article. All words, terms and phrases used herein, other than those specifically defined elsewhere in this article, shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in R.S. 47:301, as amended, and shall have the same scope and effect that the same words, terms and phrases have where used in R.S. 47:301, as amended.  
Sec. 16-81. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agricultural commodity means horticultural, viticultural, poultry, farm and range products and livestock and livestock products. 
Authority means the Town of Jonesboro, State of Louisiana. 
Collector means and includes the clerk of the authority or his duly authorized assistant or assistants or such other person, agency or instrumentality designated by the governing body to handle and accomplish the collection, enforcement and administration of sales and use taxes on behalf of the authority. 
Distraint or distrain means the right to levy upon and seize and sell, or the levying upon or seizing and selling of, any property or rights to property of the delinquent dealer by the officer charged with the collection of the tax for the purpose of satisfying any tax, interest or penalties due under the provisions of this article. 
Engaging in business in the authority means and includes any of the following methods of transacting business: maintaining directly, indirectly or through a subsidiary, an office, distribution house, sales house, warehouse, or other place of business or by having an agent, salesman, solicitor, or employee operating within the authority under the authority of the seller or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business, agent, salesman, solicitor, or employee is located in the authority permanently or temporarily, or whether such a seller or subsidiary is qualified to do business in the authority, or by having within the authority any choses in or causes of action, or any property, or any liens on property, or any indebtedness due it in the authority, protected by the laws and courts of the authority. 
New article means the original stock in trade of the dealer and shall not be limited to newly manufactured articles. The original stock or article, whether it is a used article or not, shall be subject to the tax. 
(Code 1981, § 13-52; Ord. No. 423, §§ 1.01, 1.02, 1.04, 1.07, 1.08, 1.13, 6-12-1979)  
Secs. 16-82—16-105. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - IMPOSITION OF TAX 
 
Sec. 16-106. - Levied. 
There is hereby levied for a period of ten years from and after August 1, 2009, for the purposes stated in the proposition attached to the ordinance from which this article was derived as exhibit A, a tax upon the sale at retail, the use, the lease or rental, the consumption of tangible personal property and upon the sale of services as defined herein; and the levy of such tax shall be as follows: 
(1)  At the rate of one percent of the sales price of each item or article of tangible personal property when sold at retail in the authority, the tax to be computed on gross sales for the purpose of remitting the amount of tax due the governing body and to include each and every retail sale. 
(2)  At the rate of one percent of the cost price of each item or article of tangible personal property when the same is not sold, but is used, consumed, distributed or stored for use or consumption in the authority, provided there shall be no duplication of the tax. 
(3)  At the rate of one percent of the gross proceeds derived from the lease or rental of tangible personal property, as defined herein, where the lease or rental of such property is an established business, or part of an established business, or the same is incidental or germane to the business. 
(4)  At the rate of one percent of the monthly lease rental price paid by lessee or rentee, or contracted or agreed to be paid by the lessee or rentee to the owner of the tangible personal property. 
(5)  At the rate of one percent of the gross proceeds derived from the sale of services, as defined herein. 
(Code 1981, § 13-91; Ord. No. 423, § 2.01, 6-12-1979; Ord. No. 480, § II, 3-8-1988; Ord. No. 527, art. I, § II(13-91), 9-8-1998; Ord. No. 567, art. I, § II, 9-9-2008)  
Sec. 16-107. - Special provisions for rentals. 
(a)  Sales or use taxes paid to the governing body on the purchase of new motor trucks and new motor tractors licensed and registered for 12,000 pounds or more, under the provisions of R.S. 47:462, new trailers, and new semi-trailers licensed and registered for 16,000 pounds or more, under the provisions of said section for rental may be deducted as a credit against the tax due on the rental of that item of property so that no tax is payable on rental income until the tax paid on the purchase price has not been exceeded. The sales tax paid to another authority or taxing authority or in an authority in a state other than Louisiana on the purchase price of property is not deductible from the tax subsequently due on the rental of such property in the authority. Property imported by the lessee for use in the authority that has been previously used by him in another authority is not subject to any tax on the value when imported, but is only subject to the tax that applies on rental payments. 
(b)  If the tax on rental income fails to exceed the credits for sales or use tax paid, no refund is due the purchaser. 
(c)  A dealer in the authority who ordinarily purchases personal property for sale and who withdraws a piece of property from stock for rental is not liable for a sales or use tax on the purchase price of the property when withdrawn from stock. Such person is liable only for the tax applicable on the rental income. 
(d)  Any sales tax paid on any maintenance or operation expenses of a rental business is not deductible as a credit against the tax due on rental income; such expenses are part of the cost of doing business and do not constitute a part of the cost of the identical property being rented. 
(Code 1981, § 13-92; Ord. No. 423, § 2.02, 6-12-1979; Ord. No. 480, § II, 3-8-1988; Ord. No. 527, art. I, § II(13-92), 9-8-1998)  
Sec. 16-108. - Collection and payment generally. 
The tax shall be collected from the dealer, as defined herein, and paid at the time and in the manner hereinafter provided. 
(Code 1981, § 13-93; Ord. No. 423, § 2.03, 6-12-1979; Ord. No. 480, § II, 3-8-1988; Ord. No. 527, art. I, § II(13-93), 9-8-1998)  
Sec. 16-109. - Tax declared additional. 
The tax so levied is, and shall be in addition to all other taxes, whether levied in the form of sales, excise or license, privilege or property taxes levied by any other ordinance or resolution of the governing body. 
(Code 1981, § 13-94; Ord. No. 423, § 2.04, 6-12-1979; Ord. No. 480, § II, 3-8-1988; Ord. No. 527, art. I, § II(13-94), 9-8-1998)  
Sec. 16-110. - Schedule established. 
The dealer shall collect the tax levied by this article, together with all other applicable sales and use taxes, in accordance with the integrated bracket schedule or schedules prepared and furnished by the collector of revenue of the state under the authority of section 304 of title 47 of R.S. 47:304. Such schedule or schedules shall include, in addition to the tax hereby levied pursuant to the election held on Saturday, July 18, 1998, and all other sales taxes levied by the state, the authority (by virtue of Ordinances 434 and 480), and the parish school board. The dealer will remit that portion of such total taxes representing the taxes levied by the authority to the collector. Copies of said integrated bracket schedules are available to dealers on request to the authority or to the collector. 
(Code 1981, § 13-95; Ord. No. 423, § 2.05, 6-12-1979; Ord. No. 480, § II, 3-8-1988; Ord. No. 527, art. I, § II(13-95), 9-8-1998)  
Sec. 16-111. - Collection to be made by collector in name of authority. 
The collection of the tax herein levied shall be made in the name of the authority by the collector. 
(Code 1981, § 13-96; Ord. No. 423, § 2.06, 6-12-1979)  
Secs. 16-112—16-135. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - EXEMPTIONS AND EXCLUSIONS 
 
Sec. 16-136. - Exempt tangible personal property. 
The taxes imposed and levied by this article shall be subject to all exemptions and exclusions provided in chapter 2 of title 47 of R.S. 47:301 et seq., with respect to taxes levied by local governing authorities, including municipalities. 
(Code 1981, § 13-111; Ord. No. 423, § 3.01, 6-12-1979)  
Sec. 16-137. - Scope of tax. 
It is not the intention of this article to levy a tax upon articles of tangible personal property imported into the authority or produced or manufactured in the authority for export; nor is it the intention of this article to levy a tax on a bona fide transaction in interstate commerce. It is, however, the intention of this article to levy a tax on the sale at retail, the use, the consumption, the distribution, and the storage to be used or consumed in the authority of tangible personal property after it has come to rest in the authority and has become a part of the mass of property in the authority. 
(Code 1981, § 13-112; Ord. No. 423, § 3.02, 6-12-1979)  
Sec. 16-138. - No tax due on sales of property delivered or services performed outside authority. 
No tax shall be due under this article on the sale of any goods or personal tangible property delivered or services performed outside the territorial limits of the authority. 
(Code 1981, § 13-113; Ord. No. 423, § 3.03, 6-12-1979)  
Secs. 16-139—16-159. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - COLLECTION BY DEALER 
 
Sec. 16-160. - Registration, certification of dealers. 
In order to aid in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article, and to collect all of the taxes imposed by this article, every dealer purchasing or importing tangible personal property for resale shall file with the collector a certificate of registration in a form prescribed by the administrator, within three days after commencing business or opening a new place of business. The collector shall, within five days after such registration, issue without charge to each dealer who purchases or imports for resale, a certificate of authority empowering such dealer to collect the tax from the purchaser, and duplicates therefor, for each additional place of business of such dealer. Each certificate or duplicate shall state the place of business to which it is applicable. Such certificate of authority shall be prominently displayed in all places of business of the dealer. A dealer who has no regular place of doing business shall attach such certificate to his cart, stand, truck or other merchandising device. Such certificate shall be non-assignable and nontransferable and shall be surrendered immediately to the collector upon the dealer's ceasing to do business at the place therein named. 
(Code 1981, § 13-124; Ord. No. 423, § 4.04, 6-12-1979)  
Sec. 16-161. - Requirements of manufacturers, wholesalers, jobbers, or suppliers. 
A manufacturer, wholesaler dealer, jobber or supplier shall refuse to accept a certificate that any property upon which a tax is imposed by this article is purchased for resale, and shall collect the tax imposed by this article, unless the purchaser shall have filed a certificate of registration and received a certificate of authority to collect the tax imposed by this article; provided, however, that the payment of the tax by such purchaser shall not relieve the purchaser of the duty herein imposed upon such purchaser to collect the tax upon any resale made by him; but such purchaser who shall thereafter file a certificate of registration and receive a certificate of authority to collect the tax may, upon application therefor, receive a refund of the taxes paid by him upon property thereafter resold by him, and upon the receipts from which he shall have collected and paid over to the governing body the tax herein imposed. 
(Code 1981, § 13-125; Ord. No. 423, § 4.05, 6-12-1979)  
Sec. 16-162. - Collection when purchaser fails to pay dealer. 
Where the purchaser has failed to pay and a dealer has failed to collect a tax upon a sale, as imposed by this article, then in addition to all other rights, obligations and remedies provided, such tax shall be payable by the purchaser directly to the governing body, and it shall be the duty of this purchaser to file a return thereof with the collector and to pay the tax imposed thereon to the governing body within 15 days after such sale was made or rendered. 
(Code 1981, § 13-129; Ord. No. 423, § 4.09, 6-12-1979)  
Sec. 16-163. - Compensation of dealer for collecting. 
For the purpose of compensating the dealer in accounting for and remitting the tax levied by this article, each dealer shall be allowed two percent of the amount of tax due and accounted for and remitted to the collector in the form of a deduction in submitting his report and paying the amount due by him if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Code 1981, § 13-130; Ord. No. 423, § 4.10, 6-12-1979)  
Secs. 16-164—16-191. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - COLLECTION FROM DEALER 
 
Sec. 16-192. - Generally. 
(a)  The tax imposed by this article shall be collectible by the collector on behalf of the governing body from all persons engaged as dealers. 
(b)  The collector is duly authorized and empowered to carry into effect the provisions of this article, and, in pursuance thereof, to make and enforce such rules as he may deem necessary. Such regulations, when promulgated, shall have the full force and effect of law. Promulgation shall be accomplished by publication at least one time in the official journal of the authority. 
(c)  The collector may employ such personnel, including legal counsel on a fee or salary basis, as are necessary to assist in the collection of the taxes imposed hereunder. Any duly authorized representative or deputy of the collector, when acting under his authority and direction, shall have the same power as is conferred upon the collector by this article. 
(d)  The collector may conduct hearings and administer oaths, and examine under oath, any dealer and the directors, officers, agents and employees of any dealer, and any other witness relative to the business of such dealer in respect to any matter incident to the administration of this article. 
(Code 1981, § 13-141; Ord. No. 423, § 5.01, 6-12-1979)  
Sec. 16-193. - Collection of tax on imported personal property used by dealer. 
On all tangible personal property imported, or caused to be imported, from other states or other political subdivisions of this state, or any foreign country, and used by him, the dealer shall pay the tax imposed by this article on all articles of tangible personal property so imported and used, the same as if the said articles had been sold at retail for use or consumption in this authority. For the purpose of this article, use or consumption, or distribution or storage to be used or consumed in the authority of tangible personal property, shall each be equivalent to a sale at retail, and the tax shall thereupon immediately be levied and be collected in the manner provided herein, provided there shall be no duplication of the tax in any event. 
(Code 1981, § 13-142; Ord. No. 423, § 5.02, 6-12-1979)  
Secs. 16-194—16-211. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - RECORDS 
 
Sec. 16-212. - Collector to keep records of official acts; authentication. 
The collector shall keep a record of all of his official acts and shall preserve copies of all rules, decisions and orders made by him or by any deputy of his department in charge of the collection of the tax imposed by this article. Copies of such rules, decisions or orders and of any paper filed in any office maintained by him in the administration of this article may be authenticated under his official signature, and, when so authenticated, shall be evidence in all courts of the state of the same weight and force as the original thereof. 
(Code 1981, § 13-166; Ord. No. 423, § 7.06, 6-12-1979)  
Sec. 16-213. - Files, records of collector considered confidential, privileged; inspection limited. 
The records and files of the collector, respecting the administration of this article, shall be considered confidential and privileged and neither the collector nor any employee engaged in the administration thereof or charged with the custody of any such records or files shall divulge or disclose any information obtained from such records or files or from any examination or inspection of the premises or property of any dealer. Neither the collector nor any employee engaged in such administration or charged with the custody of any such records or files shall be required to produce any of them for the inspection of any person or for use in any action or proceeding except: 
(1)  In an action or proceeding under the provisions of this article; and 
(2)  When the records or files or the facts shown thereby are directly involved in such action or proceedings. 
(Code 1981, § 13-167; Ord. No. 423, § 7.07, 6-12-1979)  
Sec. 16-214. - Permissible use of returns, reports, filed. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to prevent: 
(1)  The delivery to a dealer or his duly authorized representatives of a copy of any return, report or other paper filed by him pursuant to the provisions of this article; 
(2)  The publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of any return or report and the items thereof; 
(3)  The inspection by the legal representative of the governing body of the returns, reports or files relating to the claim of any dealer who shall have brought an action to review or set aside any tax imposed under this article or against whom an action or proceeding has been instituted in accordance with the provisions hereof; 
(4)  The examination of the records and files by the collector or by his duly authorized agents; or 
(5)  The furnishing, in the discretion of the collector, of any information disclosed by the records or files to any official person or body of any other state or of the United States who shall be concerned with the administration of any similar tax by that state or the United States. 
(Code 1981, § 13-168; Ord. No. 423, § 7.08, 6-12-1979)  
Secs. 16-215—16-239. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - IMPORTED GOODS 
 
Sec. 16-240. - Permits to import goods. 
In order to prevent the illegal importation into this authority of tangible personal property which is subject to the tax, and to strengthen and make more effective the manner and method of enforcing payment of the tax imposed by this article, the collector is hereby authorized and empowered to put into operation a system of permits whereby any person or dealer may import tangible personal property by truck, automobile, or other means of transportation other than a common carrier, without having said truck, automobile or other means of transportation seized and subjected to legal proceedings for its forfeiture. Such system of permits shall require the person or dealer who desires to import tangible personal property into the authority, which property is subject to tax imposed by this article, to apply to the collector or his assistant for a permit stating the kind of vehicle to be used, the name of the driver, the license number of the vehicle, the kind or character of tangible personal property to be imported, the date, the name and address of the consignee, and such other information as the collector may deem proper or necessary. Such permits shall be free of cost to the applicant and may be obtained at the office of the collector. 
(Code 1981, § 13-181; Ord. No. 423, § 8.01, 6-12-1979)  
Secs. 16-241—16-268. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - COLLECTION REMEDIES 
 
Sec. 16-269. - Interest, penalties, and attorney's fees for failure to pay tax. 
If the amount of tax due by the dealer is not paid on or before the 20th day of the month next following the month for which the tax is due, there shall be collected with said tax, interest upon said unpaid amount, at the rate of six percent per annum, or fractional part thereof, to be computed from the first day of the month next following the month for which the tax is due or until it is paid; and in addition to the interest that may be so due, there shall also be collected a penalty equivalent to five percent for each 30 days, or fraction thereof, of delinquency, not to exceed 25 percent in aggregate of the tax due, when such tax is not paid within 30 days of the date the tax first becomes due and payable; and in the event of suit, attorney's fees at the rate of ten percent of the aggregate of tax, interest and penalty, or the actual costs of collection (including attorney's fees and costs of court), whichever is greater. 
(Code 1981, § 13-193; Ord. No. 423, § 9.03, 6-12-1979; Ord. No. 493, § 1, 4-10-1990)  
Sec. 16-270. - Estimation, assessment of tax by treasurer when dealers fail to report and pay; presumption of correctness; specific penalty. 
(a)  In the event any dealer fails to make a report and pay the tax as provided by this article, or in case the dealer makes a grossly incorrect report, or a report that is false or fraudulent, it shall be the duty of the collector to make an estimate for the taxable period of the retail sales, or sales of services, of such dealer, or of the gross proceeds from rentals or leases of tangible personal property by the dealer, and an estimate of the cost price of all articles of tangible personal property imported by the dealer for use or consumption or distribution or storage to be used or consumed in the authority, and assess and collect the tax and interest, plus penalties, if such have accrued, on the basis of such assessment, which shall be considered prima facie correct, and the burden to show the contrary shall rest upon the dealer. In the event such estimate and assessment requires an examination of books, records, or documents, or an audit thereof, the collector shall add to the assessment the cost of such examination, together with any penalties accruing thereon. Such costs and penalties, when collected, shall be placed to the account of the sales tax fund in the same manner as are the taxes collected under this article. 
(b)  If any dealer fails to make any return required by this article or makes an incorrect return, and the circumstances indicate willful negligence or intentional disregard of rules and regulations, but no intent to defraud, there shall be imposed, in addition to any other penalties provided herein, a specific penalty of five percent of the tax or deficiency found to be due, or $10.00, whichever is greater. This specific penalty shall be an obligation to be collected and accounted for in the same manner as if it were a part of the tax due and can be enforced either in a separate action or in the same action for the collection of the tax. 
(Code 1981, § 13-194; Ord. No. 423, § 9.04, 6-12-1979)  
Sec. 16-271. - Notice to be given creditors, holders of personal property, debtors of delinquent dealer; consent of collector required prior to transfer or disposition. 
In the event that any dealer is delinquent in the payment of the tax herein provided for, the collector may give notice of the amount of such delinquency by registered mail to all persons having in their possession, or under their control, any credits or other personal property belonging to such dealer, or owing any debts to such dealer at the time of receipt by them of such notice, and thereafter, any person so notified shall neither transfer nor make any other disposition of such credits, other personal property, or debts until the collector shall have consented to a transfer or disposition, or until 30 days shall have elapsed from and after the receipt of such notice. All persons so notified must, within five days after receipt of such notice, advise the collector of any and all such credits, other personal property or debts in their possession, under their control or owing by them, as the case may be. 
(Code 1981, § 13-196; Ord. No. 423, § 9.06, 6-12-1979)  
Sec. 16-272. - Late, fraudulent return by dealer; notice to appear; hearing. 
If any dealer, subject to make and file a return required by any of the provisions of this article, fails to render such return within the time required, or renders a return which is false or fraudulent, in that it contains statements which differ from the true gross sales, purchases, leases, or rentals, or other transactions, taxable under this article, or otherwise fails to comply with the provisions of this article, for the taxable period for which said return is made, the collector shall give such dealer 15 days' notice, in writing, requiring such dealer to appear before him or his assistant, with such books, records and papers as he may require, relating to the business of such dealer, for such taxable period; and said collector may require such dealer, or other agents or employees of such dealer, to give testimony or to answer interrogatories, under oath, administered by the collector or his assistant, respecting the sale at retail, the use or consumption, or distribution or storage for use or consumption in the authority, or lease or rental of tangible personal property, or other transactions subject to tax, or the failure to make report thereof, as provided in this article. 
(Code 1981, § 13-200; Ord. No. 423, § 9.10, 6-12-1979)  
Sec. 16-273. - Collector authorized to apply to court for order to enforce provisions. 
If any dealer fails to make a return, or refuses to permit an examination of his books, records, or papers, or to appear and answer questions within the scope of such investigation relating to the sale, use, consumption, distribution, storage, lease or rental of tangible personal property, or sale of services, the collector may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction for an order requiring such dealer to make such return, or requiring the dealer, or his agents or employees, to appear and answer any such questions or permit such examination, and the court or any judge thereof shall thereupon issue an order, upon such reasonable notice as shall be prescribed therein, to be served upon said dealer or the agents or employees of such dealer, directing him or them to so appear and testify and to produce such books, records and papers as may be required. Any person or any member of any firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association or corporation, or any agent or employee thereof, failing to comply with any such order shall be guilty of contempt, and shall be punished as provided by law in cases of contempt. 
(Code 1981, § 13-201; Ord. No. 423, § 9.11, 6-12-1979)  
Sec. 16-274. - Importing taxable property in vehicle without permission deemed attempt to evade; seizure of vehicle and property. 
The importation into the authority of tangible personal property which is subject to tax by truck, automobile, or other means of transportation other than a common carrier, without having first obtained a permit as described in section 16-240 (if the tax imposed by this article on said tangible personal property has not been paid), shall be construed as an attempt to evade payment of the said tax, and the same is hereby prohibited, and the said truck, automobile, or means of transportation other than a common carrier and said taxable property may be seized by the governing body in order to secure the same as evidence in a trial, and the same shall be subject to forfeiture and sale in the manner provided for in this article. 
(Code 1981, § 13-202; Ord. No. 423, § 9.12, 6-12-1979)  
Sec. 16-275. - Personal liability of dealers; lien declared; priority. 
The liability of any person or dealer arising from any tax, interest and penalty, or any of them, imposed by this article, from the time they are due, shall be a personal debt of such person, or dealer, to the governing body recoverable in any court of competent jurisdiction in an action at law by the governing body. Such debts, whether sued upon or not, shall be a lien on all the property of such delinquent person, or dealer, except as against an innocent purchaser for value without notice in the actual course of business, and shall have preference in any distribution of the assets of the person, or dealer, whether in bankruptcy, insolvency, or otherwise. The proceeds of any judgment or order obtained hereunder shall be paid to the governing body. 
(Code 1981, § 13-204; Ord. No. 423, § 9.14, 6-12-1979)  
Sec. 16-276. - Authority to require bond or securities. 
The governing body may require a bond or other security satisfactory to the collector for the payment of any taxes, fees, interest and penalties, or any of them, imposed pursuant to this article when he shall find that the collection thereof may be prejudiced without such security. 
(Code 1981, § 13-205; Ord. No. 423, § 9.15, 6-12-1979)  
Sec. 16-277. - Payment of interest; penalties. 
(a)  Any person or dealer who shall fail to pay any tax levied by this article on or before the day when such tax shall be required by this article to be paid, shall pay in addition to the tax, interest on the tax at the rate specified in section 16-269, for each month or fraction thereof that the tax remains unpaid, to be calculated from the date the tax was originally due to the date of actual payment. 
(b)  In addition, such person or dealer shall pay any special penalties provided by this article. 
(Code 1981, § 13-213; Ord. No. 423, § 9.23, 6-12-1979)  
Sec. 16-278. - Penalties, interest deemed part of tax; waiver for satisfactory explanation. 
All penalties and interest imposed by this article shall be payable to and recoverable by the governing body in the same manner as if they were part of the tax imposed. If the failure to pay any such tax when due is explained to the satisfaction of the collector, he may remit or waive payment of the whole or any part of any penalty, and may remit or waive payment of any interest charged in excess of the rate of one-half of one percent per month. 
(Code 1981, § 13-214; Ord. No. 423, § 9.24, 6-12-1979)  
Secs. 16-279—16-302. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - REFUNDS AND REIMBURSEMENTS 
 
Sec. 16-303. - Claim for refunds. 
If any dealer shall have given to the collector notice within the time provided under state law, such dealer thereafter, at any time within two years after the payment of any original or additional tax assessed against him, may file with the collector a claim under oath for refund, in such form as the collector may prescribe, stating the grounds thereof. However, no claim for refund shall be required or permitted to be filed with respect to a tax paid, after protest has been filed with the collector as hereinafter provided, or after proceeding on appeal has been finally determined. 
(Code 1981, § 13-222; Ord. No. 423, § 10.02, 6-12-1979)  
Sec. 16-304. - Overpayment credited against dealer's liability; refund; notice of rejection. 
If, upon examination of such claim for refund, it shall be determined by the collector that there has been an overpayment of tax, the amount of such overpayment shall be credited against any liability of any dealer under this article, and if there is no such liability, the said dealer shall be entitled to a refund of the tax so overpaid. If the collector shall reject the claim for refund in whole or in part, he shall make an order accordingly and serve notice upon such dealer. 
(Code 1981, § 13-223; Ord. No. 423, § 10.03, 6-12-1979)  
Sec. 16-305. - Refund for erroneous, illegal collection of tax; certification by collector. 
Where no question of fact or law is involved, and it appears in the records of the governing body that any monies have been erroneously or illegally collected from any dealer, or have been paid by any dealer under a mistake of fact or law, the collector may, at any time within two years of payment, upon making a record in writing of his reasons therefor, certify that any dealer is entitled to such refund and, thereupon, the collector shall authorize the payment thereof from any appropriation available for such purposes. 
(Code 1981, § 13-224; Ord. No. 423, § 10.04, 6-12-1979)  
Sec. 16-306. - Repayment of deposit by dealer. 
When, to secure compliance with any of the provisions of this article, any monies shall have been deposited with the governing body by any dealer, and shall have been paid over to the governing body, and the collector shall be satisfied that such dealer has fully complied with all such provisions, the collector shall so certify and authorize repayment from any appropriations available for such purpose to such dealer of such monies, or such part thereof as the collector shall certify has not been applied by him to the satisfaction of any indebtedness arising under this article. 
(Code 1981, § 13-225; Ord. No. 423, § 10.05, 6-12-1979)  
Secs. 16-307—16-327. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - REMEDIES OF DEALERS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Protest to collector's determination of tax due, R.S. 47:337.49; taxpayers' power to remit tax under protest and file suit to recover, R.S. 47:337.63; alternative remedy for dealers, R.S. 47:337.64. 
 
Sec. 16-328. - Competent courts for action; service of process. 
This section shall afford a legal remedy and right of action in any state, town or federal court, having jurisdiction of the parties and subject matter, for a full and complete adjudication of any and all questions arising in the enforcement of this article, as to the legality of any tax accrued or accruing or the method of enforcement thereof. In such actions service shall be upon the collector. 
(Code 1981, § 13-232; Ord. No. 423, § 11.02, 6-12-1979)  
Sec. 16-329. - Legal remedy for certain causes of action; effect of payment under protest. 
This section shall be construed to provide a legal remedy in the state, town or federal courts, by action of law, in case such taxes are claimed to be an unlawful burden upon interstate commerce, or the collection thereof, in violation of any act of Congress or the United States Constitution, or in any case where jurisdiction is vested in any of the courts of the United States; provided that, upon request of the dealer and upon proper showing by such dealer that the principle of law involved in an additional assessment is already pending before the courts for judicial determination, the said dealer, upon agreement to abide by the decision of the courts may pay the additional assessment under protest, but need not file an additional suit. In such cases, the tax so paid under protest shall be segregated and held by the collector until the question of law involved has been determined by the courts and shall then be disposed of as therein provided. 
(Code 1981, § 13-233; Ord. No. 423, § 11.03, 6-12-1979)  
Sec. 16-330. - Grievance procedure. 
If any dealer shall be aggrieved by any finding or assessment of the collector, he may, within 30 days of the receipt of notice of the assessment or finding, file a protest in writing signed by him or his duly authorized agent, which shall be under oath and shall set forth the reasons therefor, and he may request a hearing. Thereafter, the collector shall grant a hearing to such dealer, if a hearing has been requested, and may make an order confirming, modifying or vacating any such finding or assessment. The filing of any such protest shall not abate any penalty for nonpayment, nor shall it stay the right of the collector to collect the tax in any manner herein provided unless the dealer shall furnish security of a kind and in an amount satisfactory to the collector. Appeals from the decision of the collector shall be direct to any state, town or federal court of competent jurisdiction as provided for in section 16-328. 
(Code 1981, § 13-234; Ord. No. 423, § 11.04, 6-12-1979)  
Sec. 16-331. - Collector as agent and trustee for governing body. 
It is hereby recognized that the tax herein levied is being levied by and on behalf of the governing body as herein provided and that the collector is acting as agent for the governing body for the purpose of administration and collection of the tax. 
(Code 1981, § 13-235; Ord. No. 423, § 14.01, 6-12-1979)  
Secs. 16-332—16-352. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 11. - OTHER ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 16-353. - Collector authorized to carry out provisions. 
The collector is hereby authorized and empowered to carry into effect the provisions of this article and, in pursuance thereof, to make and enforce such rules as he may deem necessary in administering the provisions of this article and other policies or procedures established by the governing body. 
(Code 1981, § 13-241; Ord. No. 423, § 12.01, 6-12-1979)  
Sec. 16-354. - Collector empowered to make rules and regulations. 
The collector shall have the power to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this article or the laws and the state constitution or the United States Constitution, for the enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of the revenues and penalties imposed by this article. 
(Code 1981, § 13-242; Ord. No. 423, § 12.02, 6-12-1979)  
Sec. 16-355. - Preparation, distribution of forms. 
The collector shall design, prepare, print and furnish to all dealers or make available to said dealers, all necessary forms for filing returns, and instructions to ensure a full collection from dealers and an accounting for the taxes due, but failure of any dealer to secure such forms shall not relieve such dealer from the payment of said taxes at the time and in the manner herein provided. 
(Code 1981, § 13-243; Ord. No. 423, § 12.03, 6-12-1979)  
Sec. 16-356. - Cost of enforcement. 
The cost of preparing and distributing the report forms and paraphernalia for the collection of said tax, and of the inspection and enforcement duties required herein, shall be borne by the collector. 
(Code 1981, § 13-244; Ord. No. 423, § 12.04, 6-12-1979)  
Sec. 16-357. - Pre-existing contracts. 
(a)  In any case where tangible personal property is sold at retail under a contract providing for such retail sale made and entered into prior to August 1, 1979, and containing the sale price, and delivery is made after August 1, 1979, and such sale is taxable under this article, the seller shall add the tax imposed by this article to the sale price, and collect it from the buyer. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall also apply where such tangible personal property is not sold, but is used, consumed, distributed, stored, leased or rented, and where services taxable hereunder are contracted for before August 1, 1979, except as provided in section 16-136. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to tangible personal property actually imported or caused to be imported into, or stored within, the territorial limits of the authority prior to August 1, 1979, if the said tangible personal property is actually used or consumed by the person who imported and stored said tangible personal property. 
(Code 1981, § 13-245; Ord. No. 423, § 12.05, 6-12-1979)  
Sec. 16-358. - Collector, deputy authorized to receive written oaths. 
It shall be lawful for the collector, or any deputy by him duly designated, to receive the written oath of any person signing any application, disposition, statement, or report required by the collector in the administration of this article. 
(Code 1981, § 13-246; Ord. No. 423, § 12.06, 6-12-1979)  
Sec. 16-359. - Collector, deputy authorized to conduct hearings, examinations. 
The collector, or any deputy by him duly designated, may conduct hearings and have administered and examined under oath, any dealer and the directors, officers, agents and employees of any dealer, and any other witnesses, relative to the business of such dealer in respect to any matter incident to the administration of this article. Such examinations or hearings shall be at a time convenient to the dealer within 14 days after requested by the collector in writing. 
(Code 1981, § 13-247; Ord. No. 423, § 12.07, 6-12-1979)  
Sec. 16-360. - Method of giving notice to dealers. 
Any notice required to be given by the collector pursuant to this article, may be given by personal service on the dealer for whom it is intended, or mailed to the dealer for whom it is intended, addressed to such dealer at the address given in the last report filed by him pursuant to the provisions of this article, or, if no report has been filed, then to such address as may be obtainable. The mailing of such notice shall be presumptive evidence of its receipt by the dealer to whom it is addressed. 
(Code 1981, § 13-248; Ord. No. 423, § 12.08, 6-12-1979)  
Sec. 16-361. - Records maintained by collector; authentication; fee. 
The collector shall keep a record of all of the official acts, and shall preserve copies of all rules, decisions, and orders made by him and by any deputy of his department in charge of the collection of the tax imposed by this article. Copies of such rules, decisions, or orders and of any paper filed in any office maintained by him in the administration of this article, may be authenticated under his official signature, and, when so authenticated, shall be evidence in all courts of the state of the same weight and force as the original thereof. For authenticating any such copy, he shall be paid a fee of $1.00 which shall be deposited in the sales tax fund. 
(Code 1981, § 13-249; Ord. No. 423, § 12.09, 6-12-1979)  
Sec. 16-362. - Provisions not to alter legal remedies. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to deprive the dealer of any remedy in the review of any tax, or in any proceedings to collect the tax given such dealer by any other law, or to deprive the governing body of the authority of any remedy for the enforcement of this article through any procedure or remedies expressly provided in this article imposing the tax herein levied or in any other law, nor shall this article be construed as repealing or altering any such laws, ordinances, or resolutions. 
(Code 1981, § 13-250; Ord. No. 423, § 12.10, 6-12-1979)  
Sec. 16-363. - Tax supplemental to other taxes. 
The tax levied herein is declared to be supplemental and in addition to all other taxes levied by and under the authority of the governing body of any kind or nature. 
(Code 1981, § 13-251; Ord. No. 423, § 12.12, 6-12-1979)  
Secs. 16-364—16-389. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 12. - DISPOSITION OF TAX PROCEEDS AND REVENUES 
 
Sec. 16-390. - Disposition in special fund. 
All taxes, revenues, funds, assessments, monies, penalties, fees or other income which may be collected or come into possession of the collector as an agent of the governing body under any provisions of this article shall be promptly deposited by the collector for the account of the governing body in a special fund designated the sales tax fund, which fund shall be established and maintained as sacred funds of the governing body; provided, however, any amount which is paid under protest or which is subject to litigation may be transferred to another account established by the collector pending final determination of the protest or litigation. 
(Code 1981, § 13-261; Ord. No. 423, § 13.01, 6-12-1979)  
Sec. 16-391. - Payment of administrative costs. 
Out of the funds on deposit in the sales tax fund, the collector shall first pay all reasonable and necessary expenses of collecting the tax levied hereby and administering the provisions of this article as well as the various administrative procedures established herein. 
(Code 1981, § 13-262; Ord. No. 423, § 13.02, 6-12-1979)  
Sec. 16-392. - Use of proceeds after paying administrative costs. 
In compliance with the said special election of Saturday, July 19, 2008, authorizing said tax, after all reasonable and necessary costs and expenses of collecting and administering the tax have been paid as provided in section 16-391, the remaining balance of the sales tax proceeds shall be available for appropriation and expenditure by the governing body, solely for the purposes designated in the proposition authorizing the levy of the tax, as approved by a majority of the qualified electors of the authority voting in a special election held therein on Saturday, July 19, 2008. 
(Code 1981, § 13-263; Ord. No. 423, § 13.03, 6-12-1979; Ord. No. 480, § III, 3-8-1988; Ord. No. 527, art. I, § III, 9-8-1998; Ord. No. 567, art. I, § III, 9-9-2008)  
Secs. 16-393—16-418. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - CABLE FEES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Unauthorized interception, interference with, or retransmission of services offered over a cable television system prohibited, R.S. 14:222.1; municipalities prohibited from charging cable television franchises a franchise fee in excess of that authorized by federal law, R.S. 33:4461; Consumer Choice for Television Act, R.S. 45:1361 et seq. 
 
Sec. 16-419. - Franchise fee. 
All persons or entities providing cable or video services to the citizens of the town pursuant to a state-issued certificate of franchise authority as provided in R.S. 45:1361 et seq., shall, pursuant to the provisions of R.S. 45:1366, pay the town a franchise fee equal to five percent of the cable or video service providers' gross revenues, as that term is defined by the "Consumer Choice for Television Act of 2008," derived from operations within the town municipal limits. 
(Ord. No. 723, 8-20-2014)  
Chapter 18 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Highway Regulatory Act, R.S. 32:1 et seq.; uniform application of traffic laws and regulations, R.S. 32:21; powers of local municipal authorities, R.S. 32:41; penalties, R.S. 32:57; authority of city to adopt traffic code, R.S. 33:1368. 
 
Sec. 18-1. - State highway regulations adopted. 
There is hereby adopted by reference, the same as if copied herein verbatim, all of the provisions of chapter I of title 32 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes as amended and revised (R.S. 32:1 et seq.), commonly known as the Louisiana Highway Regulatory Act, and all of the regulations of the department of highways and the director of public safety adopted pursuant thereto with respect to any and all highways within the corporate limits of the town. 
(Code 1981, § 15-1) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt Highway Regulatory Act, R.S. 32:41(C).  
Sec. 18-2. - Police department's authority to direct traffic. 
The chief of police and members of the police department shall have the full right, power and authority to direct and control the traffic, operation, use or parking of all motor vehicles on or along the public roads, streets or parking areas within the corporate limits in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or in emergencies as the public convenience and safety may require. 
(Code 1981, § 15-2)  
Sec. 18-3. - Traffic signs, signals, etc., generally. 
(a)  Town employees are hereby authorized to erect and maintain all traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings authorized by the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(b)  No person shall fail or refuse to comply with the instruction or direction of any traffic control sign, signal, device or marking erected by the town or pursuant to state law. 
(Code 1981, § 15-3) 
State Law reference— Obedience to signs required, R.S. 32:56.  
Sec. 18-4. - Reserved parking for handicapped drivers. 
(a)  Determination and designation of reserved parking spaces. The head of the public works department of the town is hereby authorized to determine the need for, and to designate, by proper signs, areas on public streets and in publicly-owned parking facilities which are to be reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles bearing a license plate issued to a handicapped driver, or a vehicle belonging to a community service organization used for transporting the elderly and/or handicapped. The head of the public works department shall determine and designate the appropriate signs or markings to be used to designate such parking areas and shall file with the office of town clerk a list of the locations of each designated parking area. 
(b)  Privately-owned parking areas. Owners of privately-owned parking areas may designate certain spaces within those parking areas to be reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles bearing the license plates issued to a handicapped driver, or a vehicle belonging to a community service organization used for transporting the elderly and/or handicapped, and, upon such designation, shall identify such handicapped parking areas by appropriate signs or markings. 
(c)  Spaces reserved for drivers with special licenses. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle other than one bearing a license issued to a handicapped driver or a vehicle belonging to a community service organization used for transporting the elderly and/or handicapped in an area either publicly- or privately-owned which has been designated by the appropriate and proper sign or marking as being reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles bearing licenses issued to handicapped drivers. 
(d)  Penalty. Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than $10.00 nor more than $25.00. 
(Code 1981, § 15-4; Ord. No. 494A, §§ 1—4, 4-10-1990)  
Sec. 18-5. - Through streets. 
The following streets are hereby declared through streets: 
(1)  U.S. Highway No. 167, beginning at the south intersection of the town limits and extending to the north section. 
(2)  Beech Springs Highway from the east town limits to the intersection of Highway 167. 
(3)  Cedar Street from the south line of East Main Street to the intersection of the Beech Springs Highway. 
(4)  Cooper Avenue from the north end to the south end, except the intersections of Highway 167 and Main Street. 
(5)  Danville Highway, from the south town limits to the intersection of Cooper Avenue. 
(6)  East Main Street from the east town limits to the Chicago, Rock Island and Pacific (CRI&P) Railroad right-of-way. 
(7)  Eighth Street from the Chicago, Rock Island and Pacific Railroad right-of-way to the intersection of Danville Highway, except Highway No. 167. 
(8)  Fifth Street or Main Street from the west town limits to the east town limits. 
(9)  Hudson Avenue from the intersection of Main Street to its termination. 
(10)  Michigan Avenue from its north limits to the intersection with Third Street and Center Street. 
(11)  North Street from Highway 167 to the east town limits. 
(12)  Polk Avenue from its south limits to the north limits, except the intersection with Eighth Street, and the intersection with Main Street and First Street. 
(13)  Third Street from Cooper Avenue to the west town limits. 
(14)  All streets in the Knob Hill Subdivision running from east to west. 
(Code 1981, § 15-5; Ord. No. 329, § 10, 5-10-1960)  
Sec. 18-6. - Truck routes. 
(a)  The following streets are hereby designated as truck routes: 
(1)  Cooper Street from its intersection with Pershing Highway, sometimes also known as U.S. Highway No. 167, southward and southwesterly to its intersection with the west town limits, a portion of Cooper Street also being known as Louisiana Highway No. 4. 
(2)  Eighth Street from its intersection with Cooper Street, sometimes also known as Louisiana Highway No. 4, eastward to its intersection with the CRI&P Railroad. 
(3)  First Street from its intersection with North Allen Avenue to its intersection with Hudson Avenue. 
(4)  Hudson Avenue from its intersection with First Street and continuing south along said street, sometimes also known as U.S. Highway No. 167, south to the south town limits. 
(5)  Main Street from its intersection with CRI&P Railroad westward to its intersection with Cooper Street. 
(6)  North Allen Avenue from its intersection with Pershing Highway, also known as U.S. Highway No. 167, and running south to its intersection with First Street. 
(7)  Pershing Highway, also known as U.S. Highway No. 167, from its intersection with the north town limits and running in a southerly and easterly direction to its intersection with North Allen Avenue. 
(8)  Seventh Street from its intersection with South Hudson Avenue, sometimes also known as U.S. Highway No. 167, eastward to its intersection with Walker Road. 
(b)  All trucks or other motor vehicles having a gross load weight in excess of 5,000 pounds shall use the truck routes designated in subsection (a) of this section when passing through the town, except when it is necessary for said truck or motor vehicle to exit from said truck routes for the purposes of making deliveries within the town. 
(Code 1981, § 15-6; Ord. No. 362, §§ I, II, 11-14-1967)  
Sec. 18-7. - Parallel parking. 
Parallel parking is only permitted on the east side of Block 19 facing Polk Avenue and on the north and south sides of Third Street between Blocks 10 and 19. 
(Code 1981, § 15-7; Ord. No. 329, § 8(E), 5-10-1960)  
Sec. 18-8. - Angle parking. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or combination of vehicles having an overall length greater than 18½ feet in any parking space provided for angular parking. 
(Code 1981, § 15-8; Ord. No. 329, § 8, 5-10-1960)  
Sec. 18-9. - Time limit on parking. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle on any street for a longer period than ten consecutive hours. 
(Code 1981, § 15-9; Ord. No. 329, § 7, 5-10-1960)  
Sec. 18-10. - Impoundment of illegally parked unattended vehicles. 
The chief of police is hereby authorized to remove any vehicle left parked and unattended on any street on which vehicles cannot be parked and to impound the vehicle. 
(Code 1981, § 15-10; Ord. No. 329, § 34, 5-10-1960)  
Chapter 20 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Abatement of public nuisances, R.S. 13:4711 et seq.; state sanitary code, R.S. 40:4. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 20-1. - Nuisances prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit, maintain, or allow the creation or maintenance of a nuisance as defined herein. 
(Code 1981, § 12-31; Ord. No. 208, § 1, 11-14-1944; Ord. No. 534, § 1(12-31), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 20-2. - Obstructions on public rights-of-way. 
The building, erecting, or installing of structures, buildings, fences, walls, billboards, signs, poles, mailboxes, barricades, ramparts, or other works either temporary or permanent, in public alleys, ditches, or rights-of-way or on any other public property by any person, corporation or entity is prohibited except as provided in this section. 
(1)  Temporary structures. 
a.  Persons, contractors, private corporations, or private agencies may erect or maintain temporary signs, buildings, structures, or traffic control devices within rights-of-way after obtaining a permit from the director of public works or other public official empowered to issue such permit. 
b.  Permit holders may place such temporary signs and warning devices as are authorized to guide, inform, regulate, and warn the public of dangers arising from the work being done within the right-of-way. 
c.  In the case of roads or highways under the control of the state, permits for the placement of obstructions must also be obtained from the state department of transportation and development and any other state agency responsible for the issuance of permits. 
(2)  Utility poles and structures. 
a.  As authorized by the town, utility companies may erect such poles and structures as are needed for the provision of services to their municipal customers. 
b.  Posters, signs, fliers and other manner of notices are prohibited on utility structures located in public rights-of-way or otherwise on public property. 
(3)  Posters on poles, structures, and trees and temporary yard signs. 
a.  The attaching of posters, signs, notices, or announcements to utility poles, columns, fences, walls, or other authorized structures in rights-of-way or on public property is prohibited without the permission of the utility agency in control of the structure. They may be removed by the utility company in control of the structure, or they may be removed by the town pursuant to this section. 
b.  The attaching of posters, signs, notices, or announcements to trees or ornamental shrubbery in rights-of-way or on public property is prohibited. They may be removed by the town pursuant to this section. 
c.  Temporary yard signs, including signs promoting political candidates, posted or left in public rights-of-way or on public property are not exempt from the requirements of this section; however, they are defined by law as "litter" and may be collected as such by appropriate authorities pursuant to section 20-6. 
(4)  Balcony supports. Columns to support balcony structures in pedestrian ways are permitted if constructed according to provisions of the town's adopted building codes and zoning regulations, particularly section 140-33. 
(5)  Mailboxes. Mail receptacles in rights-of-way should conform to postal service regulations as specified in the U.S. Postal Service's document, Domestic Mail Services Transition Book. These rules allow traditional door-to-door delivery in commercial areas, existing residential areas, and in fill-in developments. In new residential developments (defined therein as "extensions"), they allow either cluster boxes or curbside boxes; however, the town's policies encourage traditional door-to-door delivery for fill-in developments and cluster boxes for extensions, while curbside boxes are uniformly discouraged. 
(6)  Shrubbery and landscaping. With approval of the zoning administrator or other authorized official of the town, shrubbery, ornamental plants, or other organic landscaping material may be authorized in the rights-of-way adjacent to parking lots, places of business, residences, and the like. Open fields and unoccupied lots with haphazard growths of plants and trees are not to be considered as containing landscaping materials. 
(7)  Debris and leaves on banquettes and sidewalks and in ditches. Any trash, leaves, refuse, debris, litter, weeds or growths, construction debris or any other discarded substances which may interfere with proper drainage or serve as a breeding place for vermin or insects or which otherwise constitute a public nuisance are considered a right-of-way obstruction subject to the requirements of this section. 
(8)  Removal of obstructions. 
a.  Structures larger than temporary yard signs and posters which illegally occupy public rights-of-way or public property, may be removed by the town according to provisions in section 12-4. 
b.  Temporary signs, notices, or posters, which are defined by law as litter, may be removed without notice, pursuant to litter regulations in section 20-6. 
c.  Abandoned vehicles may be removed from rights-of-way or from public property according to provisions in section 12-4. 
d.  Any trash, leaves, refuse, debris, litter, weeds or growths, construction debris or any other discarded substances which have accumulated in ditches or drainage facilities, having been deposited there by abutting property owners or having washed into the rights-of-way from known locations on abutting private property may be removed by the town according to provisions in section 12-4. 
(Code 1981, § 12-32; Ord. No. 534, § 1(12-32), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 20-3. - Commerce in public places. 
All commercial activities must be conducted according to chapter 140. Furthermore: 
(1)  Open exhibition of goods and merchandise. 
a.  The placing of merchandise, goods, furniture, boxes, or other objects in public rights-of-way or on public property to conduct business is prohibited. 
b.  The retail sales of merchandise shall not be conducted in the open or in store parking lots; however, the occasional display of goods for sale may occur in commercial yard space or off-street parking areas subject to the limitations of section 140-107, provided that the display occupies available space in excess of required parking spaces as specified in section 140-107. 
c.  The conduct of garage sales or yard sales shall be regulated by section 140-57(h). 
(2)  Farmers and peddlers. 
a.  Peddlers, as defined herein, are required to meet the requirements as set forth in chapter 24. 
b.  All peddlers must obtain a certificate of occupancy for any fixed location at which they intend to conduct business. 
c.  Farmers selling their own raised produce are not exempt from the normal occupational license or zoning requirements of the town; however, if said farmers, selling their own raised produce, conduct such business in locations authorized by the town, the occupational license fee may be waived. 
(Code 1981, § 12-33; Ord. No. 534, § 1(12-33), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 20-4. - Illegally parked or abandoned vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, or entity to park, station, or abandon any automobile or other vehicle in thoroughfares, traffic lanes, or access lanes such as driveways, or in loading, reserved or otherwise restricted zones, "no parking" areas, or public carrier stands as established by authority of chapter 18 or on the private property owned by another person, corporation, or entity unless authorized by the owner or person in control of said property. 
(1)  Seizure and recovery of illegally parked vehicles. 
a.  The town may take into custody any vehicle found to be illegally parked according to section 18-10 or abandoned on public or private property as defined in section 12-2. 
b.  The owner of said vehicle may regain possession by paying all costs incurred by the town for removing the vehicle to the place of holding and all other costs incurred during the period of holding not to exceed $30.00. 
c.  All funds received from seizures under the authority of this section shall be deposited into the general fund of the town. 
(2)  Abandoned vehicles. 
a.  Whenever any motor vehicle has been determined to be abandoned in rights-of-way or on public property or on the private property of another person without authorization, notice shall be sent by registered letter, return receipt requested, to the owner of said vehicle at his last-known address informing him to remove said vehicle within ten working days from the date of receipt of notice. 
b.  The town shall notify the owner of said vehicle that, in lieu of removal, said owner may remit a disposal fee, together with a completed certificate of authority authorizing the town to remove and dispose of the vehicle. Said certificate of authority shall be on a form prescribed and furnished by the town and shall be forwarded to the owner along with a self-addressed return envelope. The disposal fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and board of aldermen from time to time. 
c.  If the abandoned motor vehicle is not removed by the owner within ten working days after receipt of the notice and the town has not received the disposal fee, the town shall: 
1.  Remove the abandoned vehicle forthwith to a place of holding, notifying the owner (by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested) within ten days of its seizure and impending disposal; and 
2.  Assess the owner a penalty to be remitted within 30 days, notifying said owner that failure to pay the penalty will result in notification to the state department of motor vehicles which will revoke the owner's driver's license and/or the owner's motor vehicle registration. The penalty shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and board of aldermen from time to time. 
(3)  Disposal of unclaimed vehicles. 
a.  Vehicles which remain in the possession of the town after three months shall be considered public property and may be disposed of as follows: 
1.  The town shall send a registered or certified letter, return receipt requested, to the owner with notice of its intent to sell said vehicle to the highest bidder and the scheduled date of the intended sale unless said owner reclaims the vehicle paying all costs for seizure and storage. 
2.  A copy of the notice shall also be sent to any person or firm known to be the holder of a mortgage on the vehicle. 
b.  Before the sale of any such vehicles, the town shall: 
1.  Have them appraised by a competent appraiser; 
2.  Publish a notice in the official journal of the town in not less than three consecutive weekly issues listing all vehicles to be sold either individually or in globo at the town's discretion; and the date, time, and location of the proposed sale. 
c.  All funds received from the sale shall be temporarily placed in a separate account. If, within one year following the date of the sale, the owner or lien holder of any of said vehicle shall present sufficient proof to the town of his ownership or lien, the said owner or lien holder shall be entitled to the amount received for his individual vehicle, less his pro rata share of the costs and expenses of the sale, as well as all charges and costs due and owing from removal and storage of the vehicle. Any funds not claimed after one year following the sale shall be deposited into the general fund of the town. 
CHART OF PROCEDURES FOR ABANDONED VEHICLE CASES
 
(Code 1981, § 12-34; Ord. No. 534, § 1(12-34), att., 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 20-5. - Junk and discarded materials including wrecked vehicles. 
Except as provided in this section: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, or entity to deposit, store, or abandon any junk, wrecked or used automobiles or motor vehicles, as defined in section 12-2, or any part or parts thereof on any vacant lot, or any unused portion of any occupied lot, neutral ground, street or sidewalk in the town. 
a.  The town may remove any junk, wrecked or used automobiles or motor vehicles, in violation of this section after no less than ten days' notice is given to the owner or other responsible party or is placed on the vehicle itself. 
b.  The town may recover the costs of removal according to section 12-4. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, or entity to deposit, store, or abandon any junk, discarded or abandoned major appliances, such as refrigerators, freezers, ranges or machinery or other metal, tin, or other discarded items or any part or parts thereof on any vacant lot, or any unused portion of any occupied lot, neutral ground, street or sidewalk in the town. 
a.  The town may remove any junk or discarded items after no less than ten days' notice is given to the owner of the property as recorded on the last property tax rolls. 
b.  The cost of removing said material, up to a maximum of $200.00, shall constitute a special lien collectible in the same manner as special assessments are collectible by law. 
(3)  As an alternative to removal and recovery actions or an order to do so by the town, the offending material in violation of this section may be enclosed within a board fence or other structure so as to render it completely obscured from public view. 
a.  This provision applies to otherwise lawfully conducted auto repair, auto salvage, or storage businesses, appliance repair businesses, or any other business which may accumulate materials or parts which may protuberate beyond the buildings or structures within which the business is generally conducted. 
b.  The maximum height of such enclosing fence or structure shall be 15 feet. 
(4)  Material in violation of this section, whether or not enclosed within a fence or structure, shall not be allowed to become a breeding place or habitat for rodents, snakes, insects, or any other vermin which may become a hazard to the health and safety of citizens. 
CHART OF PROCEDURES FOR SOLVING NUISANCE CASES
 
(Code 1981, § 12-35; Ord. No. 534, § 1(12-35), att., 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 20-6. - Litter. 
(a)  Litter in public places. No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within the town except in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles intended for collection. 
(1)  Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
(2)  No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the town the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. 
(3)  No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the town the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business within the town shall keep the sidewalks in front of their businesses and their premises free of litter. 
(4)  No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the town except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(5)  No person shall throw or deposit litter in any stream, lake, fountain, pond, or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the town. 
(b)  Litter on private property. 
(1)  No person shall throw or deposit litter on any private property within the town, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property. 
(2)  The owner or person in control of any private property shall comply with the litter container requirements in section 140-205 concerning the number, placement, and marking of litter receptacles in his parking lots. 
(3)  The owner or person in control of any private property shall, at all times, maintain the premises free of litter provided; however, that this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection. 
(c)  Litter deposited from vehicles. 
(1)  No person, while a driver or passenger in a motor vehicle, shall throw, deposit, drop or dump litter upon any street or public place within the town or upon private property. 
(2)  If the throwing, dumping, or depositing of litter was done from a motor vehicle, except a bus or large passenger vehicle or school bus, all as defined by R.S. 32:1, it shall be prima facie evidence that the throwing, dumping, or depositing was done by the driver of the motor vehicle. No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the town unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public place. 
(d)  Hazardous liquid leakage. 
(1)  No person shall operate, stop, station, or stand any vehicle while the carburetor, tank, or other appliance for containing oil or gasoline is in such condition as to permit oil or gasoline to run, leak, drip or fall upon any street or alley or upon the property of another without authorization. 
(2)  No person shall deposit on public rights-of-way or on private property any hazardous liquids such as gasoline, oil, diesel fuel, solvents, or other dangerous chemicals or allow them to leak out of proper storage containers where they may be a hazard to the public. 
(Code 1981, § 12-36; Ord. No. 209, § 1, 11-14-1944; Ord. No. 481, § 1, 5-10-1988; Ord. No. 534, § 1(12-36), 4-13-1999)  
Secs. 20-7—20-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ABANDONED AUTOMOBILES, APPLIANCES, ETC. 
 
Sec. 20-31. - Removal generally. 
(a)  In the case of abandoned property other than junk, wrecked or unused automobiles or motor vehicles, the town may remove and dispose of said abandoned property after providing notice of not less than ten days which notice shall be given to the owner of the lot or parcel of ground upon which the abandoned property prohibited by this chapter is located. 
(b)  The town may remove and dispose of any junk, wrecked or unused automobiles or motor vehicles, as defined in section 12-2, after first providing notice of its intention to do so. That notice, which shall either be tendered to the registered owner of the junk, wrecked or unused automobile or motor vehicle in person or by certified mail, or else posted prominently on the junk, wrecked or unused automobile or motor vehicle, shall advise that said junk, wrecked or unused automobile or motor vehicle shall be impounded and thereafter removed and disposed of in accordance with this chapter after the expiration of ten days from the posting of notice unless a hearing on the removal is requested in the manner set forth herein. 
(c)  The notice provided in accordance with this section shall give the make, model, VIN and, if known, license number of the junk, wrecked or unused automobile or motor vehicle. The notice referred to in this article may be given by the mayor, the public works director or his duly designated representative. 
(d)  Any interested person can, within ten days of the posting, delivery or mailing of the notice as required herein, request a hearing on the removal of said junk, wrecked or unused automobile or motor vehicle. Such a request must be made in writing within ten days of the posting, delivery or mailing of the notice. The request must be filed with the town clerk and must give the address and telephone number at which the individual requesting the hearing may be contacted in order to provide notice of the date and time of the hearing. The hearing shall be before the board of aldermen. 
(e)  If, after the conclusion of the hearing referred to in subsection (d) of this section, which shall be held within 40 days of the notice of intent to remove is posted, delivered or mailed, the board of aldermen finds that removal would not be appropriate, further efforts by the town to remove the junk, wrecked or unused automobile or motor vehicle shall cease. If, after the conclusion of the hearing, the board of aldermen finds that the removal would be appropriate, it shall order the junk, wrecked or unused automobile or motor vehicle to be removed within five days. Failure to remove the junk, wrecked or unused automobile or motor vehicle within five days shall authorize the town to take possession of the junk, wrecked or unused automobile or motor vehicle and dispose of it as provided in this chapter. 
(f)  If, within ten days of the posting of notice on the junk, wrecked or unused automobile or motor vehicle, or the delivery or mailing of that notice to the registered owner, the junk, wrecked or unused automobile or motor vehicle is not removed or a hearing has not been requested, the town shall have the authority to take possession of the junk, wrecked or unused automobile or motor vehicle and dispose of it as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 16-22; Ord. No. 383, § 3, 2-13-1973; Ord. No. 572, § I, 10-14-2008)  
Secs. 20-32—20-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PROPERTY OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITY FOR PUBLIC SAFETY NUISANCES 
 
Sec. 20-51. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Class A violation means a violation which is more serious in nature and poses a greater threat to the community and to the law enforcement officers who serve the town than a Class B violation. A conviction for the following offenses within the municipal limits of the town shall constitute a Class A violation: 
(1)  Adult abuse/neglect—R.S. 14:403.2 
(2)  Assault by drive-by shooting—R.S. 14:37.1 
(3)  Assault, aggravated—R.S. 14:37 
(4)  Battery of a police officer—R.S. 14:34.2 
(5)  Battery aggravated—R.S. 14:34, 14:34.2 to 14:34.7 
(6)  Battery, second degree—R.S. 14:34.1 
(7)  Burglary, residence—R.S. 14:62.2 
(8)  Contributing to delinquency of juvenile—R.S. 14:92 
(9)  Criminal warrant conviction, felony—C. Cr.P. Art. 204 
(10)  Discharging of firearm—section 22-8 
(11)  Disorderly conduct (fighting/language)—R.S. 14:103 
(12)  Disturbing the peace, fistic encounter—R.S. 14:103 
(13)  Drawing and displaying (weapons)—R.S. 14:94 
(14)  Drug/narcotic equipment violation (labs)—R.S. 14:94 
(15)  Drug/narcotic violation—R.S. 40:963—40:1033.1 
(16)  Drug, possession of marijuana, simple—R.S. 40:966d 
(17)  Inciting a riot—R.S. 14:329.2 
(18)  Possession of explosives—14:54.3 
(19)  Prostitution, letting premises for—R.S. 14:85 
(20)  Prostitution, pandering—R.S. 14:84 
(21)  Prostitution, soliciting for—R.S. 14:83 
(22)  Resisting conviction—R.S. 14:10.8 
(23)  Robbery, armed—R.S. 14:64 
(24)  Robbery, simple—R.S. 14:65 
(25)  Sex offenses—R.S. 14:42—14:43.5 
(26)  Stalking—R.S. 14:40.2 
(27)  Theft of motor vehicle—R.S. 14:68 
(28)  Theft from motor vehicle—R.S. 14:67.2 
(29)  Theft, purse snatching—R.S. 14:65.1 
(30)  Unauthorized entry of dwelling—R.S. 14:62.3 
(31)  Violation of protective order—R.S. 14:79 
(32)  Weapons law violation—R.S. 14:94, 14:95, 14:95.7 
The descriptions of offenses above are for simplicity of understanding only, and the citations to the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Jonesboro, The Louisiana Code of Criminal Procedure, and the Revised Statutes of the state shall define the actual offenses which are the subject of this provision. 
Class B violation means a violation which, while criminal, is less serious than a Class A violation. A conviction for the following offenses within the municipal limits of the town shall constitute a Class B violation: 
(1)  Assault, simple—R.S. 14:38 
(2)  Battery, simple—R.S. 14:35 
(3)  Criminal mischief—R.S. 14:59 
(4)  Criminal warrant conviction (misdemeanor) 
(5)  Cruelty to animals—R.S. 14:103 
(6)  Disturbance of the peace—R.S. 14:103 
(7)  Drinking in public—Sec. 22-10 
(8)  Filing a false report—R.S. 14:133 
(9)  Indecent behavior—R.S. 14:81 
(10)  Interfering with a police officer—R.S. 14:108 
(11)  Liquor law violations—R.S. 14:93 
(12)  Littering—C. Cr.P. art. 211.3 
(13)  Obscenity/exposing person—R.S. 14:106 
(14)  Obstruction of justice—R.S. 14:130.1 
(15)  Peeping tom—R.S. 14:284 
(16)  Remaining after being forbidden—R.S. 14:63 
(17)  Simple obstruction of highway—R.S. 14:100.1 
(18)  Theft of utility services—R.S. 14:67.6 
(19)  Theft, all other—R.S. 14:67 
(20)  Theft, bicycles—R.S. 14:67 
(21)  Trespassing—R.S. 14:63 
(22)  Vandalism—R.S. 14:59 
The descriptions of offenses above are for simplicity of understanding only, and the citations to the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Jonesboro, the Louisiana Code of Criminal Procedure, and the Revised Statutes of the state shall define the actual offenses which are the subject of this provision. 
Multi-family dwelling shall include boarding houses, duplex apartments, single residences divided into multiple apartments, apartment complexes and all other dwellings which house more than one family. For the purpose of this article, each apartment in any multi-family dwelling shall be considered as a separate residence. Any hotel or motel which routinely rents to the same tenant for 14 consecutive days or more will be considered for the purposes of this article to be a multi-family dwelling. 
Nuisance residence means the residence (including a multi-family dwelling defined in this section) at which a Class A violation or a Class B violation occurs, or the residence of one who has committed a Class A violation or a Class B violation. Nonprofit residential treatment programs, nursing homes, group homes for specialized rehabilitation programs, schools, any hotel or motel which is not defined in this section as a multi-family dwelling and retail businesses shall not be considered as residences for purposes of this article, and shall be exempt from the provisions of this article. The term "nuisance residence" shall encompass the full extent of the lot or other parcel or tract of immovable property upon which a nuisance residence is located. 
Owner. The owner of a nuisance residence, as defined herein, as reflected by the records of the office of the clerk of court of the parish. 
Violator. 
(1)  A natural person who is an occupant, whether adult or juvenile, of a nuisance residence and who is convicted for a Class A violation or a Class B violation on or within 300 feet of the nuisance residence. 
(2)  A natural person, whether adult or juvenile, who is the invitee or permittee of an occupant of a nuisance residence and who is convicted for a Class A violation or a Class B violation on or within 20 feet of the nuisance residence. 
(Ord. No. 544, § I(16-40), 4-9-2002)  
Sec. 20-52. - Imposition of service charge. 
(a)  A service charge, in the amount provided by section 20-53, will be imposed upon an owner for excessive calls for police service, measured by the occurrence of Class A violations and Class B violations by a violator who resides at the nuisance residence or who is an invitee or a permitee at the nuisance residence. 
(b)  Upon the occurrence of one Class A violation or two Class B violations, whichever shall first occur, an owner shall be given notice of the occurrence of the offenses at the address of the owner then reflected on the tax rolls of the town. The mailing of notice by U.S. mail to that address shall be deemed sufficient notice for all purposes of this article. Once notice has been given to an owner, no further notice shall be required for a period of 12 months in order that the provisions of this article apply to any nuisance property. 
(Ord. No. 544, § I(16-41), 4-9-2002)  
Sec. 20-53. - Amount of service charge. 
(a)  The amount of the service charges to be imposed upon an owner are determined as follows: 
(1)  No service charge shall be charged until after the occurrence of the first of the following: 
a.  Two Class A violations occurring within a six-month period of time by a violator who is a resident of or is an invitee or permittee at a nuisance residence; 
b.  Three Class B violations occurring within a six-month period of time by a violator who is a resident of or is an invitee or permittee at a nuisance residence; 
c.  One Class A violation and one Class B violation occurring within a six-month period of time, by a violator who is a resident of or is an invitee or permittee at a nuisance residence, regardless of the order of the violations; 
(2)  Following the occurrence of any one of the events described in subsection (a)(1)a—c of this section, the next Class A violation which occurs during the time period shall incur a $200.00 service charge, and all subsequent Class A violations during the time period shall incur a $300.00 service charge; 
(3)  Following the occurrence of any one of the events described in subsection (a)(1)a—c of this section, all subsequent Class B violations occurring during the time period shall each incur a $100.00 service charge, except that any Class B violations occurring after a Class A violation has occurred during the time period shall be charged at the service rates of a Class A violation. 
(b)  A service charge is calculated based upon the occurrences of Class A violations and Class B violations at a particular nuisance residence, regardless of any change or variance in the identity or number of the occupants of the nuisance residence, or the identity of the violator. 
(c)  Service charges imposed by this article shall be paid within 30 days of the mailing of an invoice itemizing the charges owed. Service charges which are not paid within 30 days of the mailing of the invoice shall additionally incur an administrative cost of collection plus any costs incurred, and shall be recoverable from the owner. The administrative cost of collection shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and board of aldermen from time to time. Service charges remaining unpaid 45 days from the mailing of the invoice may, together with the administrative costs, be added to the water/sewage bill of the nuisance property, at the option of the town, or the town may institute civil collection proceedings as provided by law. The time delays provided above shall be interrupted during the pendency of any appeal pursuant to the provisions of section 20-54. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this article, should a single incident give rise to more than one violation, only one of the violations shall be used for the purposes of this section and section 20-54. If a single incident gives rise to both Class A violations and Class B violations, the Class A violation shall be utilized for the purpose of this article. Any other selection of the applicable violation to be used shall be made in a manner which is most likely to cause imposition of a service charge. 
(e)  There shall be no service charge (or any previously assessed service charge shall be abated) in the event the occupant has been evicted within 30 days after mailing of notice of the service charges, or the owner has initiated eviction proceedings within 30 days after mailing of his notice of the service charge, and those proceedings are promptly and aggressively pursued through to completion. 
(f)  There shall be no service charge (or any previously assessed service charge shall be abated) in the event the owner shows the violator had not been convicted for any offense listed as an offense constituting a Class A violation or a Class B violation within three years prior to occupancy of the nuisance premises by the violator. 
(Ord. No. 544, § I(16-42), 4-9-2002)  
Sec. 20-54. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  Appeals/hearings. 
(1)  An owner who has received notice of service charges owed to the town under this article has the right to appeal the imposition of the service charges based on the grounds that an error has been made in the calculations of violations attributable to a nuisance residence. 
(2)  An owner may also appeal the imposition of service charges based upon the following grounds: 
a.  The occupant incurring the violation has been evicted from the nuisance residence within 30 days after mailing of a notice of service charges, or an eviction proceeding has been initiated within 30 days after mailing of a notice of service charges, and that proceeding is promptly and aggressively pursued through to completion; 
b.  An initial violation, and all subsequent violations within 30 days thereafter, should not be included in the computation because the violator had not been convicted for any offense listed as an offense constituting a Class A violation or a Class B violation within three years prior to occupancy of the nuisance premises by the violator. 
(3)  Any appeal or objection shall be filed in writing, on a form to be readily available, within 30 days of mailing of notice of the imposition of service charges, stating with particularity the grounds for appeal or objection. 
(4)  All appeals or objections will be filed with the office of the chief of police of the town. 
(5)  If, after review by the chief of police, the owner wishes further review, the owner shall be entitled to a further appeal to an administrative panel composed of a representative from the police department (which may, but need not be, the chief of police), a representative from the office of the town attorney, and a representative selected by the mayor (which may, but need not be, the mayor). A request for such further appeal shall be filed in writing, on a form to be readily available, within 15 days of mailing of notice of the review decision by the chief of police, again stating with particularity the grounds for appeal or objection. 
(b)  Refunds. An owner may file for a refund of service charges, on a form to be readily available, within 60 days after a Class A violation or a Class B violation has been dismissed, prescribed, or resulted in a verdict of not guilty, requesting that service charges paid by or imposed upon the owner be recalculated without consideration of those Class A violations or Class B violations. 
(c)  Measurements of distance. All distances referred to in this article shall be calculated in a straight line from the nearest point of the property line of the nuisance property to the point of the occurrence of an offense. Any reasonable method of computation of distance shall be allowable. 
(Ord. No. 544, § I(16-43), 4-9-2002)  
Sec. 20-55. - Noxious weeds and growths. 
(a)  General provisions. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person, corporation, or agency to allow the growth or accumulation of noxious weeds or grass or other deleterious, unhealthful, or noxious growths on any lot, place, area, or on any unused portion of any lot or area, or on any banquette or sidewalk abutting such lot or area within the town. 
(2)  The charges, costs, and expenses incurred by the town in enforcing the requirements of this section shall, to the extent of the actual costs thereof, be a charge, cost, or expense of the property abutting the sidewalk or banquette or of the lot, place, or area, and the owner thereof, as shown on the last assessment roll of the town. 
(b)  Notice to property owner. 
(1)  Before the cutting, destruction, and/or removal of noxious weeds or grass, or other deleterious, unhealthful, or noxious growths is undertaken, the owner of the lot, place, or area, or the owner of the abutting property where the weeds or growths are to be removed, as shown on the last assessment rolls of the town, shall be notified and given at least ten days to do the work himself. 
(2)  Said notice may be given to the owner by registered mail, addressed in accordance with the tax rolls of the town or by advertisement in the official journal of the town for two consecutive issues. 
(c)  Multiple cuttings. 
(1)  If the property owner liable has been notified pursuant to this section at any time during the immediately preceding six months and has failed to do the work himself after opportunity to do so, the town may undertake the cutting, destruction, or removal of noxious weeds or grass, or other deleterious, unhealthful, or noxious growths, without notice, on a monthly basis. 
(2)  Prior to undertaking a series of cuttings pursuant to this subsection, the town shall file and record an affidavit, signed by the mayor at his administrative offices which includes the following: 
a.  A description of the property sufficient to reasonably identify it; 
b.  A photograph of the property sufficient to reasonably identify its unsafe or unsanitary condition and to justify the necessity for cutting, destroying, or removing weeds, grass, or other noxious growths; and 
c.  A statement that the property owner liable has, within the last six months, failed to do such work after notification and opportunity to do so pursuant to subsection (b) of this section. 
(Code 1981, § 12-37; Ord. No. 534, § 1(12-37), 4-13-1999) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to require property be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition including the cutting, destruction, or removal of noxious weeds or grass or other deleterious, unhealthful, or noxious growths, R.S. 33:5062.  
Sec. 20-56. - Removal of dangerous structures and buildings. 
If, in the opinion of the board of aldermen, a building or structure is in a dilapidated and dangerous condition which endangers the public health, safety, or welfare, it may be condemned, and the town may cause it to be demolished or removed. 
(1)  Condemnation notice and hearing. Before the board of aldermen can condemn a building or structure and cause it to be demolished and removed, the following actions must be taken: 
a.  There must be submitted to the mayor a written report recommending the demolition or removal, signed by the building inspector or other official of the town authorized to make such recommendations. Said determination should be made according to guidelines under the state uniform construction codes. 
b.  The mayor shall serve notice on the owner of the building or structure requiring him to show cause at a meeting of the board of aldermen, regular or special, why the building or structure should not be condemned. The date and hour of the meeting shall be stated in the notice, which shall be served at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. 
c.  If the owner is absent the state or unrepresented therein, is a minor who has no tutor, or is an interdict who has no curator, then the notice shall be served upon the occupant of the building or structure, if any, and upon an attorney-at-law appointed by the mayor to represent the absentee owner. Domiciliary service may be made as in ordinary cases. 
d.  In case of grave public emergency where the building or structure is such as to cause immediate loss or damage to persons or property, the board of aldermen may condemn the building or structure after 24 hours' notice served upon the owner or his agent or the occupant, if any, and any attorney-at-law appointed to represent an absentee owner. 
(2)  Filing of notices. Notices served pursuant to the requirements of this section shall be filed with the recorder of mortgages where the property is located. Once filed, said notice shall be deemed notice to all subsequent transferees. Any transferee of such property takes the property subject to all recorded liens, mortgages, and notices there unto pertaining. 
(3)  Time limits for owner removal or repair and performance guarantees. 
a.  The board of aldermen may specify a period of time within which the owner or his agent must complete the demolition and removal. Owner demolition or removal of the building or structure may be guaranteed, by order of the board of aldermen, with a written contract and performance bond. 
b.  If repairs will correct the dilapidated, dangerous, or unsafe condition of the building or structure, the board of aldermen may grant the owner the option of making such repairs. In such case: 
1.  The general nature or extent of the repairs to be made, the amount of time allowed for the repairs, and the defects to be corrected shall be specified in the decision of the board; 
2.  The owner or his agent must execute a written contract with the town obligating himself to have the work done within the required time period, and said contract is on file with the town; and 
3.  The owner has posted a bond sufficient to guarantee performance of the contract. 
(4)  Abatement actions and recovery of costs. 
a.  In cases where the owner fails to comply with the condemnation orders of the board and fails to appeal from the decision of the board within the required time to the district court, then the town may undertake to secure, demolish and/or remove the building or structure, after notice of the time and date the work will begin is given to the owner, his agent, the occupant of the structure, if any, or the attorney-at-law appointed to represent an absentee, minor, or interdict owner. 
b.  The town may recover the costs it incurred for maintenance of the immovable property and the buildings and structures on it, for securing, demolishing and/or removing any condemned structures or buildings, for all attorney's fees related to the identification, location, and notification of the owner or other responsible party, and for collection of costs. 
1.  The term "maintenance" shall include, but not be limited to, grass cutting, weed abatement, and trash and garbage removal. 
2.  The term "secure" means the closing of the building or structure by the placing or attaching of boards or other materials over openings such as cracks, doors, windows, and other means of entrance in order to prohibit persons from entering the building or structure and in order to protect it from further deterioration. 
c.  In order to recover these losses, the town must notify the owner, his agent, or the attorney representing an absentee owner of the amounts owed and the time limit allowed for payment according to the last-known address listed on the tax rolls of the parish. 
d.  If the owner fails to reimburse the town for costs incurred, the town shall have a privilege and lien upon the property and improvements to be collected as any ordinary property tax lien and subject to the same civil penalties for delinquencies. 
1.  The town may recover interest on amounts secured by the lien not to exceed the rate of legal interest provided in C.C. art. 2924, computed from the date of recordation of the lien until paid. Said lien shall prime all other liens and privileges against the property. 
2.  If property subject to a lien under this section is owned in indivision with the owners listed separately by the tax assessor, then the town shall notify each owner in indivision of his liability under this section. Each proportionate liability shall be collected and/or released separately by the town. 
(Code 1981, § 12-38; Ord. No. 534, § 1(12-38), 4-13-1999) 
State Law reference— Authority of municipalities to impose liens for removal and securing of dangerous structures, R.S. 33:1236.28; municipal authority regarding maintenance of property to condemn dangerous structures, order their demolition, and establish a lien against the property, R.S. 33:4761 et seq.  
Chapter 22 - OFFENSES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Louisiana Criminal Code, R.S. 14:1 et seq.; local governments preempted from enacting ordinances defining offense conduct that is defined and punishable as a felony under state law, R.S. 14:143; Crime Victims Reparation Act, R.S. 46:1801 et seq. 
 
Sec. 22-1. - Adoption of state criminal code. 
(a)  All penal or criminal laws of the state, other than those the violation of which is a felony or a misdemeanor not triable in a mayor's court, are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if fully set out, provided the penalty for commission of such offenses hereunder shall be limited to that as imposed under the general penalty provisions of this Code. It is unlawful to violate any of such laws, and, upon conviction, violators shall be punished according to the general penalty provisions of this Code. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the statutes incorporated herein by reference are intended to be made part of this Code. 
(b)  When referring to a penal or criminal law under this chapter, or issuing a citation or prosecuting an offense on behalf of the town under this chapter, the section number of that offense shall be cited in the following two-part numbering scheme: the first part of the section number will be the number of this chapter ("xx") and the second part of the section number will be the section number of the penal or criminal law as listed under state law (i.e., R.S. 43:2 under state law will be the town offenses chapter § xx:2).  
Sec. 22-2. - Escape. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an escape. The crime of escape is the intentional departure of a person from lawful custody of an officer or from any place where he is lawfully detained by any officer. 
(Code 1981, § 17-2) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:110.  
Sec. 22-3. - False report of crime. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally make or to file with the police authorities any false, misleading or unfounded statement or report concerning the commission or alleged commission of any crime. 
(Code 1981, § 17-3)  
Sec. 22-4. - False alarms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally make, turn in, or report a false alarm of fire or of need for police or ambulance assistance. 
(Code 1981, § 17-4)  
Sec. 22-5. - Abandoning or discarding ice boxes or other airtight containers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded ice box, refrigerator, or any other container of any kind which has an airtight door or which may not be released for opening from the inside of said ice box, refrigerator or container. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded ice box, refrigerator, or any other container of any kind which is airtight and has a snap lock or other device thereon without first removing said snap lock, or door, from said ice box, refrigerators or containers. 
(Code 1981, § 17-5) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:324.  
Sec. 22-6. - Fortune-telling prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to practice or engage in fortune-telling, palmistry, reading futures and the like. 
(Code 1981, § 17-6)  
Sec. 22-7. - Air guns. 
The use, firing, shooting and explosion of air guns or air rifles and blow guns within the town is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful for any person to use, fire, shoot, or explode air guns or air rifles or blow guns within the town. 
(Code 1981, § 17-7)  
Sec. 22-8. - Discharging firearms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge, either in the daytime or nighttime, any firearm within the town, except law enforcement officers in the discharge of their duties, and except other persons acting in the necessary defense of life or property. 
(Code 1981, § 17-8; Ord. No. 4, § 1, 4-5-2004)  
Sec. 22-9. - Contaminating water supplies. 
(a)  Contaminating water supplies is the intentional performance of any act tending to contaminate any private or public water supply. 
(b)  Whoever commits the crime of contaminating water supplies shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1981, § 17-9) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, R.S. 14:58.  
Sec. 22-10. - Drinking in public place. 
(a)  Drinking in public is the consumption of alcoholic beverages of high or low alcoholic content on or in any public street, sidewalk, parking lot, park, building, including any school building, school grounds, football stadium, gymnasium or any place of amusement holding a retail occupational license from the town including skating rinks, bowling alleys, theaters, pool halls, dance halls and amusement centers. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink in public as defined in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Whoever commits the crime of drinking in public shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1981, § 17-83; Ord. No. 476, § 2, 7-14-1987)  
Sec. 22-11. - Possession or consumption in motor vehicles or on the public streets, parks or highways prohibited. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverages means beverages of high and low alcoholic content, as defined in section 4-2. 
Open container means any container or receptacle wherein the seal or stamp has been broken or any container, bottle or can that has been open subsequent to the filling of such container by the manufacturer, brewery or distillery of such alcoholic beverages. Alcoholic beverages contained in drinking glasses, cups, including plastic glasses and styrofoam cups, regardless of whether such container has a top affixed thereto, shall be deemed an open container. 
Private motor vehicles means any motorized vehicle which is not operating as a licensed passenger or contract carrier, including motorized two-wheel, three-wheel and four-wheel vehicles. 
Public streets, parks and highways means any public street, park or highway or public parking lots including privately-owned parking lots within the town wherein parking is allowed without charge, public school parking lots, town parks and public playgrounds. 
(b)  Possession, consumption in motor vehicles declared unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person to drink, consume or possess alcoholic beverages in an open container in any motor vehicle when such vehicle is upon the public streets, parks or highways, as defined in subsection (a) of this section, within the town limits or on or in the public streets, parks or highways as defined in subsection (a) of this section, within the town limits. This provision shall not apply to paid fare passengers on common or contract carriers. 
(c)  Owner or driver permitting or keeping alcoholic beverages in open containers in motor vehicles declared unlawful. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any private motor vehicle or the driver, if the owner is not then present in the motor vehicle, to knowingly keep or allow to be kept in a private motor vehicle when such is upon the public highways, parks and the streets of the town as defined in subsection (a) of this section, any alcoholic beverage in an open container. This provision shall not apply to alcoholic beverages possessed in the trunk of the motor vehicle and shall not apply to alcoholic beverages possessed in vehicles that are not equipped with a trunk such as station wagons, campers, recreational vehicles and blazers, provided that the alcoholic beverage is in some other area of the vehicle not normally occupied by the driver or passenger. A utility compartment or glove compartment shall be deemed to be within the area occupied by the driver and the passenger. 
(d)  Penalty for violation. Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1981, § 17-84; Ord. No. 510, § 1, 12-14-1993)  
Chapter 24 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Transient merchants, R.S. 37:1901 et seq.; peddlers, hawkers, and itinerant vendors required to obtain a license, R.S. 47:359. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 24-1. - Definition. 
The term "peddler," as used in this chapter, means any individual, whether a resident of this town or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automobile, motortruck or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, for the sale of, as well as the selling, offering for sale or taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or not or whether he is collecting advance payments on such sales or not; provided that such definition shall include any person who, for himself, or for another person, hires, leases, uses, or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, hotel room, lodginghouse, apartment, shop or any other place within this town for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery. The term "peddler" shall include the terms "canvasser," "solicitor," "transient or itinerant merchant or vendor" and "transient or itinerant photographer." 
(Code 1981, § 18-1)  
Sec. 24-2. - Exceptions to chapter. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Sales made to dealers or permanent merchants by commercial travelers selling in the usual course of business; 
(2)  Sheriffs, constables, bona fide assignees, receivers or trustees in bankruptcy or other public officers selling goods, wares and merchandise according to law; 
(3)  Bona fide residents of the state selling fruits, vegetables, dressed meats, fowl or farm products which were produced on land within the state, owned or controlled by such vendor; 
(4)  Solicitations, sales or distributions made by charitable, educational or religious organizations which have their principal places of activity within this town. 
(Code 1981, § 18-2)  
Sec. 24-3. - Soliciting upon private residence. 
The going in and upon private residences in this town by peddlers not having been requested or invited to do so by the owner or owners, occupant or occupants of said private residences, for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, and/or for the purpose of disposing of and/or peddling or hawking the same, is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and punishable as such nuisance as a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 18-3; Ord. No. 287, § 1, 9-9-1952)  
Sec. 24-4. - Refusing to leave. 
Any peddler who enters upon premises owned, leased or rented by another and refuses to leave such premises after having been notified by the owner or occupant of such premises, or his agent, to leave the same and not return to such premises, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 18-4)  
Sec. 24-5. - Misrepresentation. 
It shall be unlawful for any peddler to make false or fraudulent statements concerning the quality of his goods, wares, merchandise or services for the purpose of inducing another to purchase the same. 
(Code 1981, § 18-5)  
Sec. 24-6. - Zoning limitations. 
Peddlers must obtain a certificate of occupancy from the zoning administrator for any fixed location at which they intend to conduct business. For purposes of this section, a fixed location includes any public or private property occupied by the peddler with the permission of the property owner or, in the case of public areas, the town, for a period of time in excess of one hour. 
(Ord. No. 534, § 3(18-7), 4-13-1999)  
Secs. 24-7—24-32. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO OCCUPATIONAL LICENSES 
 
Sec. 24-33. - Application. 
An applicant for a peddler's occupational license shall file with the town clerk a sworn application in writing, in duplicate, on a form to be furnished by the clerk, which shall give the following information: 
(1)  The name and a description of the applicant; 
(2)  The permanent home address and full local address of the applicant; 
(3)  A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold; 
(4)  If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship; 
(5)  The length of time for which the right to do business is desired; 
(6)  The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured or produced, where such goods or products are located at the time the application is filed and the proposed method of delivery; 
(7)  A photograph of the applicant, taken within 60 days immediately prior to the date of filing of the application, which picture shall be two inches by two inches showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner; 
(8)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor; 
(9)  Whether the applicant, upon any sale or order, shall demand, accept or receive payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery; 
(10)  The last five municipalities wherein the applicant has worked before coming to this town; and 
(11)  Such other relevant information as may be required by the investigation of the applicant. 
(Code 1981, § 18-21; Ord. No. 116, § 3, 1-13-1939)  
Sec. 24-34. - Driver's license. 
At the time of filing his application for a peddler's occupational license, the applicant shall present his driver's license, if he has one, to the town clerk. 
(Code 1981, § 18-21.1)  
Sec. 24-35. - Application fee. 
At the time of filing the application, a fee shall be paid to the town clerk to cover the cost of investigation of the facts stated therein. The application fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and board of aldermen from time to time. 
(Code 1981, § 18-22)  
Sec. 24-36. - License fee. 
All peddlers, as defined by R.S. 47:342(7), shall obtain a license and pay the license fee. The license fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and board of aldermen from time to time. 
(Code 1981, § 18-22.1; Ord. No. 471, § 3, 6-9-1987)  
Sec. 24-37. - False information. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to give any false or misleading information in connection with the application required by this article. 
(Code 1981, § 18-23)  
Sec. 24-38. - Fingerprints. 
At the time of making application for a peddler's occupational license, the applicant shall submit to fingerprinting by the police department. 
(Code 1981, § 18-24)  
Sec. 24-39. - Bond. 
(a)  Every applicant, not a resident of the town, or who is a resident of the town and represents a firm whose principal place of business is located outside the state, shall file with the town clerk a surety bond running to the town in the amount of $1,000.00, with surety acceptable to and approved by the mayor, conditioned that the applicant shall comply fully with all the applicable provisions of this Code, the ordinances of the town and state law regulating and concerning the business of peddling, and guaranteeing to any citizen of the town that all money paid as a down payment will be accounted for and applied according to the representations of the peddler, and further guaranteeing to any citizen of the town doing business with such peddler that the property purchased will be delivered according to the representations of such peddler. Action on such bond may be brought in the name of the town to the use or benefit of the aggrieved person. 
(b)  If the applicant is an agent, employee, canvasser or solicitor of a corporation authorized to do business in this state or registered under the fictitious name laws of the state, such corporation or fictitious name business may furnish one bond in the amount of $1,000.00 for any and all of its agents, employees, canvassers or solicitors. 
(Code 1981, § 18-25; Ord. No. 113, §§ 3, 4, 1-13-1939)  
Sec. 24-40. - Service of process. 
Before a peddler's occupational license shall issue, there shall also be filed with the town clerk an instrument in writing, signed by the applicant under oath, nominating and appointing the clerk his true and lawful agent, with full power and authority to acknowledge service of notice of process for and on the behalf of such applicant and service of process in any action brought upon the applicant's bond shall be deemed made when served on the clerk. 
(Code 1981, § 18-26; Ord. No. 166, § 3, 1-13-1939)  
Sec. 24-41. - Investigation. 
Upon receipt of an application for a peddler's occupational license, the original shall be referred to the chief of police, who shall cause such investigation of the applicant's business and moral character to be made as he deems necessary for the protection of the public good. The chief of police shall complete his investigation within one week of receiving the application. 
(Code 1981, § 18-27)  
Sec. 24-42. - Denial. 
If, as a result of investigation, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on the application his disapproval and his reasons for the same, and return the application to the town clerk, who shall notify the applicant that his application is disapproved and that no peddler's occupational license shall be issued. 
(Code 1981, § 18-28)  
Sec. 24-43. - Issuance. 
If, as a result of investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on the application his approval, and return the application to the town clerk, who shall, upon payment of the required fee, deliver the occupational license to the applicant. 
(Code 1981, § 18-29)  
Sec. 24-44. - Identification tag. 
A person issued a peddler's occupational license shall be issued an identification tag which shall show the name, address and photograph of the peddler, the kind of goods to be sold thereunder, and other identifying description of any vehicle used in such business. A peddler shall display such tag upon the request of any person. 
(Code 1981, § 18-30)  
Sec. 24-45. - Revocation. 
A peddler's occupational license may be revoked by the mayor and board of aldermen for the violation of any applicable provision of this Code, state law or town ordinance, rule or regulation. 
(Code 1981, § 18-31; Ord. No. 166, § 5, 1-13-1939)  
Chapter 26 - POLICE DEPARTMENT 
 
Sec. 26-1. - Established. 
There is hereby established a police department. 
(Code 1981, § 20-1)  
Sec. 26-2. - Composition and government. 
The police department shall be staffed and governed as provided by the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(Code 1981, § 20-2)  
Sec. 26-3. - Chief. 
The chief of police shall be in charge of the police department. 
(Code 1981, § 20-3)  
Sec. 26-4. - Qualifications. 
The chief of police of the town shall have the qualifications for office and be elected in the manner provided by law. 
(Code 1981, § 20-4; Ord. No. 545, § I(20-4), 4-9-2002)  
Sec. 26-5. - Salary. 
The salary of the chief of police of the town shall be dependent upon the chief of police serving in a full-time capacity. 
(Code 1981, § 20-5; Ord. No. 545, § I(20-5), 4-9-2002)  
Sec. 26-6. - Full-time capacity defined. 
For the purposes of determining the salary of the chief of police of the town, the term "full-time capacity" shall be defined as attending directly to the affairs and business of the town at least 40 hours per week. In the event the chief of police does not serve in a full-time capacity as defined in this section, his salary shall be one-half of the salary fixed in section 26-5. 
(Code 1981, § 20-6; Ord. No. 545, § I(20-6), 4-9-2002)  
Sec. 26-7. - Code enforcement officer. 
The mayor is hereby authorized to appoint one or more employees of the town to serve as a code enforcement officer. Subsequent to the appointment of an individual to that position, the mayor shall, on or before the next meeting of the board of aldermen, advise the members of the board of aldermen of the individual so appointed. The individual shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor who may, for any reason not prohibited by law, revoke the appointment of the individual as a code enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 711, § I(20-4), 11-11-2012)  
Sec. 26-8. - Powers and duties of code enforcement officer. 
(a)  The code enforcement officer is not and shall not be considered as a law enforcement officer. He shall not have the authority to arrest any individual, to carry a weapon, to enter a residence or motor vehicle without permission, to stop a citizen or a vehicle or otherwise have any powers other than those powers of a citizen who is not a law enforcement officer. 
(b)  The code enforcement officer shall have the authority to issue a citation, that being a written direction to appear in mayor's court on a date and at a time specified in the citation, ordering the individual, firm, corporation or company so cited to appear in mayor's court for a determination of whether or not a violation of a town ordinance has been committed. 
(Ord. No. 711, § I(20-5), 11-11-2012)  
Sec. 26-9. - No authority for chapter 22 violations. 
The code enforcement officer shall not have the authority to issue citations for any violations or any offense as defined in chapter 22. 
(Ord. No. 711, § I(20-6), 11-11-2012)  
Sec. 26-10. - Record of citations issued. 
The code enforcement officer shall, within two days after the issuance of a citation under the provisions of section 26-8, file a copy of the citation so issued with the clerk of the mayor's court. 
(Ord. No. 711, § I(20-7), 11-11-2012)  
Sec. 26-11. - Failure to appear. 
Should an individual, firm, corporation or company cited to appear in mayor's court by the code enforcement officer fail to appear as directed in the citation, the magistrate shall, in open court, issue a citation to that individual, firm, corporation or company to appear on a given date and time, which citation shall be delivered to the chief of police. The chief of police shall then personally serve that citation issued by the magistrate of mayor's court on the individual so cited. 
(Ord. No. 711, § I(20-8), 11-11-2012)  
Chapter 28 - SOLID WASTE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Louisiana Environmental Quality Act, R.S. 30:2001 et seq.; Louisiana Solid Waste Management and Resource Recovery Law, R.S. 30:2151 et seq.; Louisiana Litter Reduction and Public Action Commission, R.S. 30:2521 et seq.; municipal authority over collection and disposal of garbage and trash, R.S. 33:4169.1; accumulation of rubbish, R.S. 40:1605. 
 
Sec. 28-1. - Waste prohibited. 
All trash, rubbish, refuse or litter shall be placed and deposited in an authorized public or private receptacle. Waste products not so placed or deposited shall be considered a nuisance as defined and prohibited in chapter 12. 
(Code 1981, § 10-1; Ord. No. 209, § 1, 11-14-1944; Ord. No. 481, § 1, 5-10-1988; Ord. No. 534, § 4, 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 28-2. - Garbage collection. 
(a)  All garbage generated within the town shall, unless otherwise disposed of as authorized by law, shall be collected by the town in the manner set forth herein. 
(b)  All garbage collected by the town, through its contractor, shall be placed in the garbage receptacles provided by its contractor and bearing the contractor's logo or identification. All garbage placed in the receptacles, which shall remain the property of the contractor, must be placed in a plastic or paper sack tied at the top. Garbage placed in the receptacles without being first placed in a plastic or paper sack and tied at the top shall not be picked up. 
(c)  At all times the lid on the garbage receptacles shall be closed in such a manner as to shield the contents of the receptacle from water and from sight. No receptacles having water in it will be picked up. 
(d)  The garbage receptacles shall be placed, for the pickup of garbage, within four feet of the edge of the street. The garbage receptacles shall not be placed in the street or so close to the street as to inhibit the flow of traffic on the street or the flow of pedestrians on the sidewalk. 
(e)  The garbage receptacles shall not be placed at the pickup point sooner than 24 hours before the time of pickup. The garbage receptacles shall be removed from the time of pickup no later than 24 hours after the garbage is picked up. 
(f)  Any garbage receptacle assigned to a residence which is lost, stolen or damaged by someone other than the town, its employees or its contractor shall be replaced at the expense of the occupant of the residence to which the garbage receptacle was assigned, the cost of that replacement being the cost to the town of acquiring a new garbage receptacle. 
(g)  No garbage receptacle shall be routinely stored at the pickup point. Unless at the pickup point for collection all garbage receptacles shall be stored at a point no nearer to the street than the residence. 
(h)  Any person violating the terms of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor offense and shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-8. 
(Ord. No. 796, § I(10-2), 5-8-2018)  
Chapter 30 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipalities' authority over streets and sidewalks, R.S. 33:3301 et seq.; street improvements in municipalities of more than 1,000 population, R.S. 33:3381 et seq.; improvement of sidewalks and curbings, R.S. 33:3621 et seq. 
 
Sec. 30-1. - Obstruction of street. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to obstruct a highway of commerce intentionally or in a criminally negligent manner by the placing of anything or performance of any act on any railway, railroad, navigable waterway, road, street, highway or thoroughfare which will render movement thereon more difficult. 
(b)  The chief of police or other appropriate town official may grant temporary permits for such obstructions to accomplish tasks deemed by them to be in the interests of the town's citizens. 
(Code 1981, § 21-1; Ord. No. 111, § 1, 9-1-1931; Ord. No. 534, § 5, 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 30-2. - Obstruction of walk. 
It shall be unlawful to willfully obstruct the free, convenient and normal use of any public sidewalk, street, alley, road or other passageway, or the entrance, corridor or passage of any public building or structure, by impeding, hindering, stifling, retarding or restraining traffic or passage thereon or therein. 
(Code 1981, § 21-2; Ord. No. 111, § 1, 9-1-1931)  
Sec. 30-3. - Parades. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a parade without a permit issued by the chief of police. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a parade except in compliance with the conditions imposed in such permit. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in a parade for which a permit has not been granted or in violation of the conditions imposed therein. 
(d)  The decision of whether or not to grant a permit shall in no way be influenced by the identity of the person or group seeking the permit, its aims or objectives, its members or the subject of any view or views sought to be advocated or advanced. 
(Code 1981, § 21-3)  
Sec. 30-4. - Moving buildings. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to move a building upon any of the streets of the town without a permit issued by the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the conditions of such a permit. 
(Code 1981, § 21-4)  
Sec. 30-5. - Map of the town. 
The streets, avenues, roads and boulevards within the town will, for the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, be known by the names for said streets, avenues, roads and boulevards showing in the map of the Town of Jonesboro published by Color Classified, Ltd., which map was copyrighted in 1992, a copy of which is attached to and made part of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, except as those names are amended in section 30-6. 
(Ord. No. 518, § 1(21-5), 11-14-1995)  
Sec. 30-6. - Names of streets, avenues, roads and boulevards. 
Notwithstanding any provisions of section 30-5, the names of the following streets, avenues, roads and boulevards within the town set forth in this section shall have the following names, to-wit: 
(1)  South Hudson Avenue, South Polk Avenue and South Cooper Avenue will start at Jimmie Davis Boulevard; 
(2)  That portion of Allen Avenue south of the courthouse shall be known as South Allen Avenue; 
(3)  That portion of Tenth Street west of Connors Street shall be known as Hart Place; 
(4)  Pine Drive shall become an extension of Red Fox Lane; 
(5)  Pine Hill Drive shall become an extension of Jan Circle; 
(6)  That portion of Hill Street situated within the property owned by the housing authority of the town shall be known as Swanner Drive; 
(7)  That portion of Napoleon Avenue which intersects with Third Street and Cemetery Street shall be known as South Napoleon Avenue; 
(8)  That portion of Second Street between Cemetery Street and Michigan Avenue shall be known as Cemetery Street; 
(9)  The east portion of Baker Street shall be known as Houston Drive; 
(10)  That portion of Ninth Street between South Polk Avenue and Connors Street shall be known as Tait Lane; 
(11)  That portion of Walton Street between Pearrie Street and Leon Drive shall be known as Hamilton Street; 
(12)  The street known as Glenn Avenue shall be changed to Troy Avenue; 
(13)  The road that Louis Miller lives on (being the road running North of Louisiana Highway 4 between Moffet Drive and Adalee Street shall be known as Louis Miller Drive; 
(14)  Hickory Street between Old Winnfield Road and Hickory Street shall be changed to Gimber Avenue; 
(15)  South Hickory Street shall be an extension of Hickory Street; 
(16)  That portion of Walker Road between East Main and Street Old Winnfield Highway shall be referred to as Old Winnfield Highway; 
(17)  The street known as Africa Street shall be changed to Mayfield Street. 
(Ord. No. 518, § 1(21-6), 11-14-1995)  
Sec. 30-7. - Findings and purposes. 
(a)  The town recognizes that it holds its property and the rights-of-way within its geographical boundaries as an asset in trust for its citizens. The town and other public entities have invested millions of dollars in public funds to acquire, build and maintain the rights-of-way. It also recognizes that some people, by placing their equipment in the rights-of-way and charging the citizens of the town for goods and services delivered thereby, are profiting from their use of this property held by the town for public good. 
(b)  The town's rights-of-way are owned or held by the town primarily for the purpose of pedestrian and vehicular passage and for the town's provision of essential public safety services, including police, fire and emergency medical response services; and public health services, including sanitary sewer, water and storm drainage services (together, public uses). 
(c)  Public uses should, in all cases, be considered and treated as the dominant and preeminent uses of public property and rights-of-way. 
(d)  All other uses of public rights-of-way, including use for the provision of business operations, must be subordinate to public uses. 
(e)  In order to provide for the health, safety and well-being of its citizens, as well as to ensure the structural integrity of its rights-of-way and the town-owned facilities located therein, the town strives to keep its rights-of-way in a state of good repair and free from unnecessary encumbrances. 
(f)  Right-of-way obstructions and deterioration disrupt the flow of vehicular and pedestrian traffic and are a source of frustration for merchants, business owners and the general population. 
(g)  The state legislature enacted Act 433 of 2008, codified as R.S. 45:1361 through 45:1378 as the "Consumer Choice for Television Act," which provides for a state-issued certificate of franchise authority for cable and video services. In R.S. 45:1374, the legislature reserved to local government certain authority to regulate the holder of a state-issued certificate of franchise authority, including the town's lawful exercise of its police powers. 
(h)  In order for the town to properly protect the health, safety and welfare of its citizens, to enhance the public uses and manage and maintain its property, it is appropriate and necessary that the town obtain and maintain current, accurate information concerning the location, construction, installation and maintenance of structures, facilities and equipment occupying town property for business operations (system). 
(i)  Some entities conduct business operations utilizing town property and rights-of-way authorized by a fully executed, valid franchise agreement or ordinance with the town which addresses, among other matters, maintenance and use of town property and rights-of-way. The town has determined that it is in the public's best interest to honor said franchise agreements or ordinances and exempt from the application of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived the business operations specifically authorized by such agreements or ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 569, preamble, 9-9-2008)  
Sec. 30-8. - Permits. 
Be it ordained by the mayor and board of aldermen of the town, in regular session, duly convened as the governing authority of the town, that no person or entity may enter upon, traverse, either above or below, or otherwise utilize any property, servitude or other property right, owned, leased, possessed or controlled by the town (hereinafter referred to as town property) for the conduct of business operations without first being issued a permit to enter town property for business operations as more fully set forth hereafter. 
(1)  Location of any system for business operations within town property without a valid permit from the town pursuant to this chapter presents a threat to the health, safety and welfare of the town's citizens and their property and is expressly forbidden. 
(2)  The town recognizes and reserves any and all rights available to it to regulate use of any town property. 
(3)  The granting of any town license, permit or other requirement for doing business within the town shall not be construed as authorizing any such person or entity the right to utilize town property for the conduct of business operations. 
(4)  Any person or entity desiring to operate a system occupying town property (applicant) shall make a written request to the town for a permit, which shall include the following information: 
a.  Name, address, telephone number and contact person of the person or entity making the request; 
b.  Necessary corporate information, if applicable; 
c.  Name, address, e-mail address and home, office and cell telephone numbers of a person with authority to act on behalf of the applicant in case of emergency; 
d.  Description of the proposed activity; 
e.  Identification of the town property which the applicant's system will occupy. Said identification shall include the following: 
1.  A map drawn to scale of the location of all of the applicant's system presently occupying town property; 
2.  An inventory of all equipment, structures and facilities comprising the applicant's system occupying town property; and 
3.  A description of all anticipated construction, major maintenance and major installation activities which shall include the specific locations and the beginning and ending dates of all projects to be commenced during the next calendar year; and the tentative locations and beginning and ending dates for all projects contemplated for the two-year period following the next calendar year. 
f.  Proof of comprehensive general liability insurance covering and affecting the applicant's business operations occupying town property. The applicant shall notify the town of cancellation of such policy at least 30 days in advance of such cancellation; and 
g.  Name of all contractors acting or working on behalf of the applicant within town property, along with the name and home address, office and cell telephone numbers of a person with authority to act on behalf of the contractor in case of emergency. 
(5)  Upon provision of all of the information required by subsection (4) of this section, the town shall issue a permit allowing the applicant/permittee to enter town property to conduct business operations in accordance with the specific information provided to the town by applicant/permittee. 
(6)  Standard provisions of each permit granted pursuant to this chapter shall include the following: 
a.  Conditions of occupancy. The system shall be located so as to cause minimum interference with the public uses of the town property and with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who own properties that adjoin town property; 
b.  Restoration of public ways. If, during the course of the permittee's construction, installation or maintenance of the system, there occurs a disturbance of any town property by the permittee, the permittee shall replace and restore such town property to a condition reasonably comparable to the condition of the town property existing immediately prior to such disturbance; 
c.  Relocation at request of the town. If the town shall lawfully elect to vacate, relocate, abandon, alter, reconstruct or change any town property, the permittee, upon 30 days' written notice by the town via certified mail to the permittee, shall remove, relay and relocate his structure, equipment and facilities at his own expense. Should the permittee refuse or fail to remove the system within 30 days after written notification, the town shall have the right to remove the component parts of the system and charge the permittee for the costs of removal; 
d.  Relocation at request of third party. The permittee shall, on the request of any person holding a lawful building moving permit, protect, support, raise, lower, temporarily disconnect, relocate in or remove from any town property, as necessary, any property of the permittee, provided: 
1.  The expense of such is paid by said person benefitting from the relocation, including, if required by the permittee, making such payment in advance; and 
2.  The permittee is given reasonable advance written notice to prepare for such changes. For purposes of this section, reasonable advance written notice shall be no less than 30 days in the event of a temporary relocation, and no less than 120 days for a permanent relocation; 
e.  Interference with use of right-of-way. When working within town property, the permittee shall not unreasonably interfere with public uses of said town property and the safety, health and convenience of the public in the public's use thereof for ordinary travel. 
(7)  No less than three business days prior to commencement of construction, installation or maintenance activities within town property, the permittee shall notify the town of the specific locations and beginning and ending dates of said construction, installation or maintenance project and shall provide current, accurate contact information for both the permittee and the contractor, as outlined in subsection (4) of this section. Upon receipt of this notification, the town shall determine whether the proposed construction, installation or maintenance activities shall pose an unreasonable interference with public uses. If the town determines the proposed activity presents no such unreasonable interference, it shall issue the permittee a notice to proceed. If the permittee receives no written notification from the town within 24 hours of the proposed commencement of activities, the proposed activities may be deemed approved. This section shall not apply to emergency repair projects or utility service extension projects which the permittee could not have anticipated. 
(8)  The permittee shall keep all of the information required by subsection (4) of this section current at all times by immediately providing the town written notice of changes. 
(9)  Any person or entity: 
a.  Whose system occupies town property for business operations without obtaining the permit required in this chapter; 
b.  Who fails to provide the 72 hours' notice prior to commencement of construction, installation or maintenance activities as required in subsection (6) of this section; or who fails to maintain current, accurate information required by subsection (4) of this section concerning any system occupying town property; 
may have any permit granted pursuant to this chapter revoked and may be denied future authorization for construction, installation or maintenance activities for a period of two years. 
(10)  Any violation of this chapter shall afford the town the full range of remedies available under any applicable law or regulation, including the levying of fines, not to exceed $500.00 per day for each day this chapter is violated. The election of one or more remedies shall not be construed as a waiver of any other legal and/or equitable remedy including, but not limited to, the town's right to seek injunctive relief, damages and attorney's fees as the law might allow. 
(11)  Business operations specifically authorized by a fully executed, valid franchise agreement or ordinance with the town shall not be subject to the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of said franchise agreement or ordinance shall continue to govern. 
(Ord. No. 569, § I, 9-9-2008)  
Chapter 32 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Louisiana Environmental Quality Act, R.S. 30:2001 et seq.; Louisiana Water Control Law, R.S. 30:2071 et seq.; Louisiana Hazardous Waste Control Law, R.S. 30:2171 et seq.; authority for municipalities to construct sewerage system, R.S. 33:4001 et seq.; public utilities, R.S. 33:4161 et seq.; municipal authority to establish utility rates and regulations, R.S. 33:4163; utility meters, R.S. 45:845 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 32-1. - Defrauding utilities. 
(a)  Whoever shall, intentionally, by any means or device, prevent electric current or water from passing through any meter to register the current of electricity or water passing through meters, or intentionally prevent the meter dial from turning or duly registering the quantity of electricity or water supplied, or in any way interfere with its proper action or just registration, or without the consent of its supplier or manufacturer, intentionally divert any electricity or water from any wire or cable or from any pipe or conduit or from any main of such supplier or manufacturer, or otherwise use or cause to be used, without the consent of such supplier or manufacturer, any electricity or water distributed or produced by such supplier or manufacturer, or to remove, replace, or change any meter from its place without the consent of such supplier or manufacturer, or refuse to deliver any meters, lamps, or other appliances which may be, or have been, loaned or leased to them by any supplier or manufacturer for the purpose of furnishing electricity or water, through the same, with the intent to defraud such supplier or manufacturer, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  The presence at any time on or about such meter, wire, cable, pipe, conduit or main of any device or object resulting in the diversion of electricity or water as above defined, or resulting in the prevention of the proper action or just registration of the meter as above set forth, shall constitute prima facie evidence of knowledge on the part of the person having control or custody of the room or place where such device or object is located, of the existence thereof and the effect thereof, and shall constitute prima facie evidence of the intention of the person to defraud and shall bring such person within the scope, meaning and penalties of this section. 
(Code 1981, § 22-1; Ord. No. 98, §§ I, II, 2-5-1929)  
Sec. 32-2. - Registration of plumbers; license required. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the business of plumbing contractor, meaning the contracting for plumbing work of any character in the town, without first securing from the state a license as either a master plumber or a journeyman plumber and without registering with the town on or before the first day of each year (or before beginning to do such work if he commences to do such work after the first day of each year). 
(b)  Each registered plumber shall, at the time of registration, pay an annual registration fee as is established by the mayor and board of aldermen and provide to the town a bond in the amount of $1,000.00. 
(Code 1981, § 22-2; Ord. No. 502, § 2, 5-12-1992)  
Sec. 32-3. - Work of journeyman plumber restricted. 
No journeyman plumber shall do plumbing work within the town that he is not authorized by state law to do. 
(Code 1981, § 22-3; Ord. No. 502, § 3, 5-12-1992)  
Secs. 32-4—32-24. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WATERWORKS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Power of town to operate water system, R.S. 33:401, 33:4162. 
 
Sec. 32-25. - Scope. 
The provisions of this article shall govern the use, sale and consumption of water and regulation of the waterworks system of the town. 
(Code 1981, § 22-16; Ord. No. 395, § I, 10-8-1974)  
Sec. 32-26. - Application for service. 
(a)  Formal application for water service shall be made to the proper authorities or person designated by the mayor and board of aldermen in writing, said application plainly setting forth the purpose for which water is to be used and where connections are to be made. 
(b)  The mayor and board of aldermen reserve the right to refuse service to any applicant when, in their judgment, such action is for the general good of the water system, or for the town or the citizens thereof, in part or as a whole. 
(Code 1981, § 22-17; Ord. No. 395, § I(rules 1, 2), 10-8-1974)  
Sec. 32-27. - Taps. 
The tapping of all mains shall be made by the superintendent or some other designated officer or employee, and the town shall furnish material and labor necessary to install the service to the applicant's curb line, nearest to the town main. Tapping of the main, together with the necessary material for the installation of the service to the applicant's curb line, shall be paid for by the applicant. 
(Code 1981, § 22-18; Ord. No. 395, § I(rule 6), 10-8-1974)  
Sec. 32-28. - Approval of plumbing before connection authorized. 
All plumbing and piping of all kinds and descriptions shall be done under the supervision of the superintendent and sewer department and approved by him before service connection is made. 
(Code 1981, § 22-19; Ord. No. 395, § I(rule 4), 10-8-1974)  
Sec. 32-29. - Right of town to order repairs; disconnection of service. 
In the event the customer's plumbing or piping is found defective, the superintendent or such other designated individual shall have the right to order the customer to have the necessary repairs made promptly and the town shall have the right to discontinue his service until repairs ordered have been made. In the event it is necessary to discontinue service on account of the customer not making the ordered repairs and the service has been discontinued and after the repairs are made and the customer requests reconnection, a charge of $5.00 shall be made and collected in advance for said reconnection. 
(Code 1981, § 22-20; Ord. No. 395, § I(rule 5), 10-8-1974)  
Sec. 32-30. - Payment of bills. 
Payments of all monthly water bills must be made to the town on or before the 15th day of the month. In the event patrons do not pay their bills by the 25th of the month, they shall be cut off, and they shall be deprived of further service until all back bills have been paid in full. 
(Code 1981, § 22-21; Ord. No. 395, § I(rule 8), 10-8-1974)  
Sec. 32-31. - Right to discontinue service. 
The mayor and board of aldermen shall have the power to discontinue service to any customer, when such service shall be found to be a detriment to the said system, the citizens, or the town, in part or as a whole. When such action is deemed necessary, the customer in question shall be given written notice 30 days prior to date set for discontinuing service. The town, its governing authorities and its representatives shall not be held liable, either collectively or individually for such action. 
(Code 1981, § 22-22; Ord. No. 395, § I(rule 3), 10-8-1974)  
Sec. 32-32. - Service outside town. 
The mayor and board of aldermen shall have the authority to make such contracts and establish such rules and regulations as they deem necessary in connection with the services and water furnished to all customers outside the corporate limits of the town. 
(Code 1981, § 22-23; Ord. No. 395, § III, 10-8-1974)  
Sec. 32-33. - Rates and charges. 
All water rates and charges are hereby ratified and confirmed. 
(Code 1981, § 22-24)  
Sec. 32-34. - Testing of water lines in new construction. 
All water lines in new construction must be tested, prior to final approval, at a pressure of 100 pounds (minimum). Air or air and water may be used in the test and the pressure must be maintained for a period of two hours without a loss in pressure. 
(Code 1981, § 22-25; Ord. No. 502, § 3, 5-12-1992)  
Secs. 32-35—32-56. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Sewage disposal generally, R.S. 33:3881 et seq.; power of town with reference to sewers, R.S. 33:401(9). 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 32-57. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Biochemical oxygen demand or BOD means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/L). 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping on a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce. 
Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade, or business as distinct from normal sewage. Any significant industrial waste discharge shall be approved by the state department of health. 
Maximum limits for discharge of heavy metals shall include, but not be limited to: 
Cadmium 	0.020 mg/L 
Mercury 	0.005 mg/L 
Selenium 	0.020 mg/L 
Silver 	0.100 mg/L 
 
Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
Objectionable items shall include, but not be limited to, waters or wastes containing concentrations in excess of the following quantities: 
Copper 	0.20 mg/L 
Zinc 	1.00 mg/L 
Lead 	0.10 mg/L 
Boron 	0.50 mg/L 
Arsenic 	0.05 mg/L 
Chromium 	2.00 mg/L 
Nickel 	0.50 mg/L 
Cyanides 	0.01 mg/L 
Tin 	1.00 mg/L 
Iron 	5.00 mg/L 
Sodium chloride 	21.0 mg/L 
Free oil 	50.0 mg/L 
Barium 	3.00 mg/L 
Manganese 	1.00 mg/L 
 
pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
Prohibited heavy metal and toxic material shall include, but not be limited to, the following materials: 
Antimony 	Strontium 
Beryllium 	Tellurium 
Bismuth 	Herbicides 
Cobalt 	Fungicides 
Molybdenum 	Pesticides 
Rhenium 	
 
Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwaters, surface waters, and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such groundwaters, surface waters, and stormwaters as may be present. 
Sewage, normal, means sewage having the following limiting characteristics: 
BOD 5-day 20°C 	200 ppm (max) 
Chlorine demand, 15-min 68°F 	25 ppm (max) 
Suspended solids 	200 ppm (max) 
pH 	5.0 to 9.5 
Grease 	100 ppm (max) 
Temperature 	125°F (max) 
 
Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage. 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
Slug means any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation of that particular customer. 
Storm drain ( sometimes termed storm sewer) means a sewer which carries stormwaters and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water. 
Superintendent means the superintendent of the water sewerage systems of the town, or his authorized representative. It is understood that the superintendent is working under the general policies established by the mayor and board of aldermen. 
Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1981, § 22-41; Ord. No. 405, art. I, §§ 1—27, 6-8-1976)  
Sec. 32-58. - Stormwater. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. Unpolluted industrial process waters shall be considered those waters with BOD and suspended solids concentrations less than those of the sewage treatment plant effluent. 
(b)  Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to storm drains approved by the superintendent. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the superintendent, to a storm drain. 
(Code 1981, § 22-42; Ord. No. 405, art. II, § 2, 6-8-1976)  
Sec. 32-59. - Connections. 
(a)  All persons owning premises which are located within 500 feet of a town sewer line shall connect such premises to such line. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tie into or tap a sewer line without a written permit from the superintendent. Persons desiring such permits shall pay such fee as is established by the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(c)  Sewer connection for sewer house leads shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  All work is to be performed under the superintendent's inspection. 
(2)  Notice to water and sewer maintenance, 24 hours in advance of work shall be given. 
(3)  All work is to be performed in the best trade practice. 
(4)  The type of pipe in the ground, used for a house lead, will be carried all the way to the house unless a factory-made adapter, approved by the superintendent, is used to convert to another type of pipe. 
(d)  New connections shall be properly designed and constructed in such a manner that sources of inflow will be prevented from entering the sewer system. 
(Code 1981, § 22-43; Ord. No. 304, §§ I, II, 3-13-1956; Ord. No. 405, art. II, §§ 3, 12, 6-8-1976)  
Sec. 32-60. - Pipes under foundations. 
All sewer pipes located under concrete slab foundations shall be iron pipe approved by the superintendent. 
(Code 1981, § 22-44)  
Sec. 32-61. - Septic tanks. 
Individual septic tank systems shall be approved by the director of the parish health unit. 
(Code 1981, § 22-45; Ord. No. 405, art. II, § 13, 6-8-1976)  
Sec. 32-62. - Samples. 
The superintendent shall advise each sewer user what analysis shall be conducted on waste samples and the frequency of sampling required. Samples shall be taken and analyzed by the user, at his expense, in a manner and at such intervals as required by the superintendent. Copies of test results shall be furnished by the superintendent on forms approved by him. Samples may also be taken and analyzed periodically by the superintendent. 
(Code 1981, § 22-46; Ord. No. 405, art. III, § 4, 6-8-1976)  
Sec. 32-63. - Disconnection of premises. 
At any time service of the town's sewage system to any owner of any lot, dwelling, house, building or premises or occupant thereof shall be or become a detriment to the town or to the system or its orderly and efficient operation and service, for the non-compliance by said owner or occupant of the provisions of any law, ordinance, enacted or to be enacted, or any rule prescribed or to be hereafter prescribed, for the good or service of said system or for the sanitation of the town, or for any other cause, said service shall be discontinued on giving reasonable notice to the owner of such premises or the occupant thereof, and giving a reasonable time for correction of said defects, if susceptible to correction; provided no notice whatsoever shall be required for discontinuance of service for failure to pay for said services other than a statement on the bill itself giving notice of such discontinuance on failure to pay. 
(Code 1981, § 22-47; Ord. No. 396, § V, 10-8-1974)  
Sec. 32-64. - Injuring, defacing, etc., sewer system. 
No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the sanitary sewer works. 
(Code 1981, § 22-48; Ord. No. 405, art. IV, § 1, 6-8-1976)  
Sec. 32-65. - Special agreements authorized. 
No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the town and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the town for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern. 
(Code 1981, § 22-49; Ord. No. 405, art. II, § 11, art. V, § 5, 6-8-1976)  
Sec. 32-66. - When agreements become effective. 
An agreement for private sewage discharge into the town's sewage disposal system shall not become effective until all requirements of this article are met to the satisfaction of the superintendent and in accordance with standard town specifications. 
(Code 1981, § 22-50; Ord. No. 405, art. V, § 1, 6-8-1976)  
Sec. 32-67. - Entry powers of superintendent. 
The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the town bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the town holds a duly negotiated easement for the purpose of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Code 1981, § 22-51; Ord. No. 405, art. VI, § 1, 6-8-1976)  
Sec. 32-68. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this article shall be served by the town with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(b)  Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for herein shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the town for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the town by reason of such violation. 
(Code 1981, § 22-52; Ord. No. 405, art. V, §§ 2—4, 6-8-1976)  
Sec. 32-69. - Discontinuance of service. 
At any time service of the town's sewage system to any owner of any lot, dwelling, house, building or premises or occupant thereof shall be or become a detriment to the town or to the system or its orderly and efficient operation and service, for the non-compliance by said owner or occupant of the provisions of any law, ordinance, enacted or to be enacted, or any rule prescribed or to be hereafter prescribed, for the good or service of said system or for the sanitation of the town, or for any other cause, said service shall be discontinued on giving reasonable notice to the owner of such premises or the occupant thereof, and giving a reasonable time for correction of said defects, if susceptible to correction, provided no notice whatsoever shall be required for discontinuance of service for failure to pay for said services other than a statement on the bill itself giving notice of such discontinuance upon failure to pay. 
(Code 1981, § 22-53; Ord. No. 422, § V, 11-14-1978)  
Sec. 32-70. - Conflicts with state sanitary code. 
Nothing contained in this article is intended to conflict with the state sanitary code. 
(Code 1981, § 22-54; Ord. No. 405, art. VII, § 3, 6-8-1976)  
Sec. 32-71. - Testing of sewer lines in new construction. 
All sewer house drain lines in new construction must be tested with a column of water eight feet high. The column must be maintained for two hours without a decrease in height. 
(Code 1981, § 22-55; Ord. No. 502, § 4, 5-12-1992)  
Secs. 32-72—32-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RATES AND CHARGES 
 
Sec. 32-101. - Generally. 
Persons receiving sewer service shall pay such rates and charges as are established by the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(Code 1981, § 22-61)  
Sec. 32-102. - Payment required. 
Sewer rates and charges shall be paid monthly in advance and shall be due on the first day of each month, and shall become delinquent on the 15th of the month, and, if not paid on or by the 25th of said month, service shall be discontinued. 
(Code 1981, § 22-62; Ord. No. 422, § III, 11-14-1978)  
Sec. 32-103. - Discontinuance of service. 
In the event service is discontinued, before service is again resumed, there shall be paid in addition to all assessments and charges due, a fee as established by the mayor and board of aldermen for reconnection of said service. 
(Code 1981, § 22-63; Ord. No. 396, § IV, 10-8-1974; Ord. No. 422, § IV, 11-14-1978)  
Sec. 32-104. - Monthly charges for water service, sewage service, and garbage collection and disposal. 
There is hereby fixed, established and levied on the occupant of every lot, dwelling, building or premises whatsoever connected with the water and sewage systems of the town, for obtaining water supplies and sewage services and for the services rendered by the town in the collection and disposal of garbage, trash and other refuse, and the maintenance of the general cleanliness and sanitation of the town, monthly charges in amounts as established by the mayor and board of aldermen from time to time. 
(1)  Garbage collection and disposal charges. There shall be assessed to residences within the town a monthly fee for garbage pickup. That fee shall be equal to the monthly fee charged the town by the contractor picking up and disposing of that garbage, together with an administrative fee per residence, that will be in an amount as established by the mayor and board of aldermen from time to time. 
(2)  Payment of charges; method of collection. The charges herein fixed, established and levied shall be due and payable by each customer on the 15th day of the month following the month in which the bill was mailed by U.S. mail to the customer. If the same has not been paid on or before the 15th day of the month of the mailing, a penalty of ten percent shall be added to the bill for late payment charges. If the bill has not been paid on or before the 25th day of said month, service shall be discontinued and a disconnect and reconnect charge shall be added, as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 562, § I(22-65), 12-12-2007)  
Secs. 32-105—32-121. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PROHIBITED DISCHARGES 
 
Sec. 32-122. - Generally. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged objectionable items or any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas. 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including, but not limited to, cyanides in excess of 0.01 milligrams per liter, as CN, in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer. 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.0 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works. 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, underground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, or milk containers, either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(Code 1981, § 22-71; Ord. No. 405, art. II, § 4, 6-8-1976)  
Sec. 32-123. - Items superintendent may prohibit. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely, in the opinion of the superintendent, that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, or public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes, in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 125 degrees Fahrenheit (52 degrees Celsius); 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter, or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 125 degrees Fahrenheit (zero to 52 degrees Celsius); 
(3)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent; 
(4)  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions if not neutralized; 
(5)  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances, or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the superintendent for such materials; 
(6)  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state board of health, the state air and water pollution control commission, or the Environmental Protection Agency, or all; 
(7)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes; 
(8)  Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5; 
(9)  Materials which exert or cause: 
a.  Unusual concentrations (300 ppm, maximum) or inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids, (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate). 
b.  Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions). 
c.  Unusual BOD (400 ppm, maximum) chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works. 
d.  Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting "slugs," as defined herein. 
(10)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of the state board of health, the state air and water pollution control commission, the Environmental Protection Agency, or all. 
(b)  If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in subsection (a) of this section, and which, in the judgment of the superintendent, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the superintendent may: 
(1)  Reject the water; 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewer; 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 
(4)  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes and sewer charges under the provisions of the town's ordinances. If the superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to his review and approval, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and law. 
(Code 1981, § 22-72; Ord. No. 405, art. II, §§ 5, 6, 6-8-1976)  
Sec. 32-124. - Interceptors and traps. 
Grease, oil, and sand traps shall be provided when, in the opinion of the superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such traps shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All traps shall be of a type and capacity approved by the superintendent, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(Code 1981, § 22-73; Ord. No. 405, art. II, § 7, 6-8-1976)  
Sec. 32-125. - Preliminary treatment facilities. 
Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any water or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. Should such pretreatment or equalizing facilities fail, the owner shall immediately notify the superintendent of the failure. 
(Code 1981, § 22-74; Ord. No. 405, art. I, § 8, 6-8-1976)  
Sec. 32-126. - Control manhole. 
When required by the superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole or other acceptable facility, together with such necessary meters, sampling equipment, and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole or facility and equipment, when required, shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the superintendent. The manhole or facility shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. The superintendent shall have right of access to the control manhole or facility at all times on request for inspections, flow measurements, and sampling. Measuring and sampling devices shall be of types acceptable to and approved by the superintendent. 
(Code 1981, § 22-75; Ord. No. 405, art. II, § 9, 6-8-1976)  
Sec. 32-127. - Measurements and tests. 
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole or facility. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite sample is appropriate or whether a grab sample of samples should be taken. Normally, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from a 24-hour composite whereas pH levels are determined from periodic grab samples. 
(Code 1981, § 22-76; Ord. No. 405, art. II, § 10, 6-8-1976)  
Subpart B - LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE  
Chapter 100 - GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 100-1. - Title. 
The title of this subpart shall be known as the "Land Development Code for the Town of Jonesboro, Louisiana." This part may also be cited as the "Land Development Code" or the "LDC."  
Sec. 100-2. - Applicability of subpart A, chapter 1. 
Unless otherwise stated or where the context of the provision clearly shows a different intent, the provisions of chapter 1 shall apply to the chapters contained in this part.  
Sec. 100-3. - Fee requirements. 
Reasonable fees to offset the costs of administration of this part may be set by resolution of the mayor and board of aldermen, from time to time, unless state law requires them to be established by ordinance.  
Sec. 100-4. - Conflicts. 
(a)  Where general requirements of a provision under the Code of General Ordinances or the Land Development Code conflict with a specific requirement of a provision under the Land Development Code, including, but not limited to, building regulations, drainage and flood control, electricity, gas, mechanical code, planning and development, plumbing, subdivisions, airport hazard zoning, and zoning, then the provision concerning the specific requirement under the Land Development Code shall prevail. 
(b)  In the event that a provision or requirement under the Code of General Ordinances or the Land Development Code in any way conflicts with another provision or requirement under the Land Development Code, then the more stringent provision or requirement shall prevail.  
Chapter 105 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Adoption of building, electrical, etc., codes by reference, R.S. 33:1368 et seq.; municipal building regulations generally, R.S. 33:4721 et seq.; building permits, R.S. 33:4744; mandatory adoption of certain nationally recognized building codes and standards as the state uniform construction code, R.S. 40:1730.28 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 105-1. - Fire limits. 
The fire limits of the town shall be as follows: beginning on the west right-of-way line of the CRI&P Railroad at a point that is intersected by the eastward extension of the center line of Third Street; thence run west across Hudson Avenue on said extended line and continue west along and with the center line of Third Street to its intersection with the center line of Cooper Avenue; thence run south along the center line of Cooper Avenue to its intersection with the center line of Seventh Street; thence run east along and with the center line of Seventh Street to its intersection with the center line of Polk Avenue; thence run south along and with the center line of Polk Avenue to its intersection with the center line of Eighth Street; thence run east along and with the center line of Eighth Street to its intersection with the west right-of-way of the CRI&P Railroad; thence run in a northwesterly and northerly direction along and with the west right-of-way line of the CRI&P Railroad to the point of beginning. 
(Code 1981, § 6-1; Ord. No. 355, § 8, 2-14-1967) 
State Law reference— Fire limits authorized, R.S. 33:4741.  
Secs. 105-2—105-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE 
 
Sec. 105-21. - Definitions. 
When used in this article, the following words and phrases have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, unless the context indicates a different meaning: 
Building official means that employee or individual appointed to serve as the building official for the town and to serve as the building code enforcement officer for the town. 
Farm structure means a structure which is constructed on a farm, other than a residence or a structure attached to it, for use on the farm; including, but not limited to, barns, sheds and poultry houses, but not public livestock areas. However, the term "farm structure" shall not include a structure originally qualifying as a farm structure, but later converted to another use. 
Recreational camps means private outdoor recreational structures, other than a residence, such as a hunting or fishing camp. 
(Ord. No. 790, § 1(1-1), 4-12-2016)  
Sec. 105-22. - Creation of enforcement agency. 
The town building department is hereby created, and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the building official. 
(1)  Deputies. In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this building department and with the concurrence of the appointing authority, the building official shall have the authority to appoint a deputy building official, related technical officers, inspectors, plan examiners and other town employees or contract agents. Such deputies shall have powers as delegated by the building official. 
(2)  Enforcement. Enforcement procedures by the code enforcement officers such as the building official, deputies, or third-party providers acting in the capacity of a code enforcement officer shall include examination or review of plans, drawings, or specifications; the conducting of inspections; and the issuance, denial, or revocation of permits and certificates of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 790, § 1(1-2), 4-12-2016)  
Sec. 105-23. - Adoption of state uniform construction codes. 
Pursuant to R.S. 40:1730.21 et seq., the following construction codes (hereinafter sometimes referred to as "codes") are hereby adopted as the regulations governing construction of buildings and other structures in town, excluding farm structures and recreational camps. Unless specified, all standards contained in a referenced code are adopted and included for purposes of this article. Unless referenced by name or letter designation, no appendices to the codes specified herein are adopted. The most recent editions adopted and amended by the state uniform construction code council shall be adopted per R.S. 40-1730.28 as follows: 
(1)  International Building Code, as published by the International Code Council, not including parts 1—Administration, 11—Accessibility, and 27—Electrical, including any standards referenced therein, but not including any appendices thereto. 
(2)  International Existing Building Code, as published by the International Code Council, including any standards referenced therein, but not including any appendices thereto and not including part 1—Administration. 
(3)  International Residential Code, not including parts I—Administrative, and VIII—Electrical. The applicable standards referenced in that code are included for regulation of construction within this state. The enforcement of such standards shall be mandatory only with respect to new construction, reconstruction, additions to homes previously built to the International Residential Code, and extensive alterations. The adopted 2012 edition shall be amended to include amendments as stated under Louisiana title 55 of public safety part VI, chapter 3. 
(4)  The International Mechanical Code (IMC), as published by the International Code Council, but not including any appendices thereto or the administrative chapter. 
(5)  The International Plumbing Code. The standards referenced in that code are also included. However, the appendices to that code are excluded. 
(6)  The International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC), as published by the International Code Council, but not including any appendices thereto or the administrative chapter. 
(7)  The National Electrical Code (NEC), as published by the National Fire Protection Association. 
(8)  Nothing in this article shall conflict with the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development's regulations regarding manufactured housing construction or the provisions of R.S. 51:912.21 et seq., as it relates to manufactured housing installation. Further, it is the intent of the town that any service, renovation, repair, or warranty work performed on a manufactured home shall be handled under the appropriate federal standards governing manufactured housing construction or state standards governing installation, and all such work shall be under the jurisdiction of the state manufactured housing commission. Additionally, the exemption for manufactured housing provided for in this article shall extend to and include driveways, steps, decks, or other similar accessory structures or work, but shall not include any additional living area or other type of heated and cooled space outside of the original footprint of the manufactured home. 
(9)  Nothing contained in this section to the contrary shall affect the applicability to residential construction of the standards published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency for the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(Ord. No. 790, § 1(1-3), 4-12-2016)  
Sec. 105-24. - Regulation of construction or improvement of industrial facilities. 
(a)  Excluding the applicable requirements of the International Plumbing Code, the provisions of this part shall not apply to the construction or improvement inside the secured or fenced confines of the following types of industrial facilities that are engaged in activities defined or classified under one or more of the following subsectors, industry groups, or industries of the 2012 North American Industry Classification System (NAICS): 
211 	Oil and gas extraction. 
211112 	Natural gas liquid extraction. 
213 	Support activities for mining. 
22111 	Electric power generation. 
3211 	Saw mills and wood preservation. 
3212 	Veneer, plywood, and engineered wood product manufacturing. 
322 	Paper manufacturing. 
324 	Petroleum and coal products manufacturing. 
325 	Chemical manufacturing. 
326 	Plastics and rubber products manufacturing. 
331 	Primary metal manufacturing. 
562211 	Hazardous waste treatment and disposal. 
562212 	Solid waste landfill. 
424710 	Petroleum bulk stations and terminals. 
486110 	Pipeline transportation of crude oil. 
486910 	Pipeline transportation of refined petroleum products. 
482610 	Pipeline transportation of natural gas. 
486 	Pipeline transportation. 
486990 	All other pipeline transportation. 
 
(b)  The council may adopt by rule, in accordance with the Administrative Procedure Act, compatible NAICS code designation updates. 
(Ord. No. 790, § 1(1-4), 4-12-2016)  
Sec. 105-25. - Duties and powers of the building official. 
The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the Code. The building official shall have the authority to render interpretations of the code and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in conformance with the intent and purpose of the Code. Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in the Code. 
(1)  Applications and permits. The building official shall receive applications, review construction documents and issue permits for the erection and alteration of buildings and structures, inspect the premises for which such permits have been issued and enforce compliance with the provisions of the Code. 
(2)  Inspections. The building official is authorized to make all of the required inspections, or the building official shall have the authority to accept reports of inspection by a contracted agent (with sufficient certifications) or by certified third-party providers. Reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be completed by an individual listed on the state's list of certified third-party providers. The building official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise, subject to the approval of the appointing authority. 
(3)  Right of entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of the Code, or where the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a structure or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or in violation of the Code which makes the structure or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official or his designee is authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by the Code, provided that if such structure or premises is occupied, that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such structure or premises be unoccupied, the building official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry. 
(4)  Department records. The building official shall keep official records of applications received, permits and certificates issued, fees collected, reports of inspections, and notices and orders issued. Such records shall be retained in the official records for the period required for the retention of public records. 
(5)  Liability. The building official, member of the board of appeals or employee charged with the enforcement of the Code, while acting for the building department in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties required by the Code or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally and is hereby relieved from personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against an officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of the Code shall be defended by a legal representative of the building department until the final termination of the proceedings. The building official or any subordinate shall not be liable for costs in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of the Code. 
(6)  Approved materials and equipment. Materials, equipment and devices approved by the building official shall be constructed and installed in accordance with such approval. 
(7)  Used materials and equipment. Used materials, equipment and devices shall not be reused unless approved by the building official. 
(8)  Modifications. Wherever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of the Code, the building official shall have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases, provided the building official shall first find that special individual reason makes the strict letter of the Code impractical, and the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose of the Code and that such modification does not lessen health, life and fire safety requirements or structural soundness. The details of actions granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the files of the building department. 
(9)  Alternative materials, design and methods of construction and equipment. The provisions of the Code are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to prohibit any design or method of construction not specifically prescribed by the Code, provided that any such alternative has been approved. An alternative material, design or method of construction shall be approved where the building official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of the code, and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the Code. Compliance with the specific performance-based provisions of the Code in lieu of specific requirements of the Code shall also be permitted as an alternate. 
(10)  Tests. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of the Code, or evidence that a material or method does not conform to the requirements of the Code, or in order to substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the building official shall have the authority to require tests as evidence of compliance to be made at no expense to the building department. Test methods shall be as specified in the Code or by other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the building official shall approve the testing procedures. Tests shall be performed by an approved agency. Reports of such tests shall be retained by the building official for the period required for retention of public records. 
(11)  Cooperation of other officials and officers. The building official may request and shall receive the assistance and cooperation of other town and parish officials so far as is required in the discharge of the duties required by the Code or other pertinent law or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 790, § 1(1-5), 4-12-2016)  
Sec. 105-26. - Permits. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful to construct, enlarge, alter, extensively alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of any building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, extensively alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the technical codes adopted in section 105-23, or to cause any such work to be done, without obtaining a properly-issued permit from the building official for that work. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to connect the electrical power service utilities to a manufactured home until an electrical hook-up inspection has been conducted and approved by the building official. 
(2)  All commercial projects must be approved by the state fire marshal's office. The approved stamped drawings, specifications and plan review letter are required when applying for a permit. 
(b)  Work exempt from permit. Permits shall not be required for the following. Exemption from permit requirements of the code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of the code or any other laws or ordinances of the town. 
(1)  Building. 
a.  One-story detached accessory structures without utilities used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 500 square feet (35.65 m 2 ). 
b.  Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons (18,927 L) and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed 2:1. 
c.  Sidewalks and driveways. 
d.  Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work. 
e.  Prefabricated swimming pools that are less than 24 inches (610 mm) deep. 
f.  Swings and other playground equipment. 
g.  Window awnings supported by an exterior wall which do not project more than 54 inches (1,372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not require additional support. 
(2)  Electrical. Repairs and maintenance. A permit shall not be required for minor repair work, including the replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently-installed receptacles. 
(3)  Gas. 
a.  Portable heating, cooking or clothes-drying appliances. 
b.  Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe. 
c.  Portable fuel cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid. 
(4)  Mechanical. 
a.  Portable heating appliances. 
b.  Portable ventilation appliances. 
c.  Portable cooling units. 
d.  Steam, hot water or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by the Code. 
e.  Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe. 
f.  Portable evaporative coolers. 
g.  Self-contained refrigeration systems containing ten pounds (4.54 kg) or less of refrigerant, or that are actuated by motors of one horsepower (746 W) or less. 
h.  Portable fuel cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid. 
The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe; provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drainpipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in the Code. The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures, and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures. 
(5)  Emergency repairs. Where equipment replacements and repairs must be performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be submitted within the next working business day to the building official. 
(6)  Repairs. Application or notice to the building official is not required for ordinary repairs to structures, replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently-installed receptacles. Such repairs shall not include the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or load-bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress requirements; nor shall ordinary repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety. 
(7)  Public service agencies. A permit shall not be required for the installation, alteration or repair of generation, transmission, distribution, metering or other related equipment that is under the ownership and control of public service agencies by established right. 
(8)  Application for permit. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application on a form furnished by the building department for that purpose. Such application shall: 
a.  Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made. 
b.  Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by legal description, street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work. 
c.  Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed work is intended. 
d.  Be accompanied by construction documents and other information as required by the building official. 
e.  State the estimated valuation of the proposed work. 
f.  Be signed by the applicant or the applicant's authorized agent. 
g.  Give such other data and information as is required by the building official. The specific information shall, at a minimum, include the following information: 
1.  Name, address, and daytime telephone number of the owner; 
2.  Name, address, and daytime telephone number of any and all contractors; 
3.  Location of the construction; 
4.  Description of the construction, including, but not limited to, square footage, type of construction, intended occupancy, and whether any work will involve the following types: 
(i)  Electrical. 
(ii)  Concrete or masonry. 
(iii)  Plumbing. 
(iv)  Structural. 
(v)  Natural gas, liquefied gas, or other gas fuel. 
5.  Anticipated completion of construction. 
(9)  Action on application. The building official shall examine, or cause to be examined, applications for permits and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after filing. If the application or the construction documents do not conform to the requirements of pertinent laws, the building official shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the building official is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of the Code and laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the building official shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. 
(10)  Time limitation of application. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days after the date of filing unless such application has been pursued in good faith or a permit has been issued; except that the building official is authorized to grant one or more extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 180 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. 
(11)  Validity of permit. The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of the Code or of any other ordinance of the building department. Permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of the Code or other ordinances of the building department shall not be valid. The issuance of a permit based on construction documents and other data shall not prevent the building official from requiring the correction of errors in the construction documents and other data. The building official is also authorized to prevent occupancy or use of a structure where in violation of the Code or of any other ordinances of the town. 
(12)  Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. 
(13)  Suspension or revocation. The building official is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of the Code wherever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of the Code. 
(14)  Placement of permit. The building permit or copy thereof shall be kept on the site of the work, located or visible at the front exterior of the structure, until the completion of the project. 
(15)  Responsibility. It shall be the duty of every person who performs work for the installation or repair of building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems, for which the code is applicable, to comply with the Code. 
(Ord. No. 790, § 1(1-6), 4-12-2016)  
Sec. 105-27. - Construction documents. 
(a)  Submittal documents. Construction documents, special inspection and structural observation programs and other data shall be submitted in two or more sets with each application for a permit. The construction documents shall be prepared by a registered design professional, where required by the statutes of the town in which the project is to be constructed. Where special conditions exist, the building official is authorized to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a registered design professional. 
(b)  Exception. The building official is authorized to waive the submission of construction documents and other data not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such that reviewing of construction documents is not necessary to obtain compliance with the Code. 
(c)  Information on construction documents. Construction documents shall be drawn upon suitable material. Electronic media documents are permitted to be submitted when approved by the building official. Construction documents shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of the Code and relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, as determined by the building official. 
(d)  Manufacturer's installation instructions. Manufacturer's installation instructions, as required by this Code, shall be available on the job site at the time of inspection. 
(e)  Site plan. The construction documents submitted with the application for permit shall be accompanied by a site plan showing the size and location of new construction and existing structures on the site and distances from lot lines. In the case of demolition, the site plan shall show construction to be demolished and the location and size of existing structures and construction that are to remain on the site or plot. 
(f)  Examination of documents. The building official shall examine, or cause to be examined, construction documents for Code compliance. 
(g)  Approval of construction documents. When the building official issues a permit, the construction documents shall be approved, in writing or by a stamp which states "approved plans." One set of construction documents so reviewed shall be retained by the building official. The other set shall be returned to the applicant, shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or his authorized representative. 
(h)  Third-party providers. The building official is authorized to accept reports from certified third party providers, so long as such providers satisfy the state requirements as to qualifications and are recognized by the town as reliable entities. These reports are required to be submitted to the building official before the permit application will be considered for approval. 
(i)  Previous approvals. The Code shall not require changes in the construction documents, construction or designated occupancy of a structure for which a lawful permit has been heretofore issued or otherwise lawfully authorized, and the construction of which has been pursued in good faith within 180 days after the effective date of the Code and has not been abandoned. 
(j)  Phased approval. The building official is authorized to issue a permit for the construction of foundations or any other part of a building or structure before the construction documents for the whole building or structure have been submitted, provided that adequate information and detailed statements have been filed complying with pertinent requirements of the Code. The holder of such permit for the foundation or other parts of a building or structure shall proceed at the holder's own risk with the building operation and without assurance that a permit for the entire structure will be granted. 
(k)  Amended construction documents. Work shall be installed in accordance with the approved construction documents, and any changes made during construction that are not in compliance with the approved construction documents shall be resubmitted for approval as an amended set of construction documents. 
(l)  Retention of construction documents. One set of approved construction documents shall be retained by the building official for a period of not less than 180 days from the date of completion of the permitted work, or as required by state or local laws. 
(Ord. No. 790, § 1(1-7), 4-12-2016)  
Sec. 105-28. - Temporary structures and uses. 
(a)  General. The building official is authorized to issue a permit for temporary structures and temporary uses. Such permits shall be limited as to time of service, but shall not be permitted for more than 180 days. The building official is authorized to grant extensions for demonstrated cause. 
(b)  Conformance. Temporary structures and uses shall conform to the structural strength, fire safety, means of egress, light, ventilation and sanitary requirements of the Code as necessary to ensure the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(c)  Temporary power. The building official is authorized to give permission to temporarily supply and use power in part of an electric installation before such installation has been fully completed and the final certificate of completion has been issued. The part covered by the temporary certificate shall comply with the requirements specified for temporary lighting, heat or power in the applicable electric code. 
(d)  Termination of approval. The building official is authorized to terminate such permit for a temporary structure or use and to order the temporary structure or use to be discontinued. 
(Ord. No. 790, § 1(1-8), 4-12-2016)  
Sec. 105-29. - Fees. 
(a)  Payment of fees. A permit shall not be valid until the fees prescribed by law have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, has been paid. 
(b)  Schedule of permit fees. On buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required as established by the mayor and board of aldermen from time to time. 
(c)  Building permit valuations. Generally, building permit fees shall be calculated based on the square footage under beam as prescribed in the agreements. 
(d)  Related fees. The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration, removal or demolition for work done in connection with or concurrently with the work authorized by a building permit shall not relieve the applicant or holder of the permit from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by law. 
(e)  Refunds. Before the start of construction and upon surrender of the permit, permit holders can receive a refund of 50 percent of the original cost of inspections. This refund does not apply to plan review or permit fees. 
(Ord. No. 790, § 1(1-9), 4-12-2016)  
Sec. 105-30. - Inspections. 
(a)  Residential. 
(1)  General. Construction, or work for which a permit is required, and shall be subject to inspection by the building official, and such construction or work shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved. Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of the Code or of other ordinances of the building department. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of the Code or of other ordinances of the building department shall not be valid. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the building official nor the building department shall be liable for expenses entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to allow inspection. 
(2)  Preliminary inspection. Before issuing a permit, the building official is authorized to examine, or cause to be examined, buildings, structures and sites for which an application has been filed. 
(3)  Types of inspections. For on-site construction, from time to time the building official, upon notification from the permit holder or his agent, shall make or cause to be made any necessary inspections and shall either approve that portion of the construction as completed or shall notify the permit holder or his agent wherein the same fails to comply with the Code. 
a.  Foundation inspection. Inspection of the foundation shall be made after poles or piers are set or trenches or basement areas are excavated and any required forms erected and any required reinforcing steel is in place and supported prior to the placing of concrete. The foundation inspection shall include excavations for thickened slabs intended for the support of bearing walls, partitions, structural supports, or equipment and special requirements for wood foundations. 
b.  Plumbing, mechanical, gas and electrical systems inspection. Rough inspection of plumbing, mechanical, gas and electrical systems shall be made prior to covering or concealment, before fixtures or appliances are set or installed, and prior to framing inspection. Exception: back-filling of ground-source heat pump loop systems tested prior to inspection shall be permitted. 
c.  Frame and masonry inspection. Inspection of framing and masonry construction shall be made after the roof, masonry, all framing, fire stopping, draft stopping and bracing are in place and after the plumbing, mechanical and electrical rough inspections are approved. 
d.  Other inspections. In addition to the called inspections in this subsection, the building official may make or require any other inspections to ascertain compliance with the Code and other laws enforced by the building official. 
e.  Fire-resistance-rated construction inspection. Where fire-resistance-rated construction is required between dwelling units or due to location on a property, the building official shall require an inspection of such construction after all lathing and/or wallboard is in place, but before any plaster is applied, or before wallboard joints and fasteners are taped and finished. 
f.  Reinforced masonry, insulating concrete form (ICF) and conventionally formed concrete wall inspection. Reinforced masonry walls, insulating concrete form (ICF) walls and conventionally formed concrete walls located in Seismic Design Categories DO, D1, D2, and E shall be inspected after plumbing, mechanical, and electrical systems embedded within the walls, and reinforcing steel are in place and prior to placement of grout or concrete. Inspection shall verify the correct size, location, spacing, and lapping of reinforcing. For masonry walls, inspection shall also verify that the location of grout cleanouts and the size of grout spaces comply with the requirements of the Code. 
g.  Final inspection. Final inspection shall be made after the permitted work is complete and prior to occupancy. 
(b)  Nonresidential. 
(1)  General. Construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official and such construction or work shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved. Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of the Code or of other ordinances of the building department. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of the Code or of other ordinances of the building department shall not be valid. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the building official nor the building department shall be liable for expenses entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to allow inspection. 
(2)  Preliminary inspection. Before issuing a permit, the building official is authorized to examine or cause to be examined buildings, structures and sites for which an application has been filed. 
(3)  Types of inspections. For onsite construction, from time to time the building official, upon notification from the permit holder or his agent, shall make or cause to be made any necessary inspections, and shall either approve that portion of the construction as completed, or shall notify the permit holder or his agent wherein the same fails to comply with the Code. 
a.  Footing and foundation inspection. Footing and foundation inspections shall be made after excavations for footings are complete and any required reinforcing steel is in place. For concrete foundations, any required forms shall be in place prior to inspection. Materials for the foundation shall be on the job, except where concrete is ready-mixed in accordance with ASTM C 94, the concrete need not be on the job. 
b.  Concrete slab and under-floor inspection. Concrete slab and under-floor inspections shall be made after in-slab or under-floor reinforcing steel and building service equipment, conduits, piping accessories and other ancillary equipment items are in place, but before any concrete is placed or floor sheathing installed, including the subfloor. 
c.  Frame inspection. Framing inspections shall be made after the roof deck or sheathing, all framing, fire-blocking and bracing are in place and pipes, chimneys and vents to be concealed are complete and the rough electrical, plumbing, heating, wires, pipes and ducts are approved. 
d.  Lath and gypsum board inspection. Lath and gypsum board inspections shall be made after lathing and gypsum board, interior and exterior, is in place, but before any plastering is applied or gypsum board joints and fasteners are taped and finished. Exception: gypsum board that is not part of a fire-resistance-rated assembly or a shear assembly. 
e.  Fire-resistant penetrations. Protection of joints and penetrations in fire-resistance-rated assemblies shall not be concealed from view until inspected and approved. 
f.  Energy efficiency inspections. Inspections shall be made to determine compliance with this Code and shall include, but not be limited to, inspections for: envelope insulation R and U values, fenestration U value, duct system R value, and HVAC and water-heating equipment efficiency. 
g.  Other inspections. In addition to the inspections specified above, the building official is authorized to make or require other inspections of any construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of the Code and other laws that are enforced by the department of building safety. 
h.  Final inspection. The final inspection shall be made after all work required by the building permit is completed. 
(4)  Third-party providers. The building official is authorized to accept reports from certified third-party providers, so long as such providers satisfy the state requirements as to qualifications and are recognized by the town as reliable entities. The inspection reports for the structure are required to be submitted to the building official within two days of the completion of the inspection, and the final inspection must be received before the certificate of occupancy will be issued. 
(5)  Inspection requests. It shall be the duty of the permit holder or his agent to notify the building official that such work is ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the person requesting any inspections required by the Code to provide access to and means for inspection of such work. 
(6)  Approval required. Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the building official. The building official, upon notification, shall make the requested inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the construction that is satisfactory as completed, or shall notify the permit holder, or an agent of the permit holder, wherein the same fails to comply with the Code. Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected and such portion shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 790, § 1(1-10), 4-12-2016)  
Sec. 105-31. - Certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  Use and occupancy. No building or structure shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof shall be made until the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy therefor as provided herein. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of the Code or of other ordinances of the building department. Exceptions: 
(1)  Certificates of occupancy are not required for work exempt from permits under section 105-26. 
(2)  Accessory buildings or structures. 
(b)  Change in use. Changes in the character or use of an existing structure shall not be made except as specified in the International Existing Building Code. 
(c)  Certificate issued. After the building official inspects the building or structure and finds no violations of the provisions of the Code or other laws that are enforced by the department of building safety, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy that contains the following: 
(1)  The building permit number. 
(2)  The address of the structure. 
(3)  The name, telephone number and address of the owner. 
(4)  A description of that portion of the structure for which the certificate is issued. 
(5)  A statement that the described portion of the structure has been inspected for compliance with the requirements of the Code for the occupancy and division of occupancy and the use for which the proposed occupancy is classified. 
(6)  The name, address, and daytime telephone number of any and all contractors. 
(7)  The name of the building official. 
(8)  The edition of the code under which the permit was issued. 
(9)  The use and occupancy of the structure. 
(10)  The type of construction. 
(11)  The design occupant load. 
(12)  If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, whether the sprinkler system is required. 
(13)  Any special stipulations and conditions of the building permit. 
(d)  Temporary occupancy. The building official is authorized to issue a temporary certificate of occupancy before the completion of the entire work covered by the permit, provided that such portion shall be occupied safely. The temporary certificate of occupancy will be valid for 28 days. 
(e)  Revocation. The building official is authorized to, in writing, suspend or revoke a certificate of occupancy or completion issued under the provisions of the Code wherever the certificate is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or where it is determined that the building or structure or portion thereof is in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of the Code. 
(Ord. No. 790, § 1(1-11), 4-12-2016)  
Sec. 105-32. - Service utilities. 
(a)  Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system that is regulated by the Code for which a permit is required, until approved by the building official. 
(b)  Temporary connection. The building official shall have the authority to authorize and approve the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility, source of energy, fuel or power. 
(c)  Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by the Code and the referenced codes and standards in case of emergency, where necessary, to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property or when such utility connection has been made without approval. The building official shall notify the serving utility and, whenever possible, the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnection, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing as soon as practical thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 790, § 1(1-12), 4-12-2016)  
Sec. 105-33. - Violations. 
(a)  Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish or occupy any building, structure or equipment regulated by the Code, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of the Code. 
(b)  Notice of violation. The building official is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving, removal, demolition or occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the provisions of the Code, or in violation of a detailed statement or a plan approved thereunder, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of the Code. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. 
(c)  Prosecution of violation. If the notice of violation is not complied with within the time prescribed by such notice, the building official may, through the town attorney, seek to enjoin further construction or work which is required to be permitted under this article and which construction or work does not have a validly-issued permit. Further, the building official may seek to enjoin the occupancy or use of any building or structure which has, without compliance with this article, been, in whole or in part, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, demolished, or the occupancy changed or for which the electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system has been erected, installed, enlarged, altered, repaired, removed, converted or replaced in any fashion. 
(d)  Violation penalties. Any person who violates a provision of the Code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of the Code, shall be subject to penalties. 
(e)  Other remedies. The imposition of penalties prescribed in this section shall not preclude the town attorney from instituting appropriate action, including equitable and extraordinary remedies, to prevent any unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair conversion, maintenance or use or to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent the occupancy of a building or structure or portion thereof, or of the premises, or to prevent an illegal act, conduct of business or use in or about the premises. 
(Ord. No. 790, § 1(1-13), 4-12-2016)  
Sec. 105-34. - Stop work order. 
(a)  Notice to owner. Upon notice from the building official that work on any building or structure is being prosecuted contrary to the provisions of the Code or in an unsafe and dangerous manner, such work shall be immediately stopped. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work will be permitted to resume. 
(b)  Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop-work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. 
(c)  Penalties. In addition to any legal costs incurred, any person, partnership, or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this article or aids, or abets in the violation of any of the provisions of this article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $500.00, nor less than $100.00 for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 790, § 1(1-14), 4-12-2016)  
Secs. 105-35—105-57. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - HOUSE AND BUILDING NUMBERS 
 
Sec. 105-58. - Manner of display. 
Each residence or business within the town shall display its duly assigned structure number in the following manner: 
(1)  House numbers shall be at least three inches in height. These numbers shall be made of durable and clearly visible material and shall be of a contrasting color from the house or mobile home; 
(2)  All numbers shall be conspicuously placed immediately above, on or at the side of the proper door of each building so that the number can be seen plainly from the street line. Whenever any building is situated more than 50 feet from the street line, the number must be placed near the walk, driveway or common entrance to such building and upon a mailbox (visible from both sides), gatepost, fence post or other appropriate place so as to easily be seen from the street line; 
(3)  House numbers shall be illuminated or made of a reflective material that is easily visible at night; 
(4)  House numbers shall be in plain block letters rather than script; and 
(5)  Numbers on commercial buildings shall not be less than three inches in height. These numbers shall be made of durable and clearly visible material and shall be in a contrasting color from the building. Commercial storefronts having glass walls shall adhere to the size and reflective characteristics set out in this article but may have numbers painted on them. 
(Code 1981, § 6-32; Ord. No. 509, § 1, 9-14-1993)  
Sec. 105-59. - Prohibition of installation of utilities to unnumbered structures. 
No utility company licensed or franchised to do or that is doing business in the town shall install permanent service to any structure unless a physical address has been assigned by the parish communication district. 
(Code 1981, § 6-33; Ord. No. 509, § 1, 9-14-1993)  
Sec. 105-60. - Monthly list provided by utility companies. 
Any utility company licensed or franchised to do or that is doing business in the parish installing permanent service to a structure in compliance with section 105-58 shall provide a monthly list of the connections showing the occupant names and physical addressed to the parish communication district. 
(Code 1981, § 6-34; Ord. No. 509, § 1, 9-14-1993)  
Sec. 105-61. - Penalties for violations. 
Any property owner, resident or utility company who violates the provisions of sections 105-58 through 105-60 or who fails to comply with any of the requirements of said sections shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $100.00 or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
(Code 1981, § 6-35; Ord. No. 509, § 1, 9-14-1993)  
Chapter 110 - DRAINAGE AND FLOOD CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Flood control and related matters, R.S. 38:81 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 110-1. - Statutory authorization. 
The legislature of the state has, in R.S. 38:84, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. 
(Code 1981, § 7.5-1; Ord. No. 479, 2-9-1988)  
Sec. 110-2. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the town are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities and by the occupancy of flood hazards areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Code 1981, § 7.5-2; Ord. No. 479, 2-9-1988)  
Sec. 110-3. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Code 1981, § 7.5-3; Ord. No. 479, 2-9-1988)  
Sec. 110-4. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which service such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Code 1981, § 7.5-4; Ord. No. 479, 2-9-1988)  
Sec. 110-5. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Appeal means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within the municipal limits of the town subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This area has been designated as Zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) also known as the flood insurance rate map, dated May 29, 1979, bearing community-panel number 220252 0001 B. After detailed rate making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE or V. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
Development means any manmade change in improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
Elevated building means a nonbasement building: 
(1)  Built, in the case of a building in Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the cases of a building in Zones V1-30, VE or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns, posts and piers, or shear walls parallel to the floor of the water; and 
(2)  Adequately anchored so as to not impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. 
In the case of Zones A1-30, E, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, D, the term "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In the case of Zones V1-30, VE or V, the term "elevated building" also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building," even though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls if the breakaway walls meet the standards of section 60.3(e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
Existing construction means, for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. The term "existing construction" may also be referred to as existing structures. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated the boundaries of the flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow) related erosion areas having special hazards have been designated as Zone A, M, and/or E. 
Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
Floodplain or floodprone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flooding"). 
Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes the term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes, the term manufactured home does not include park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles. 
Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
New construction means, for floodplain management purposes, structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community. 
Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured home. 
Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either: 
(1)  Before the improvement or repair is started; or 
(2)  If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. 
For the purpose of this definition, the term "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places. 
Variance means a grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this chapter when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. (For full requirements see section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.) 
Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Code 1981, § 7.5-5; Ord. No. 479, 2-9-1988)  
Sec. 110-6. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the town. 
(Code 1981, § 7.5-6; Ord. No. 479, 2-9-1988)  
Sec. 110-7. - Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency on its flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) dated May 29, 1979, and any revisions thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 7.5-7; Ord. No. 479, 2-9-1988)  
Sec. 110-8. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 7.5-8; Ord. No. 479, 2-9-1988)  
Sec. 110-9. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Code 1981, § 7.5-9; Ord. No. 479, 2-9-1988)  
Sec. 110-10. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Code 1981, § 7.5-10; Ord. No. 479, 2-9-1988)  
Sec. 110-11. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the mayor and board of aldermen; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Code 1981, § 7.5-11; Ord. No. 479, 2-9-1988)  
Sec. 110-12. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions, greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Code 1981, § 7.5-12; Ord. No. 479, 2-9-1988)  
Secs. 110-13—110-42. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 110-43. - Designation of the floodplain administration. 
The building official of the town is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (National Flood Insurance Program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(Code 1981, § 7.5-21; Ord. No. 479, 2-9-1988)  
Sec. 110-44. - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Review permit application to determine whether proposed building site will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(3)  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this chapter. 
(4)  Review permits for proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
(5)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
(6)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(7)  Ensure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(8)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 110-7, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of article III of this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 7.5-22; Ord. No. 479, 2-9-1988)  
Sec. 110-45. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  Application for a development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him together with a permit fee and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. The permit fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and board of aldermen from time to time. Additionally, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed; 
(3)  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 110-67(2); 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; 
(5)  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with section 110-44(1). 
(b)  Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the following relevant factors: 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(2)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(3)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(4)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(5)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(6)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
(7)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
(8)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(9)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; and 
(10)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area. 
(Code 1981, § 7.5-23; Ord. No. 479, 2-9-1988)  
Sec. 110-46. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The appeal board, consisting of the board of aldermen, shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter. 
(f)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in section 110-45(b) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(g)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this chapter, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this chapter (section 110-3). 
(h)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(i)  Prerequisites for granting variances: 
(1)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
a.  Showing a good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)  Any application to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(j)  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that: 
(1)  The criteria outlined in subsections (a) through (i) of this section are met; and 
(2)  The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Code 1981, § 7.5-24; Ord. No. 479, 2-9-1988)  
Secs. 110-47—110-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 
 
Sec. 110-66. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(5)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(6)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and 
(7)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Code 1981, § 7.5-31; Ord. No. 479, 2-9-1988)  
Sec. 110-67. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in sections 110-7, 110-44(8) or 110-68(d) the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in section 110-45(a)(1), is satisfied. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood level or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level, the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications and plans or the construction and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(3)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A, shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purpose of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of the over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
b.  All manufactured homes shall be in compliance with subsection (1) of this section. 
(Code 1981, § 7.5-32; Ord. No. 479, 2-9-1988)  
Sec. 110-68. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals including manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with sections 110-2 through 110-4. 
(b)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall meet development permit requirements of section 110-8 and section 110-45; and the provisions of article III of this chapter. 
(c)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including manufactured home parks and subdivisions which are greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 110-7 or section 110-44(8). 
(d)  All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(e)  All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(Code 1981, § 7.5-33; Ord. No. 479, 2-9-1988)  
Chapter 115 - ELECTRICITY  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 115-1. - Inspector. 
(a)  There is hereby created the office of electrical inspector who shall be appointed by the mayor and board of aldermen. The electrical inspector shall have had at least two-years' experience as an electrician, shall be of good moral character, shall be versed in the approved methods of electrical construction for the safety of life and property and the National Electric Code. He shall receive such compensation as the mayor and board of aldermen determine. 
(b)  The electrical inspector shall regulate and determine the placing of electric wires or other appliances for electric lights, heat or power in the town and to cause all such wires, appliances or apparatus to be placed, constructed and guarded as not to cause fires or accidents, endangering life or property, and to be constructed as to keep to a minimum the loss or waste of electric current. 
(c)  The electrical inspector shall enforce all provisions of this chapter and he is hereby granted the authority to enter all buildings in the town in the performance of his duties between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. daily, except that in an emergency and within the limits of reason, he may enter buildings for such purposes at other than such hours. 
(d)  The electrical inspector shall inspect or test all electrical work and equipment or apparatus for compliance with the National Electrical Code whenever electric wiring, appliances, or apparatus shall be defective or hazardous through improper manufacture of improper of insufficient insulation or for any other reason, he shall at once cause the removal of such defect or defects, at the expense of the owners of such wiring, appliance or apparatus. 
(Code 1981, § 8-1; Ord. No. 358, §§ 2, 3, 2-14-1967)  
Secs. 115-2—115-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ELECTRICAL CODE 
 
Sec. 115-21. - Permit required. 
No installation, alteration, or removal shall be made in/or of the wiring of any building or structure for light, heat or power or to increase the load of energy carried by such wires or equipment, nor shall any building or structure be wired for electric lights, appliances, motors, apparatus, or heating devices nor alterations made thereto without a written permit being obtained from the town by the person having direct charge of such installation, alteration or removal. 
(Code 1981, § 8-17; Ord. No. 358, § 4, 2-14-1967)  
Sec. 115-22. - Inspection. 
Upon the completion of the wiring, installation or alteration of any building or structure for light, heat, power, appliance or apparatus, it shall be the duty of the person having direct charge of such to notify the electrical inspector who shall, as early as possible, inspect such wiring, installation, appliance, and apparatus and if installed, altered and constructed in compliance with the permit and in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, he shall execute a certificate of satisfactory inspection, which shall contain the date of such inspection and the result of his examination, but no such certificate shall be issued unless such electric wiring, motors, heating devices, appliances, and apparatus be in strict accord with the rules and requirements and the spirit of this chapter, nor shall current be turned on such installation, equipment, appliance, motor, heating device, and apparatus until said certificate be issued. The amount of fee or charge to be made for such inspections and certificate to be fixed and determined by the board of aldermen. 
(Code 1981, § 8-18; Ord. No. 358, § 5, 2-14-1967)  
Sec. 115-23. - Interpretations by inspector. 
The electrical inspector shall have the responsibility and authority for making interpretations of the electrical code, for deciding upon the approval of electrical equipment, materials, construction and for granting permission to depart from the terms of the National Electrical Code. 
(Code 1981, § 8-19; Ord. No. 358, § 6, 2-14-1967)  
Sec. 115-24. - Cutting off service. 
Upon failure to comply with this chapter, the electrical inspector shall have authority, after due notice, to cut out electric current to the premises concerned. 
(Code 1981, § 8-20; Ord. No. 358, § 10, 2-14-1967)  
Sec. 115-25. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person who fails to correct any defect in his electrical work or meet the required standards after having been given notice of non-compliance by the electrical inspector within a reasonable time, shall be refused any other electrical permit until the defects have been corrected and shall be subject to revocation of his electrician's license for continual defective work or either upon being convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall be in addition to the penalty provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1981, § 8-21; Ord. No. 358, § 9, 2-14-1967)  
Secs. 115-26—115-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICIANS 
 
Sec. 115-56. - License required. 
Any person desiring to engage in the business of electrical construction or of the installation of wiring and apparatus for electric lights, appliances, heating or power in the town shall obtain a license from the electrical inspector. 
(Code 1981, § 8-31; Ord. No. 358, § 7, 2-14-1967)  
Sec. 115-57. - License fee. 
(a)  The annual fees for electrical contractors and journeymen electricians licenses shall be in amounts as established by the mayor and board of aldermen from time to time. 
(b)  The fee for a journeyman shall be paid by the electrical contractor who employs him. 
(Code 1981, § 8-32; Ord. No. 359, § 7, 2-14-1967)  
Sec. 115-58. - Issuance. 
No license required herein shall be issued until the party applying for it gives satisfactory evidence of his ability to pass an examination administered by the electrical inspector, an electrical contractor's statewide-license, and an executed bond of $1,000.00 for him and each journeyman electrician for when he purchases a license. 
(Code 1981, § 8-33; Ord. No. 358, § 8, 2-15-1967)  
Sec. 115-59. - Expiration of license. 
The licenses required herein shall expire at the end of each calendar year. 
(Code 1981, § 8-34)  
Sec. 115-60. - License as prerequisite to electrical permit. 
Except as provided in section 115-61, no electrical permit shall be issued to a person who does not possess a valid electrical contractor's license issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 8-35; Ord. No. 358, § 8, 2-14-1967)  
Sec. 115-61. - Right of individual to do own work. 
Any individual desiring to perform his own electrical work personally shall not be required to obtain the license required herein, but shall be required to obtain an electrical permit for that particular job. Such work done by an individual must be done by him personally on his own particular job and not be a way of performing a service to the public generally. 
(Code 1981, § 8-36; Ord. No. 358, § 12, 2-14-1967)  
Chapter 120 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 120-1. - Improvements on properties to be annexed. 
No additions or subdivisions on which there are to be constructed improvements requiring streets, sewer lines and similar improvements will be accepted and taken into the corporate limits of the town until such time or times as the party or parties petitioning for annexation constructs and builds such improvements at their own expense. Such improvements shall comply with the town's subdivision ordinance and such other rules and regulations as may be required by the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(Code 1981, § 19-1; Ord. No. 305, §§ 1, 2, 6-8-1954)  
Secs. 120-2—120-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal planning commissions, R.S. 33:101 et seq., 33:361; power of town to create planning commission, R.S. 33:4726. 
 
Sec. 120-21. - Created. 
There is hereby created a planning commission which shall also serve as a zoning commission. 
(Code 1981, § 19-16; Ord. No. 326, § I, 3-9-1960; Ord. No. 533, § 1(19-16), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 120-22. - Membership. 
(a)  The planning commission shall consist of five members, all to be appointed by the mayor, who may remove any member of the commission, after public hearing for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance. The first-appointed members of the commission shall hold office for terms of one, two, three, four, and five years, respectively. Their successors shall be appointed for a term of five years from and after the expiration of the term of their predecessors in office. If a vacancy occurs otherwise than by expiration of term, it shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term. 
(b)  All members of the commission shall serve without compensation and shall hold no other public office. 
(Code 1981, § 19-17; Ord. No. 326, § I, 3-9-1960; Ord. No. 533, § 1(19-17), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 120-23. - Powers and duties of the commission. 
(a)  The planning commission shall make, adopt, publish, and occasionally revise a master plan for the continued physical development of the town, considering present and future conditions. 
(1)  Such plan, with its accompanying maps, plats, charts, and other descriptive matter shall show a commission's recommendations for the development of the town, including, among other things: 
a.  The general location, character, and extent of public rights-of-way, facilities, utilities, etc.; 
b.  The nature and extent of land use regulations that may be adopted or amended by the town; 
c.  The character, extent, and layout of public housing and of the replanning of blighted districts and slum areas; and 
d.  The character, extent, and layout of subdivisions according to duly adopted subdivision ordinance provisions. 
(2)  The planning commission may promote interest in and understanding of the master plan and may employ such means as is necessary to do so. 
(3)  As the work of making the whole master plan progresses, the commission may from time to time adopt and publish a part or parts thereof, any such part to cover one or more major sections or divisions of the town or one or more of the functional matters to be included in the plan. 
(4)  After adoption of such plan, all new or expanded rights-of-way, public and private facilities, utilities, etc. shall be in accordance with such plan. 
(5)  The planning commission may from time to time amend, extend, or add to the master plan. 
(b)  The planning commission shall recommend to the appropriate public officials programs for public structures and improvements and for the financing thereof. 
(c)  The planning commission shall also serve as the zoning commission for the town; and, when acting as such, shall hold separate meetings with separate minutes and records. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 1(19-18), 4-13-1999)  
Secs. 120-24—120-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - MOBILE HOME PARKS 
 
Sec. 120-50. - Purposes. 
(a)  Statement of authority and intent. 
(1)  These mobile home park regulations are adopted under authority of the police power of the town. 
(2)  It is the intent of this article to provide for the harmonious design of parks for mobile homes; for the convenient and attractive arrangement of mobile home sites; for adequate vehicular and pedestrian circulation and parking; for recreation and other common open spaces and facilities; and in general for the creation of conditions favorable to health, safety and convenience of mobile home parks in residential areas. 
(3)  This article supplements other codes that have been adopted by the mayor and board of aldermen of the town, such as, but not limited to, housing codes, building codes, electrical codes and plumbing codes, etc., as such regulations may be amended from time to time. 
(4)  This article does not govern the construction, plumbing, wiring or other characteristics of mobile homes as structures, nor does it govern the location of a single mobile home located outside mobile parks as are hereinafter defined. 
(b)  Application of regulations. 
(1)  From and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, every mobile home park, as herein defined, shall be designed and constructed in conformance with these regulations. 
(2)  These regulations shall govern all mobile home parks within the territorial boundary of the town, as same now exists or may be extended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 532, § I(1), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 120-51. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Block means a tract or plot of land entirely surrounded by park streets, streams, railroad rights-of-way, parks or other public spaces or by a combination thereof or by the boundaries of the mobile home park. 
Developer means any person, group or corporation acting as a unit, or any agent thereof, developing or proposing to develop land so as to constitute a mobile home park as defined herein. 
Easement means a grant by the owner of the use of a strip of land by others for specific purposes. 
Engineering plans means the drawings on which the proposed improvements are shown and which, if approved, will be used for construction of the improvements. 
Final plan means the final map or drawing on which the mobile home park plan is submitted for approval and which, if approved, will be used to lay out and construct the mobile home park. 
Health officer means the health officer of the parish or his authorized representative; the term "health officer" may jointly mean the state health officer or his authorized representative. 
Improvements means street surfacing, with curb and gutter, walkways and walks, water mains and service lines, sanitary sewers and service lines, storm sewers and other drainage structures and utilities installations. 
Master plan means a comprehensive plan made and adopted by the town planning commission, for the physical development of the town and surrounding area; the term "master plan" includes any unit or component of such plan separately adopted and any amendment to such plan or part thereof. 
Mobile home means a vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis and designed to be used without a permanent foundation as a dwelling when connected to indicated utilities. A travel trailer, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreations and vacation use, is not to be considered as a mobile home. 
Mobile home lot means a tract or plot of land rented for the exclusive use of the occupants of a single mobile home. 
Mobile home park means a tract or plot of land, whether publicly or privately-owned, which has been planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes for non-transient use; and the definition of a mobile home park shall also mean any tract or plot of land upon which two or more mobile homes are located regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodation. 
Mobile home stand means that part of a mobile home lot which has been reserved for the placement of a mobile home, appurtenant structures or additions. 
Park street means a private roadway which provides vehicular access to adjacent properties. 
Planning commission or commission means the town planning commission as such commission was created heretofore by the home rule charter of the town, pursuant to R.S. 33:101 et seq. 
Public street means a public right-of-way which provides vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent properties. 
Sketch plan means the sketch map or drawing showing the general design of a proposed mobile home park. 
Walk means a pedestrian way. A common walk is one intended for general pedestrian traffic and a private walk is one serving only an individual mobile home stand. 
(Ord. No. 532, § I(2), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 120-52. - Procedures. 
(a)  General procedure. The procedure for review and approval of a mobile home park plan by the planning commission consists of two consecutive steps as follows: 
(1)  Preparation and submission of a sketch plan of the proposed mobile home park, together with the attendant items specified herein. Submission of a sketch plan is not mandatory, but this step is recommended as a means of identifying and solving design and other problems. 
(2)  Preparation and submission of a final plan, together with the attendant items required herein. 
(b)  Sketch plan. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of the sketch plan is to develop a general design on which to base the final plan, and thus to avoid having to revise such design to make it conform to the master plan, to the provisions of this article and to other regulations, and to relate it to surrounding development. To this end, the developer should consult informally with the building inspector of the town, the technical staff of the planning commission, the town engineer, the parish health officer, the utility agencies, companies or department concerned and other appropriate officials. 
(2)  Submission and review. Prior to the filing of an application for approval of the final plan, the developer shall submit to the building inspector of the town, two copies of the sketch plan of the proposed mobile home park, together with the attendant items specified herein. This step does not require formal application or fee. The sketch plan shall be reviewed by the planning commission or its staff. The review shall take into consideration, in addition to the requirements set out in this article, the relation of the proposed mobile home park to the master plan and to other plans, programs of regulations that might affect the design and development of the mobile home park. 
(3)  Action on sketch plan. With 15 days, the planning commission or its staff shall inform the developer and the building inspector of the town, that the sketch plan as submitted or as modified does or does not meet the objectives of this article. When the planning commission or its staff finds that the sketch plan does not meet the objectives of this article, the reasons therefore shall be given, together with any changes recommended to be made. In the event the developer does not agree to changes recommended by the staff of the planning commission or their officials, he may request and shall receive review and approval or disapproval by the planning commission at its next regular meeting. 
(c)  Final plan. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of the final plan, together with the attendant items required herein, is to provide plans for the design and construction of the mobile home park and its improvements. To this end, during the preparation of the final plan, the developer should consult with the building inspector of the town, the technical staff of the planning commission, the town engineer, the parish health officer, the utility agencies, companies or departments concerned and other appropriate officials. 
(2)  Submission and review. The developer shall submit to the building inspector of the town, four copies of the final plan together with the attendant items required herein, with written application for final approval at least ten days prior to the planning commission meeting at which it is to be considered. The final plan, together with the attendant items required herein, shall be reviewed by the planning commission and will be referred for review and report to the town engineer, the parish health officer, the utility agencies, companies, or departments concerned and other appropriate officials. The review shall take into consideration conformance to the approved sketch plan and fulfillment of any conditions of such approval. 
(3)  Action on final plan. The planning commission shall act upon the final plan within 45 days after its submission, taking into consideration the reports from the officials and agencies named above, and shall communicate in writing to the developer its approval or disapproval. In the case of approval, the commission shall enter such approval upon the final plan by the appropriate certificate. In the case of disapproval, the planning commission shall state the ground for disapproval. 
(4)  Effect of approval. Approval of a final plan shall not constitute acceptance of the mobile home park but shall be deemed only as an expression of approval of the plan submitted as a guide to construction. Final acceptance of the mobile home park for occupancy shall be by action of the building inspector of the town, acting upon instructions from the mayor and board of aldermen of the town 
(5)  Street acceptance. Approval of a final plan shall not constitute acceptance by the public of the dedication of a street or other public way, park or space. 
(Ord. No. 532, § I(3), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 120-53. - Documents. 
(a)  Specifications for sketch plan. 
(1)  General form. The sketch plan shall show in simple outline the general design of the proposed mobile home park in relation to existing conditions and to its surroundings. It may be either a mechanical drawing or a free-hand sketch, made at any convenient scale and size. 
(2)  Information to be shown. The sketch plan shall contain the following information: 
a.  Location. A diagram showing the relation of the proposed mobile home park to main traffic arteries, schools, recreation areas, business and industrial areas and other important features. 
b.  Survey data. Contours or spot elevations required for the final plan or a sufficiently close approximation of such contours or spot elevations to determine necessary drainage. 
c.  Miscellaneous data. The scale of the sketch plan, north arrow and date, and the name and address of the developer, the owner (if a person other than the developer) and the professional engineer or land surveyor. 
d.  Park streets and walks. The park street pattern in relation to existing public streets, including those shown on the plan for circulation (major street plan) or on a neighborhood plan, and the pattern of common walks and parking areas. 
e.  Lots and blocks. The general arrangement of mobile home lots and blocks, with dimensions of typical lot width and depths. 
f.  Mobile home stands. The location and grouping of mobile home stands. 
g.  Nonresidential sites. Identification of proposed recreation areas, service buildings and their sites, and any other nonresidential uses or sites; the general locations of nonresidential buildings. 
h.  Easements. The approximate locations, widths and purposes of existing easements. 
i.  Utilities. 
1.  The approximate locations and sizes of existing utility lines to which connections are proposed to be made. 
2.  A statement of the utilities, street, and other improvements proposed to be made. 
3.  Water and sewerage service will be that of the town. 
(b)  Specifications for final plan. 
(1)  General form. The final plan shall show accurately and in sufficient detail for construction of the mobile home park and its improvements, the design of the park in relation to existing conditions and the surroundings. It shall be drawn to a scale of one inch equals 100 feet, or larger, and the sheet size shall not be larger than 32 inches by 32 inches. Where necessary, the plan may be on several sheets accompanied by an index sheet showing the entire mobile home park. 
(2)  Information to be shown. The final plan shall contain the following information: 
a.  Location. A diagram showing the location of the proposed mobile home park. 
b.  Survey data. The boundary line of the mobile home park with length and bearing of lines; section and corporation lines, if any; mobile home lot lines; contours at intervals of two feet, based on a datum plane that is mean sea level; where contours will not provide adequate information for drainage determinations, spot elevations in sufficient number to show drainage conditions shall be given. 
c.  Miscellaneous data. The title or name by which the proposed mobile home park is to be known, with name and address of the developer, the owner (if a person other than the developer); notations giving scale, (true) north arrow, and date of final plan. 
d.  Park streets and walks. The locations of part streets, common walks and other walkways. 
e.  Lots and blocks. Identification by letter of each block and by number of each mobile home lot. 
f.  Mobile home stands. The location of each mobile home stand on its lot. 
g.  Nonresidential sites. The purpose for which sites, other than mobile home lots, are to be used. 
h.  Utilities. The locations and dimensions of any utility rights-of-way or easements. 
i.  Easements. The locations, dimensions of any utility rights-of-way or easements. 
j.  Building setback lines. Minimum building setback lines on all mobile home lots and other sites. 
k.  Adjoining land. The names of recorded subdivision plats of adjoining platted land; the names of record of owners of adjoining unsubdivided land. 
l.  Certificate. Notarized certification by the land owner of the adoption of the mobile home park plan. 
m.  Certificate of survey. Certification by the registered professional engineer or land surveyor that the plan represents a survey made by him and that all dimensional and other data are correct. 
n.  Approvals. Space for certification of approval of the planning commission, the town engineer, the building inspector of the town, and the parish health officer. 
(c)  Attendant items. The final plan shall be accompanied by the following items: 
(1)  Engineering plans. The cross-sections and profiles of streets showing grades approved by the town standard scales, and elevations shall be based on a datum plane that is mean sea level. Plans for water supply and sanitary sewerage. 
(2)  Plan review fee. A check payable to the town, for the payment of the fee for review of the final plan. The fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and board of aldermen from time to time. 
(d)  Development of site. 
(1)  Nonresidential use. Any nonresidential use shall be subordinate to the residential use and character of the property and shall be such as not to adversely affect the desirability of the park or adjacent or neighboring properties for residential use or family occupancy. 
(2)  Natural features. Natural scenic features of the land, such as streams, shall be considered to be community assets, and the design of the park shall protect and utilize such scenic feature. Because of their value in soil conservation, health and community appearance, large trees shall be preserved where ever possible. 
(3)  Buffer park strips. Where a mobile home park site adjoins land used for a railroad right-of-way, an industrial area, a commercial area or other land use which would have a depreciating effect on the residential use of the land, a buffer park strip of not less than 30 feet in width shall be provided. Buffer park strips shall comply with the following regulations: 
a.  Landscaping. Screen planting shall be provided in sufficient density and of sufficient height (but in no case less than eight feet two years after planting) to afford protection to the mobile home park site from glare of lights, from blowing paper, dust and debris, from visual encroachment, and to effectively reduce the transmission of noise. Screen planting shall be maintained in a clean and neat condition. 
b.  Use of land. No part of a buffer park strip shall be used for any purpose other than screen planting unless such screen planting is provided adjacent to the nonresidential use or district in sufficient depth and density to accomplish the purpose of protection, in which case as much as 20 feet of the required 30 feet may be used for parking or other open space uses or service uses not in conflict with the purpose of protection nor in violation of any other provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 532, § I(4), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 120-54. - General design criteria. 
(a)  Minimum area of site. The minimum area of a tract to be developed as a mobile home park shall be six acres, and the minimum frontage on a public street shall be 50 feet. The minimum number of mobile home lots completed and ready for occupancy, together with all required improvements and services before the first occupancy is permitted shall be 35. 
(b)  General location. The location of the mobile home park shall be convenient to community facilities and services such as employment centers, shopping centers, schools and recreation areas. Police and fire protection shall be reasonably accessible or provisions shall be made assuring those facilities and services. 
(c)  Access to the site. Direct vehicular access to the park shall be provided by means of an abutting improved street of such width and construction as to be adequate for vehicular traffic requirements of the park as well as the other properties served by the access street. 
(d)  Character of the site. The mobile home park site shall be selected with consideration of the proximity and possible effect of environmental factors which exist or may result from the change in land use with regard to the health and safety or comfort of persons who are to reside in the park or persons using land in the vicinity of the park. No site shall be used which does not either have municipal water supply, and which does not have municipal sanitary sewerage. No site shall be used which is subject to undue pooling of water, or air pollution by smoke, dust or fumes. 
(Ord. No. 532, § I(5), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 120-55. - Site planning. 
(a)  General considerations. 
(1)  Objective. Site planning and improvements shall provide for the facilities and amenities appropriate to the needs of the occupants, for safe, comfortable and sanitary use by the occupants under all weather conditions, and for practical and efficient operation and maintenance of all facilities. The site, including mobile home lots, structures and all site improvements, shall be harmoniously and efficiently organized in relation to topography, the shape of the site, and the shape, size and position of structures and common facilities and with full regard to use, appearance and livability. 
(2)  Protection from adverse influences. Adequate protection shall be provided against any undesirable off-site views or any adverse influence from adjoining and access. 
(b)  Park street, walks and parking. 
(1)  Park street layout. The park street layout shall be devised for the most advantageous development of the land. Park street shall provide access to the mobile home lots or other sites. The street system shall provide convenient circulation by means of properly located streets. Closed-end streets (cul-de-sacs) shall be no longer than 600 feet and shall be provided at the closed end with a vehicular turnaround. 
(2)  Alignment and gradient. Park streets shall be adopted to the topography and shall have suitable alignment and gradient for safety of traffic, satisfactory surface and groundwater drainage, and proper functioning of sanitary and storm sewer systems. 
(3)  Intersections. Park street intersections shall be at right angles or nearly so. Where, for topographic or other reasons, an intersection cannot be at right angles, the intersection shall be so designed as to ensure safety. Street jogs with centerline offsets less than 125 feet shall be avoided. 
(4)  Pavement widths. Pavements shall be of adequate widths to accommodate the contemplated traffic load. The minimum widths of pavements shall be: 
a.  Street: 22 feet, back of curb to back of curb, at least 18 feet of rolling surface. 
b.  Street cul-de-sac: 80 feet in diameter. 
c.  Walk: three feet. 
(5)  Common walks. Common walks shall be provided where pedestrian traffic is concentrated and where necessary for convenient access to recreation areas, service buildings and other community use facilities. They should be located preferably through interior areas removed from the vicinity of streets. Walks shall be at least three feet wide. 
(6)  Individual walks. Individual walks to each mobile home stand shall be provided from a common walk or paved street or from a paved driveway or parking space or area connecting to a paved street. Individual walks shall be at least 1½ feet wide. 
(7)  Car parking. Off-street parking shall be provided; provided, however, that required off-street parking may be located either on the mobile home lot or within 200 feet of such lot. The park streets of the mobile home park shall not be considered to answer the requirement for off-street spaces. 
(c)  Blocks and mobile home lots. 
(1)  Sign and shape of blocks. The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with consideration of the limitations and opportunities of topography, the provision of the mobile home lots and the need for convenient access, circulation, control of and safety from traffic. In general, block lengths shall not exceed 800 feet and block lengths shall not be less than 300 feet. Common walks shall be provided across blocks longer than 300 feet. 
(2)  Size and shape of mobile home lots. The size, depth, shape and orientation of mobile home lots and the minimum building setback lines shall be appropriate to the location of the mobile home park and to the type of development and use contemplated. Mobile home lots shall be laid out at such angle with the street as to provide for placing of mobile homes to the best advantage. 
(3)  Minimum width and area. Mobile home lots shall be at least 40 feet wide or the building setback line and shall contain at least 4,000 square feet. 
(4)  Setbacks (yards). Mobile homes shall be placed no closer than ten feet to any park street or to any park property line and no closer than five feet to any mobile home lot line. 
(5)  Spacing of mobile homes. Mobile homes shall be placed not less than 20 feet from any other mobile home. Mobile homes or their appendages shall not be placed over sewer main lines. 
(6)  Lot coverage. The minimum lot coverage by the mobile home shall be 35 percent. An unenclosed patio shall not be considered a part of the structure for the purpose of calculating lot coverage. 
(d)  Public spaces and facilities. 
(1)  Recreation areas. Not less than eight percent of the gross site area shall be devoted to recreational facilities, generally provided in a central location or, in the larger parks, decentralized. Recreation area includes space for community building and community use facilities, such as guest parking, adult recreation and child play areas, swimming pools, utilities and drying yards. 
(2)  Utility easements. Where easements are required for public utilities, they shall be at least 12 feet wide. The width of easements shall be increased, or they shall be extended, where necessary, to provide for utility pole bracing or other construction. No new easement for utilities shall be platted. 
(3)  Drainage easements. Easements for watercourses, drainageways or streams shall conform essentially with the lines of such watercourses having such width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for maintenance. 
(4)  Service buildings. One or more service buildings shall be provided at such locations as to be reasonably accessible to residents of the park. Service buildings shall include space and separation for a park manager's office, storage of maintenance equipment and supplies, recreation management, and adequate individual storage compartments for each lot in the mobile home park. 
(e)  Types of mobile homes permitted. 
(1)  Only Class A or B mobile homes are permitted in mobile home parks as these structures are defined in section 140-5. 
(2)  Within existing mobile home parks, a mobile home of a lower classification may be replaced by a mobile home of a higher classification, provided all other requirements of this article are met. 
(Ord. No. 532, § I(6), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 120-56. - Improvements. 
(a)  General requirements. 
(1)  Street, utility and other improvements shall be installed in each mobile home park in accordance with the standards and requirements specified herein. 
(2)  Improvements required by these regulations shall be made in accordance with the specifications and under the supervision of the town engineer, health officer, the utility agencies, companies or departments concerned and other appropriate authorities. 
(b)  Required improvements. 
(1)  Park streets. Park streets shall be surfaced for their entire width and shall have roll-top or valley-type gutter at each edge. The minimum acceptable all-weather surfacing shall be 2½ inches of hot asphalt on six inches of compacted gravel, or equivalent base, to provide adequate subsurface drainage. 
(2)  Walks. Common walks shall be concrete at least four inches thick. Individual walks shall be concrete at least three inches thick. 
(3)  Car parking areas. Car parking areas shall have all-weather surfacing on compacted base the same as park streets. 
(4)  Water supply. The developer shall install a water supply system connected to the public water supply of the town. An individual water connection shall be provided for each mobile home stand. The connection shall consist of a riser terminating at least eight inches under the ground surface with one, one-half-inch-valved outlet. 
(5)  Sanitary sewerage. The developer shall install a sanitary sewerage system connected to the public sanitary sewer of the town. A four-inch sewer connection suitably located for connection to the mobile home shall be provided for each mobile home stand in accordance with the sanitary code for mobile homes of the town. 
(6)  Surface drainage. The mobile home park shall be so designed that surface water will be drained into natural watercourses or into the municipal stormwater drainage system. Necessary facilities for drainage of roadways and for drainage of surface water in the park shall be installed. All streets shall be designed with curb and underground drainage. No valley drains will be allowed. 
(7)  Utilities. Aboveground utilities shall be placed along streets or on rear or side line of mobile home lots in easements provided for this purpose. Installations shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements and under the supervision of the utility agencies, companies or department concerned. 
(8)  Illumination. Adequate lights shall be provided to illuminate streets, driveways and walkways for the safe movement of vehicles and pedestrians at night. 
(9)  Street signs. Each intersection shall have a sign identifying the streets which form the intersection, constructed and installed in accordance with the requirements of the town engineer. 
(10)  Landscaping. Lawn and ground cover shall be provided for all exposed ground surfaces not paved or covered with other solid material or in such areas as woods and ravines which are to be preserved in their natural state. Screen planting shall be provided as necessary to screen objectionable views such as laundry drying yards, garbage and trash collection stations and rear yards of adjacent properties. 
(c)  Guarantees of performance. The building inspector of the town, shall not issue a certificate of compliance with the provisions of this article for any mobile home park unless the improvements required by this article have been installed in accordance with the standards and specifications of the appropriate officials and agencies and their approval has been certified. A certificate of compliance must have been issued prior to the occupancy of the park. 
(Ord. No. 532, § I(7), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 120-57. - Enlargement or extension. 
(a)  No mobile home park and no extension or enlargement of a mobile home park shall be constructed without prior approval of the planning commission and the building inspector. 
(b)  Increasing the number of mobile homes in a mobile home park and/or enlarging the land area devoted to this use shall both be considered an enlargement or extension. 
(Ord. No. 532, § I(7), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 120-58. - Administration. 
(a)  General provisions. This article shall be administered by the zoning administrator of the town, with the advice of the planning commission and mayor and board of aldermen. 
(b)  Modifications. 
(1)  Hardship. Where the planning commission finds that extraordinary physical circumstances related to the layout of the land prevent strict compliance with these regulations, it may modify the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided that such modifications will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the master plan or these regulations. 
(2)  Conditions. In granting modifications, the planning commission may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so modified. 
(c)  Enforcement. No mobile home park and no extension or enlargement of a mobile home park shall be constructed without having been issued a permit by the building inspector of the town. No such permit shall be issued until the plans for such mobile home park or extension or enlargement thereof have been submitted to and approved by the planning commission. 
(d)  Penalties. 
(1)  Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this ordinance or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $100.00 or imprisoned for not more than ten days, or both, and, in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(2)  The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. 
(3)  Nothing herein contained shall prevent the town from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 532, § I(8), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 120-59. - Amendments. 
(a)  The regulations contained in this article are based on comprehensive planning studies and on the need for uniform standards of design and construction for mobile home parks and improvements to carry out the objective of a sound, stable and desirable development. It is recognized that casual change or amendment to the regulations would be detrimental to the achievement of that objective and it is therefore declared to be the policy of the mayor and board of aldermen of the town, to amend these regulations only where there is manifest error in the regulations or where changed or changing conditions make a change in the regulations necessary and desirable. 
(b)  Amendments to this article may be requested by any person concerned with or affected by the application of the regulations. A request for amendment shall state the name, address and interest of the person requesting the amendment, the nature and purpose of the amendment requested and the need therefore. 
(Ord. No. 532, § I(10), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 120-60. - Interpretation, validity and effective date. 
(a)  Interpretation. In interpreting and applying these regulations, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. Whenever these regulations require higher standards than are required in any other applicable statute, ordinance or regulation, these regulations shall govern; whenever other applicable statutes, ordinances or regulations require higher standards than these regulations, such other applicable statutes, ordinances or regulations shall govern. 
(b)  Validity. Should any section or provision of this article be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the article as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. No. 532, § I(11), 4-13-1999)  
Chapter 125 - PLUMBING 
 
Sec. 125-1. - Office of plumbing inspector. 
The office of plumbing inspector for the town is hereby established. The superintendent of the water and sewerage department of the town shall ex officio be the plumbing inspector. The plumbing inspector or his designated representative shall be responsible for the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 19.5-1; Ord. No. 454, § 1, 1-11-1983)  
Sec. 125-2. - License required. 
(a)  No individual, corporation, partnership or firm shall engage in the business of plumbing or gas piping in the town unless the individual or a member or employee of the corporation, partnership or firm has been licensed as a journeyman plumber under the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  No individual shall engage in the practice of installing plumbing work or gas piping in the town unless licensed as a journeyman plumber under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 19.5-2; Ord. No. 454, § 2, 1-11-1983)  
Sec. 125-3. - Requirements for license. 
A license shall be issued only to an individual who complies with this section, as follows: 
(1)  Possesses a journeyman license issued by the state plumbing board of the state; 
(2)  Pays a license fee to the town in an amount as established by the mayor and board of aldermen from time to time; and 
(3)  Deposits with the plumbing inspector an indemnity bond or certificate of public liability and property damage insurance in an amount as established by the mayor and board of aldermen from time to time. 
(Code 1981, § 19.5-3; Ord. No. 454, § 3, 1-11-1983)  
Sec. 125-4. - Temporary journeyman's license. 
Any person from out of state desiring to practice the occupation of plumbing shall show evidence of his qualifications as a journeyman plumber and will be granted a temporary license for 30 days pending successful completion of the state examination. 
(Code 1981, § 19.5-4; Ord. No. 454, § 4, 1-11-1983)  
Sec. 125-5. - Reciprocal licenses. 
An applicant for a reciprocal plumber's license shall show evidence of his qualifications as a journeyman plumber and his out-of-state license and will be granted a temporary license for 30 days pending successful obtaining of a state license. 
(Code 1981, § 19.5-5; Ord. No. 454, § 5, 1-11-1983)  
Sec. 125-6. - Issuance of reciprocal license. 
Upon successful completion of the requirements for a license as required by section 125-3, the license required by the provisions of this chapter shall be issued. 
(Code 1981, § 19.5-6; Ord. No. 454, § 6, 1-11-1983)  
Sec. 125-7. - Expiration and renewal. 
(a)  All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire at the end of each calendar year. 
(b)  Any person desiring to renew his license shall comply with the provisions of section 125-3. 
(c)  Upon failure of any person to renew a license by January 31 of any year, a penalty fee of $50.00 shall be paid to the town in order to renew such license, in addition to the fee required by section 125-3. 
(Code 1981, § 19.5-7; Ord. No. 454, § 7, 1-11-1983)  
Sec. 125-8. - Registration of apprentices. 
An apprentice plumber shall register his apprenticeship with the plumbing inspector showing the name of the journeyman plumber for whom he works, and, if he transfers, he shall immediately notify the plumbing inspector of such transfer. There shall be no charge for apprentice registration but evidence of registration with the state apprenticeship council will be a prerequisite to such registration. 
(Code 1981, § 19.5-8; Ord. No. 454, § 8, 1-11-1983)  
Sec. 125-9. - Journeyman plumber's responsibility. 
Any licensed journeyman plumber who agrees, is hired, who contracts, or subcontracts to install any plumbing or gas piping in the town shall be responsible for the installation of such work in accordance with all ordinances of the town regulating such work. Such journeyman plumber shall be responsible for securing all permits and for requesting inspection of installations as required by the ordinances of the town and he shall not transfer his duty and responsibility under this section to any other person. Any exception to the provisions of this section shall be temporary and must have the written approval of the plumbing inspector. 
(Code 1981, § 19.5-9; Ord. No. 454, § 9, 1-11-1983)  
Sec. 125-10. - Exemption for homeowners. 
A homeowner personally doing or performing his own work in his own home, occupied by himself and his family, is exempt from being licensed but must comply with all other ordinances of the town in doing such work. 
(Code 1981, § 19.5-10; Ord. No. 454, § 10, 1-11-1983)  
Sec. 125-11. - Revocation and suspension. 
(a)  The mayor and board of aldermen may suspend or revoke any plumber's license for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Misrepresentation of a material fact in obtaining a license or the renewal thereof; 
(2)  Use of a license in obtaining a permit for another; 
(3)  Failure to secure the permits, inspections and approvals required by the town; 
(4)  Work, workmanship or materials not in conformity with the provisions of other ordinances of the town or not in conformity with the permit issued therefor; 
(5)  Repeated violations of this chapter or other ordinances of the town or failure to promptly correct an installation or part thereof made in an incompetent manner or in violation of any ordinance of the town; or 
(6)  Conviction of a felony involving the moral character of the licensee, provided such suspension or revocation is deemed necessary in the public interest. 
(b)  When a license has been suspended three times, any subsequent action because of any of the reasons listed above shall be the cause for the revocation of such license. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the plumbing inspector to report such violations to the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(d)  A license may be suspended for a prescribed period not to exceed six months, and the notice of suspension may require the person whose license is suspended to correct work improperly installed or to correct any other conditions because of which the license was suspended before such license may be reinstated. 
(e)  Before the license may be revoked or suspended, the licensee shall have notice in writing, enumerating the charge against him and be entitled to a public hearing by the mayor and board of aldermen not sooner than five days from the receipt of the notice. The licensee shall be given an opportunity to appear, be represented by counsel, present testimony, oral or written, and shall have the right to cross examination. The mayor and board of aldermen shall have power to administer oaths, issue subpoenas, and compel the attendance of witnesses. The decision of the mayor and board of aldermen shall be based on the evidence produced at the hearing and made part of the record thereof. 
(Code 1981, § 19.5-11; Ord. No. 454, § 11, 1-11-1983)  
Chapter 130 - SUBDIVISIONS 
 
Sec. 130-1. - Purpose. 
(a)  Statement of authority and intent. These subdivision regulations are adopted under authority of subpart A, part IV, chapter 1, title 33, of Louisiana Revised Statutes. The planning commission has fulfilled the requirements set forth therein as prerequisite to the adoption of regulations governing the subdivision of land. It is the intent of these regulations to provide for the harmonious development of the planning area; for the coordination of streets within subdivisions with other existing or planned streets or with other features of the master plan; for adequate and convenient open spaces for traffic, utilities, recreation, light and air; and for a distribution of population and traffic that will tend to create conditions favorable to health, safety, convenience or prosperity. 
(b)  Area of jurisdiction. These regulations shall govern all subdivisions within the planning area as now or hereafter defined. 
(c)  Application of regulation. From and after the effective date of the ordinance from which these subdivision regulations were derived, every plat of land that is a subdivision, as defined herein, shall be prepared, presented for approval and recorded as required herein, and no plat shall have any validity unless it shall have been approved by the planning commission as having fulfilled the requirements of these regulations. 
(Code 1981, app. A, § 1)  
Sec. 130-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alley means a public right-of-way 20 feet or less in width between rear or side property lines, which provides access to adjacent properties. 
Building setback line means the line indicating the minimum horizontal distance between the street line and building. 
Collector (feeder) street means a street of considerable continuity, existing or planned, which serves or is intended to serve as a secondary traffic way and as a feeder between minor streets and one or more major streets. 
Crosswalkway means a public right-of-way ten feet or more in width between property lines, which provides pedestrian access to adjacent properties. 
Cul-de-sac means a short street, not to exceed 600 feet in length, having one end open to traffic and being terminated at the other end by a vehicular turn-around of no less than 100-foot diameter. 
Easement means a grant by the owner of the use of a strip of land by others for specific purposes. 
Final plat means the final plat or drawing on which the subdivision plan is submitted to the planning commission for approval and which, if approved, will be submitted to the clerk and recorder of the parish for recording, and a true copy shall be furnished to the tax assessor for the parish. 
Improvements means street surfacing with curb and gutter, sidewalks, crosswalkways, water mains, sanitary sewers, and utilities. 
Lot means a portion of subdivision intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or for development. 
Major street means a street or great continuity, existing or planned, which serves, or is intended to serve, as a principal traffic way and which is designated on the major street plan as a limited access highway, major street, thoroughfare, parkway, or other term to identify those streets comprising the basic structure of the street system of the town. 
Major street plan means a part of the master plan showing the location and dimension of principle thoroughfares. 
Marginal access street means a street running parallel to the adjacent to or in the immediate vicinity of a major street or highway and which has as its purpose the relief of such major street or highway from the local service of abutting properties. 
Master plan means the comprehensive plan for the physical development of the town, as made and adopted by the town planning commission, all as provided by law; the term includes any unit or part of such plan separately adopted and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof. 
Minor street means a street of limited continuity which serves or is intended to serve the local needs of a neighborhood. 
Official map means the map established by the mayor and board of aldermen provided by law, showing the streets theretofore existing and established by law as public and any amendments thereto adopted by the mayor and board of aldermen, as appropriate, or additions thereto resulting from approval of subdivision plats and the subsequent recording of such approved plats. 
Planning area means all land within the town as such town exists or may exist in the future. 
Planning commission or commission means the town planning commission. 
Preliminary plat means the preliminary map or drawing on which the proposed layout of subdivision is submitted to the planning commission for consideration and tentative approval. 
Reverse corner lot means a corner lot having to its rear a building site facing toward the intersecting or side street. 
Roadway means the portion of street available for vehicular traffic; where curbs are laid, the portion between curbs. 
Sidewalks means the portion of street or crosswalkway, paved or otherwise surfaced, intended for pedestrian use only. 
Street means a public right-of-way which provides vehicular access to adjacent properties. 
Subdivider means any person, group, or corporation acting as a unit, or any agent thereof, dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision as defined herein. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building developments; the term "subdivision" includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing, or to land or area subdivided. 
(Code 1981, app. A, § 2)  
Sec. 130-3. - Procedure. 
(a)  Informal consideration. It is recommended that, prior to the preparation of a subdivision plan, or at least while such plan is still in sketch form, the subdivider and his surveyor or engineer consult with the planning commission to ascertain what provisions must be made to conform to the master plan, including the major street plan, the official map, the zoning ordinance, and these regulations. 
(b)  Preliminary plat. Prior to the completion of the final survey of streets and lots or any subdivision and before the start of any grading or construction work upon the proposed streets and before any map of the subdivision is made in form suitable for recording, a preliminary layout, prepared in accordance with the regulations set forth herein, shall be submitted to the planning commission for its review and recommendations. 
(1)  Submission. An application in writing for the tentative approval of the subdivision, together with four prints of the preliminary plat at a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet, shall be filed with the zoning administrator, who shall submit for approval to the planning commission, at least ten days prior to the regular monthly meetings of the commission to receive action at such meetings. The planning commission shall determine whether the preliminary plat is in proper form and shall not receive or consider the application as filed until such documents are in accordance with the requirements set forth herein. 
(2)  Consideration. The planning commission will study the preliminary plat in its relation to the master plan, including the major street plan, the official map, the zoning ordinance, and the topography of the area, and will take into consideration the general requirements of the community, the particular requirements of the neighborhood, and the best use of the land to be subdivided. Particular attention will be given to specific requirements for parks, playgrounds, playfields, school sites, major streets and collector streets, the adequacy of street connection and the suitability of land for development. The preliminary plat will also be checked by the town engineer or consultant engineer, as appropriate, and by such aspects of subdivision as utilities or health protection. 
(3)  Action. The planning commission will, within 60 days after receipt of the plat, communicate in writing to the subdivider its tentative approval or disapproval, giving: 
a.  The specific changes which it will require in the preliminary plat; 
b.  The character and extent of the required improvements; and 
c.  The amount of the performance bond which it will require in lieu of the completion of improvements required. 
(4)  Tentative approval. Tentative approval of the preliminary plat by the planning commission does not constitute acceptance of the plat of the proposed subdivision but is to be considered only as approval of the general design thereof. 
(5)  Effective period of tentative approval. Tentative approval of the preliminary plat by the planning commission shall be effective for a maximum period of 12 months, unless, upon application by the subdivider, the commission grants an extension. If the final plat has not been submitted to the commission for approval within this time limit, the preliminary plat shall again be submitted to the planning commission for approval. 
(c)  Final plat. 
(1)  Submission. After approval of the preliminary plat by the planning commission and fulfillment of required condition, four true copies of the original drawing the final plat of the subdivision at a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet, in accordance with the regulations set forth herein, together with the required attendant items, shall be submitted to the zoning administrator for submission to the planning commission for approval by the planning commission. 
(2)  Hearing. The subdivider, or, in lieu of the subdivider, the person whose name appears on the final plat for this purpose shall receive written notice of the time and the place at which he will be heard on behalf of his application. 
(3)  Action. The planning commission will communicate in writing to the subdivider its approval or disapproval of the final plat, together with the reasons therefor. 
(4)  Effective period. Approval of the final plat by the planning commission shall be null and void if the plat is not recorded in the office of the clerk or recorder of the parish within 30 days after hearing on the same, unless application for an extension of time is made in writing during such 30-day period to the planning commission and granted by it. 
(5)  Approval not acceptance of public areas. Approval of the final plat shall not be deemed to constitute or effect any acceptance by the public or the dedication of a street or other public way, a park, playground, or playfield, or any other space shown on the plat. 
(Code 1981, app. A, § 3)  
Sec. 130-4. - General requirements for design standards. 
(a)  General principles of acceptability. 
(1)  Conformance to master plan. The subdivision shall conform to the master plan and shall not encroach upon area designated in the master plan for future public facilities. 
(2)  Provisions for future subdivision. If a tract is subdivided into parcels larger than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged to allow the opening of future streets and logical future subdivisions. 
(3)  Reverse strips prohibited. There shall be no reserve strips controlling access to land dedicated or intended to be dedicated to public use. 
(4)  Buffer park strips. Where a residential subdivision adjoins a railroad right-of-way, and industrial area, a business area, or other land use, whether existing or permitted, which might have a depreciating effect on the residential use of the property. A buffer park strip, in the form of an easement, of adequate width for suitable screen planting may be required by the planning commission. 
(5)  Building sites. Every lot must contain a suitable building site. 
(6)  Trees. Valuable large trees shall be preserved wherever possible. Where the neutral ground or planting strip between the roadway and the sidewalk is provided with trees, such trees shall not be of a low bushy species that might obstruct vision. No tree or shrub or bush shall be planted in the neutral ground within 40 feet of the intersecting property lines at a street intersection. 
(7)  Uninhabitable land. Land deemed by the commission to be uninhabitable because of danger of flood or for other reasons shall not be platted for residential use nor for such other uses as may increase danger to health, life, property or aggravate the hazard, until the conditions making the land uninhabitable have been corrected, land that is permitted to be platted shall not be considered to be guaranteed by the mayor and board of aldermen, against flood or other hazards. 
(8)  Neighborhood plan. If a suggested plan for the neighborhood or area in which the tract to be subdivided is located has been made by the planning commission, the street layout of the subdivision shall be in general conformance thereto. 
(9)  Planned residential developments. The planning commission may approve planned residential developments consisting of townhouses, condominiums and/or cluster dwelling lots under the following conditions: 
a.  General requirements. 
1.  The drainage and sewage systems are approved by the local health authority, town officials, and the designated engineering review agencies. 
2.  Restrictions shall be submitted prior to final subdivision and shall be made a part of the plat, setting up perpetual servitudes for parking, utilities and the like and providing for joint maintenance responsibility by the owners, occupants, and/or developers for all joint facilities such as planned open space, parking, drives, drying yards, play areas, and the like according to the provisions of this section and the zoning ordinance as appropriate. 
3.  If townhouse, condominium and cluster subdivision tracts are not under construction within six months of final subdivision approval, the commission may revoke approval unless some compelling reasons can be shown for its continuance. 
b.  General suitability. 
1.  The planning commission shall not approve the subdivision if it is determined that, in the best interest of the public, the site is not suitable for development purposes of the kind proposed or that adequate provision has not been made to protect the community at large from the adverse effects of higher density residential developments such as traffic congestion, drainage capacity, etc. 
2.  Land subject to flooding and land deemed to be topographically or geologically unsuitable shall not be platted for residential occupancy or for other uses, as may increase danger to health, life, or property or aggravate erosion or flood hazard. 
(b)  Townhouse development design standards. 
(1)  No townhouse development shall be approved of less than two nor more than six gross acres. A maximum of 15 dwelling units per gross acre will be allowed. 
(2)  Townhouse lots shall have a minimum area of 2,000 square feet with a minimum width of 18 feet and maximum allowable lot coverage of 75 percent. 
(3)  Townhouses shall have a minimum front setback of 20 feet regardless of whether this front setback is part of an individual lot or part of the common open space. Front yards may contain driveways, walkways, and/or fences but no carports, garages, or accessory structures. Where townhouse lots are designed to face upon an open space or common access court rather than upon a street, this open space shall be a minimum of 40 feet in width, and said space shall not include vehicular drives or parking areas. Setbacks on adjoining units shall vary a minimum of two feet. 
(4)  A maximum of eight living units shall be allowed in each row of townhouses. When an end unit of a row of townhouses does not side on a street, an open space or court of at least 20 feet in width shall be provided between it and the adjacent row of townhouses; however, where two rows of townhouses that together contain less than eight living units are immediately adjacent to each other, this open space between the ends of the two buildings may be reduced to a minimum of 15 feet. 
(5)  No side setback is required for townhouse developments except where the side lot line abuts a street, in which case a minimum of ten feet is required between the building and the right-of-way. No windows, doors, or other openings shall be installed in any common wall between units, however, where a two-story townhouse adjoins a single-story townhouse, openings may be installed in the second story wall of the two-story unit. 
(6)  A minimum of ten feet of rear setback is required, which may contain walks, drives, and/or fences, but no accessory structures, covered patios or carports. 
(7)  The maximum height of any townhouse dwelling shall be 35 feet. 
(c)  Design standards. Design standards for condominium developments are identical to townhouse developments when townhouse style construction is undertaken. All other building styles shall meet design standards as outlined in building and construction codes governing multiple-family dwellings units which have been adopted by the town. 
(d)  Cluster dwelling development and design standards. 
(1)  The planning commission may approve cluster dwelling development tracts of not less than two nor more than ten acres. A maximum of eight dwelling units per gross acre shall be permitted in R-1H zones and nine in R-2 and B-1 zones. 
(2)  Cluster dwelling lots shall have a minimum area of 4,000 square feet in R-2 and B-1 zones with a minimum width of 40 feet at the building setback line. 
(3)  Cluster dwellings shall have a minimum front yard of 15 feet. Front yards may contain driveways, walkways, and fences but no carports, garages or accessory structures. All cluster dwellings shall face upon a street. Setbacks on adjacent units shall vary a minimum of four feet. 
(4)  Cluster dwellings shall have one side yard of at least ten feet. The required side yard shall not be penetrated by accessory structures or appurtenances such as carports or garages but may contain trellises, fences, walks, or landscaping features. Eaves and fireplace columns may penetrate the side yard by no more than two feet. On corner lots, the side setback shall be a minimum of ten feet. A maintenance servitude of five feet shall be provided in the required side yard, abutting the adjacent lot continuously, allowing maintenance access to any structures on said adjacent lot. 
(5)  Accessory buildings, exterior mounted equipment (such as air conditioning units, swimming pool pumps and the like) shall, in no case, be constructed within five feet of another dwelling or accessory structure on an adjacent lot. 
(6)  A minimum of ten feet of rear yard is required which may contain walks, drives, and/or fences but no accessory structures. 
(7)  The maximum height of any cluster dwelling shall be 35 feet. 
(e)  Streets. 
(1)  Major streets. Wherever a subdivision embraces a major street, as shown on the major street plan, such major street shall be platted in the location and the width indicated on the major street plan. 
(2)  Street layout. The street layout shall be devised for the most advantageous development of the entire neighborhood area. Where necessary to the neighborhood pattern, existing principal streets in adjoining subdivision shall be continued and shall be at least as wide as such existing streets and in alignment with them. The street layout shall provide for the future projection of the principal streets into unsubdivided lands adjoining. 
(3)  Intersections. There shall be a minimum number of intersections of minor streets with major streets. 
(4)  Marginal access streets. Where a subdivision has frontage on a major street, as shown on the major street plan, or on a highway of other high volume traffic-way, there shall be provided marginal access streets approximately parallel to and on each side of the major street right-of-way, by a strip of land at least ten feet wide. Separation strips may be provided with screen planting, but such planting shall be so placed that it does not obstruct vision at intersections. 
(5)  Streets at business centers. In front of areas zoned or designed for commercial use, and in front of schools and other public buildings, the street width and the roadway width shall be increased on the side or sides on which the property for commercial use is located by at least ten feet to ensure the free flow of traffic without interference by vehicles entering or leaving parking areas. This is not a parking space requirement and shall in no way effect or diminish requirement by zoning ordinance or otherwise for off-street parking facilities; neither shall fulfillment of this requirement and its acceptance by the planning commission be deemed approval or endorsement of any change in zoning necessary for such commercial use. 
(6)  Alleys. Paved rear alleys not less than 20 feet wide shall be required in all business and industrial districts where other provisions for delivery and service, including adequate off-street loading space, suitably surfaced, is not made. In general, alleys will not be approved for residential subdivisions. 
(7)  Half streets. Except in unusual circumstances, no new half streets shall be platted; where a tract of land to be subdivided abuts upon an existing half street, the other half of the street shall be platted. 
(8)  Street grades. Street grades shall conform in general to the terrain and shall be sufficient for proper drainage. 
(9)  Cul-de-sacs. Except as provided in section 140-5, cul-de-sacs shall not exceed 600 feet in length and shall have a turnaround of not less than 100 feet in diameter of paved street at the closed end. 
(10)  Right-of-way widths. Except where the major street plan specifies a greater width as a minimum or where the planning commission has approved a narrower street as part of a planned unit residential development according to provisions of subsection (a) of this section, the minimum right-of-way widths for streets, alleys, and crosswalks shall be: 
Major street 	100 feet 
Marginal access street 	50 feet 
Collector street 	80 feet 
Minor street 	50 feet 
Closed-end street 	50 feet 
Turnaround right-of-way diameter 	100 feet 
Alley 	20 feet 
Crosswalk 	10 feet 
 
(11)  Roadway widths. Roadway widths shall be as follows: 
Major street 	* 
Secondary street 	26 feet 
Minor street 	26 feet 
Cul-de-sac 	26 feet 
Marginal access street (with no intersecting streets) 	20 feet 
Marginal access street (with one or more intersecting streets) 	26 feet 
Alley (in business or industrial district) 	20 feet 
Alley (in residential district where permitted by exception) 	16 feet 
Crosswalkway 	4 feet 
Sidewalk 	4 feet 
 
*Major street roadway construction and surfacing is not required of the subdivider. 
(12)  Curvature of streets. The minimum radius of curvature, other than intersections, of streets on the center line shall be: 
Major street 	600 feet 
Secondary street 	300 feet 
Minor street 	100 feet 
Cul-de-sac 	37 feet 
 
(13)  Reversed curvings. Between reversed curves on major streets there shall be a tangent at least 100 feet long. 
(14)  Intersections. Street intersections shall be at right angles or nearly so. Where, because of topographic or other reasons, an intersection cannot be at right angles, such intersection shall be designed to ensure safety. 
(15)  Curb radii. Curb radii shall not be less than ten feet. Where an angle of intersection of less than 90 degrees is permitted, curb radii shall be increased as necessary for safety. 
(f)  Blocks. 
(1)  Length of blocks. Blocks shall not exceed 1,200 feet in length; blocks longer than 800 feet in length shall have a street crosswalkway near the center of the block. 
(2)  Blocks for industrial or commercial use. Blocks intended for commercial or industrial use shall be designed specifically for such purpose, with adequate space set aside for off-street parking. 
(3)  Blocks on major streets. Blocks shall be so arranged as to make a minimum number of intersections of minor streets with major streets. 
(4)  Shape of blocks. In general, blocks providing two rows of lots are acceptable, but irregularly-shaped blocks indented by cul-de-sacs and containing interior parks shall be used where topography and other natural features of the terrain allow such variations. 
(5)  Lots. Except as provided in subsection (a)(9) of this section, lots for residential use shall be at least 60 feet wide at the building setback line and shall be at least 7,200 square feet in area. 
(g)  Public spaces. 
(1)  Parks and playgrounds. Ten percent of the area of every subdivision, exclusive of streets and unusable land, may be required by the planning commission to be set aside for public recreational purposes. In small subdivisions such reservation of land shall be so located as to permit combining it with similar reservations in adjoining tracts. Reservations of land for park and recreational use shall be located to conform, as nearly as possible, with the master plan. 
(2)  Natural and cultural features. Outstanding natural and cultural features, such as scenic spots, watercourses, and historic sites, shall be preserved insofar as possible. 
(3)  Utility easements. Non-exclusive easements at least ten feet wide, five feet on each side of rear or side property line of lots, together with the right of egress and ingress, shall be provided where necessary for public utilities. The dimensions of such easements shall be increased where necessary to provide space for utility pole bracing or other construction or for the extension of main storm and sanitary sewer lines are located in the same easement, easements shall be part of the yard area and shall remain unobstructed except for fences. 
(4)  Names. The name of the subdivision and new street names shall not duplicate, nor too closely approximate phonetically, the name of any other subdivision or street within the town. 
(h)  Improvement design standards. Street, utility and other improvements shall be installed and other improvements shall be installed in each new subdivision in accordance with the standards and requirements specified herein. 
(1)  Improvements required by the regulations shall be made in accordance with the specifications and subject to the approval of the town engineer, director of the parish health unit, the utility agencies or companies concerned with the tract or adjacent tracts and other appropriate authorities. 
(2)  Monuments. Lot and block corners shall be marked with iron pipes at least one-half inch in diameter and 16 inches long. Angle points, points of curves in streets, the out boundary corners of the subdivision and intermediate points as required by the town engineer shall be marked with either concrete blocks six inches square in diameter and 30 inches long or with iron pipes two inches in diameter and four feet long. 
(3)  Roadways. 
a.  Roadways shall be constructed with curb and gutter for asphalt street and an integral type curb for concrete streets. All curbs shall be mountable type unless otherwise approved by the town engineer. 
b.  The minimum acceptable surfacing shall be 2½ inches of hot asphalt on six inches of compacted sand-clay-gravel or six inches thick concrete on stabilized or compacted soil. 
c.  Minimum physical compaction requirements shall be as follows: 
Subgrade (top 6 inches) 	95% (AASHO T-99) 
Sand-clay-gravel base 	95% (AASHO T-180) 
Asphalt 	95% (minimum of briquette density (75) blow) 
 
d.  Concrete minimum strength shall be 3,000 pounds per square inch at 28 days. Testing requirements shall be as follows: 
1.  Concrete. A minimum of four cylinders shall be made for each day's pour. Two shall be tested at seven days and two at 28 days. 
2.  Asphalt. Control bin samples shall be run each day the plant is in operation. One briquette shall be obtained and density determined for each 500 linear feet of roadway. 
3.  Base and subgrade. One compaction test shall be run for each 500 linear feet of roadway. 
e.  A copy of all test results shall be submitted to the town engineer immediately after they are available. 
(4)  Drainage. All drainage shall be accomplished by underground conduits and shall be collected from the roadway by means of catch basins. Surface water shall not be allowed to run over 300 feet along the street gutter. 
(5)  Water supply. Where the town water supply is not accessible to all lots, the subdivider shall install a water supply system in accordance with the requirements and under the supervision of the town engineer and director of the parish health unit. The system shall include adequate capacity for fire protection. The minimum line size shall be six inches with a maximum length of 600 feet being fed from an eight-inch or larger main. A leakage and pressure test shall be conducted on the system in accordance with American Water Works Association standards. A letter certified by the developer's engineer shall then be sent to the planning commission and the town engineer stating that the tests have been conducted and the results of these tests. 
(6)  Sanitary sewerage. Where a public sanitary sewer is reasonably accessible, the subdivider shall install a sanitary sewer system with a stubout for each lot in the proposed subdivision and shall connect the system to the public sewer. To avoid cutting pavement or roadway when connections are made, stubouts shall extend from the sewer line to points outside the roadway. All sewer work shall be done in accordance with state department of health requirements. A leakage test shall be conducted on the completed sewerage system. Allowable leakage (infiltration) shall be as specified by the town engineer for all sewerage work within the town. A letter certified by the developer's engineer shall then be sent to the planning commission and the town engineer stating that the test has been conducted and the result of the test. 
(7)  Gas lines. To avoid cutting pavement or roadway when service connections from the gas main are made, stubouts shall extend from the main points outside of the roadway. 
(8)  Aboveground utilities. Aboveground utilities shall normally be placed on rear or side property lines of lots along easements provided for this purpose. Existing franchise rights are not affected by this requirement and special consideration will be given to street lighting requirements and unusual circumstances. 
(9)  Street signs. Each intersection shall have signs on diagonally opposite corners identifying the streets which form the intersection. Construction and installation of street signs shall be in accordance with the requirements of the town engineer. 
(10)  Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of the street; provided, however, that where low population density, small traffic volumes, and other special circumstances reduce the normal need for sidewalks, the planning commission may waive the requirement. Sidewalks shall be four feet wide and constructed of concrete which is four inches thick. They shall be located 1½ feet from property lines. 
(11)  Guarantees of performance. 
a.  Completion of improvements. The planning commission shall not approve the final plat of any subdivision unless the improvements required by these regulations have been installed in accordance with the standards and specifications of the appropriate officials and agencies and their approval has been certified to the planning commission. 
b.  Surety bond. In lieu of the completion of improvements prior to the submission of the final plat for approval, the planning commission may accept a bond in an amount and with surety and conditions satisfactory to it providing for and securing to the town to actual construction and installation of the improvements within a period specified by the commission and expressed in the bond. 
(Code 1981, app. A, § 4; Ord. No. 531, §§ 1—4, 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 130-5. - Documents. 
(a)  The preliminary plat. The preliminary layout shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name of the subdivision. 
(2)  Legal description of location. 
(3)  Scale of the layout or plat. 
(4)  Date. 
(5)  Statement of whether the north point is true or magnetic and whether bearings shown on the plat are true or magnetic. 
(6)  Boundary lines of the subdivision with length and bearing not azimuth of lines. 
(7)  The location, widths, and names or streets or other public ways, easements, railroad and utility rights-of-way, pipelines, section and corporation lines within or adjacent to the tract, airport approach zones, hazard areas, and height restrictions, and distances and bearings to the nearest official monuments which shall be accurately described. 
(8)  Location of land intended to be dedicated to public use or reserved in the deeds for the use of all property owners in the subdivision. 
(9)  Numbers, dimensions and area of lots and blocks. 
(10)  Building setback lines, both front and side. 
(11)  Accurate location of watercourses and other important features. 
(12)  Contours, commensurate with slope and topography referred to mean gulf level. 
(13)  Name and address of owner and subdivider and name of designer of the preliminary layout. 
(14)  The names of subdivisions immediately adjacent and the names of owners of record of adjacent unsubdivided tracts. 
(15)  Existing permanent buildings or structures within or adjacent to the tract. 
(16)  Where the preliminary layout covers only a part of the subdivider's entire holding, a sketch of the prospective street system of the unsubmitted part shall be furnished, and the street system of the submitted part will be considered in the light of adjustments and connections with the street system of the part not submitted. 
(b)  The final plat. The final plat shall contain all of the information required in subsections (a)(1) through (11) of this section, of the preliminary plat and, in addition, shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Accurate location and reference of all monuments, shall be concrete blocks, six inches by six inches and 30 inches long, properly centered and sunk to grade level. Such monuments shall be placed within each block as directed by the town engineer or consulting engineer, as appropriate, and shall not be further apart than 500 feet. 
(2)  Certification by a state-registered professional engineer or land surveyor to the effect that the plat represents a survey made by him and that the monuments shown thereon actually exist as located and that all dimensional and other details, such as curb data, are correct. 
(3)  Notarized certification by the owner of the adoption of the plat and the dedication of streets and other public areas. 
(4)  Approval by signature of the proper town official, the director of Jackson Parish Health Unit, and other authorities concerned with the specifications and inspection of utility installations and improvements. 
(5)  Space for approval of the planning commission with date and signature of the chairperson of the planning commission. 
(c)  Attendant items. The final plat shall be accompanied by the following documents: 
(1)  Cross sections, plans and profiles of each street and, if required by the town, of sewer and water lines. 
(2)  Copy of restrictions to be incorporated into deeds or covenants to be recorded with the plat. 
(3)  A conveyance to the town by fee simple or by easement of land set aside for parks, playgrounds, or other public use, provided by this chapter. 
(4)  Performance bond to secure to the town, the actual construction and installation of utilities and improvements, if required by the planning commission. 
(Code 1981, app. A, § 5)  
Sec. 130-6. - Administration. 
(a)  General provisions. These subdivision regulations shall be administered by the planning commission. 
(b)  Appeals. The disapproval of a subdivision plan or plat may by appealed by the subdivider by filing with the planning commission and with the mayor and board of aldermen a written notice of such appeal. Upon receiving notice of appeal, the planning commission shall transmit to the local legislative body a certified copy of the proceedings in the case upon which the appeal is taken. The local legislative body may overrule such disapproval by a majority vote of its entire membership. Upon such overruling, the local legislative body shall notify the planning commission, directing the issuance of a certificate of approval to permit the recording of the plat. 
(c)  Enforcement. No plat of a subdivision of land lying within the planning commission planning area shall be filed or recorded until it shall have been submitted to and approved by the planning commission. 
(d)  Penalties. Whoever, being the owner of any land within the municipality constituting a subdivision as defined herein, transfers or sells or agrees to sell such land before a subdivision plat thereof has been approved by the planning commission and filed or recorded in the conveyance records of the parish shall be subject to the penalties set forth in subpart A, part IV, chapter 1, title 33, of Louisiana Revised Statutes of 1950, as amended. 
(Code 1981, app. A, § 6)  
Sec. 130-7. - Amendments. 
(a)  Amendment policy. These subdivision regulations are based on comprehensive planning studies and on the need for uniform standards of design and construction for subdivisions and improvements to carry out the objective of a sound, stable and desirable development. It is recognized that casual change or amendment to the regulations would be detrimental to the achievement of that objective, and it is therefore declared to be the policy of the planning commission to amend these regulations only when one or more of the following conditions prevails: 
(1)  Error. There is a manifest error in the regulations. 
(2)  Change in conditions. Changed or changing conditions in a particular area or in the planning region generally make a change in the regulations necessary and desirable. 
(b)  Amendment procedure. Amendments to these subdivision regulations may be requested by a person concerned with or affected by the application of the regulations. A request for amendment shall state the name, address and interest of the person requesting the amendment, the nature and purpose of the amendment requested and the need thereof. 
(Code 1981, app. A, § 7)  
Sec. 130-8. - Interpretation and application of provisions. 
In interpreting and applying the provisions of these regulations, they shall be help to the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. Whenever the provisions of these regulations require higher standards than are required in any other applicable statute, ordinance or regulation, the provisions of these regulations shall govern; whenever other applicable statutes, ordinances or regulations require higher standards than the provisions of these regulations, such other applicable statutes, ordinances or regulations shall govern. 
(Code 1981, app. A, § 8)  
Chapter 135 - AIRPORT HAZARD ZONING 
 
Sec. 135-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The Jonesboro Airport Hazard Zoning Ordinance." 
(Code 1981, app. E, § I)  
Sec. 135-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Airport means the Jonesboro Airport, Jonesboro, Louisiana. 
Airport elevation means the highest point of an airport's usable landing area measured in feet from mean sea level. 
Airport hazard means any structure or object of natural growth located on or in the vicinity of a public airport, or any use of land near such airport, which obstructs the airspace required for the flight of aircraft in landing or takeoff at such airport or is otherwise hazardous to such landing or takeoff of aircraft. 
Approach, transitional, horizontal, and conical zones means these zones apply to the area under the approach, transitional, horizontal, and conical surfaces defined in Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) Part 77. 
Board of appeal means a board consisting of five members appointed by the mayor and board of aldermen of the town as provided in section 135-9. 
Conical surface means a surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to one for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. 
FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration of the U.S. Department of Transportation. 
Height means, for the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this chapter and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified. 
Horizontal surface means a horizontal plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan coincides with the perimeter of the horizontal zone. 
Larger than utility runway means a runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of greater than 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and jet powered aircraft. 
Nonconforming use means any pre-existing structure, object of natural growth, or use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or any amendment thereto. 
Nonprecision instrument runway means a runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in-non-precision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned. 
Obstruction means any structure, growth, or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in section 135-4. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association, or governmental entity; includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, or similar representative of any of them. 
Precision instrument runway means a runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing an instrument landing system (ILS) or a precision approach radar (PAR). The term "precision instrument runway" also means a runway for which a precision approach system is planned and is so indicated on an FAA approved airport layout plan or any other planning document. 
Primary surface means a surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway; but when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface, or planned hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of the primary surface of a runway will be that width prescribed in part 77 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) for the most precise approach existing or planned for either end of that runway. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. 
Runway means a defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length. For purposes of this zoning chapter, it will include any runway extension shown on an approved airport layout plan. 
Structure means an object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by man, including, but without limitation, buildings, towers, smokestacks, earth formation, and overhead transmission lines. 
Transitional surfaces means these surfaces extend outward at 90 degree angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces. 
Transport runway means a runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by aircraft of greater than 12,500 pounds and less than 60,000 pounds maximum gross weight. 
Tree means any object of natural growth. 
Utility runway means a runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller-driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and less. 
Visual runway means a runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures. 
(Code 1981, app. E, § II)  
Sec. 135-3. - Airport zones. 
In order to carry out the provisions of this chapter, there are hereby created and established certain zones which include all of the land lying within the approach zones, transitional zones, horizontal zones, and conical zones as they apply to Jonesboro Airport. Such zones are shown on the Jonesboro Airport Hazard Zoning Map consisting of one sheet, prepared by HTB, INC., and dated June 6, 1979, which is attached to the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and made a part hereof. An area located in more than one of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows: 
(1)  Utility runway visual approach zone. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 250 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 1,250 feet at a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(2)  Utility runway nonprecision instrument approach zone. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 500 feet wide. The approach zones expands outward uniformly to a width of 2,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(3)  Transitional zones. These zones are hereby established as the area beneath the transitional surfaces. These surfaces extend outward at 90 degree angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended a slope of seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces. 
(4)  Horizontal zone. The horizontal zone is hereby established by swinging arcs of 5,000 feet radii for all runways designated utility or visual from the center of each end of the primary surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal zone does not include the approach and transitional zones. 
(5)  Conical zone. The conical zone is hereby established as the area that commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward there from a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. The conical zone does not include the precision instrument approach zones and the transitional zones. 
(Code 1981, app. E, § III)  
Sec. 135-4. - Airport zone height limitations. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, allowed to grow, or be maintained in any zone created by this chapter to a height in excess of the applicable height limit therein established for such zone. Such applicable height limitations are hereby established for each of the zones in question as follows: 
(1)  Utility runway visual approach zone. Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(2)  Utility runway nonprecision instrument approach zone. Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(3)  Transitional zone. Slopes upward and outward seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the approach zones and extending to a height of 150 feet above the airport elevation. In addition to the foregoing, there are established height limits sloping upward and outward seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach zones and extending to where they intersect the conical surface. 
(4)  Horizontal zone. 150 feet above the airport elevation or a height of 398 feet above mean sea level. 
(5)  Conical zone. Slopes upward and outward 20 feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the periphery of the horizontally zone end at 150 feet above the airport elevation and extending to a height of 350 feet above the airport elevation. 
(6)  Excepted height limitations. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the construction or maintenance of any structure, or growth of any tree to a height up to 50 feet above the surface of the land. 
Where an area is covered by more than one height limitation, the more restrictive limitation shall prevail. 
(Code 1981, app. E, § IV)  
Sec. 135-5. - Use restrictions. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no use may be made of land or water within any zone established by this chapter in such a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards, or otherwise in any way create a hazard or endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport. 
(Code 1981, app. E, § V)  
Sec. 135-6. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Regulations not retroactive. The regulations prescribed by this chapter shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or other changes or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of a nonconforming use. Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, and is diligently prosecuted. 
(b)  Marking and lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this section, the owner of any existing nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation, and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the mayor and board of aldermen of the town to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of such airport hazards. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the town. 
(Code 1981, app. E, § VI)  
Sec. 135-7. - Permits. 
(a)  Future uses. No material change shall be made in the use of land and no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, planted, or otherwise established in any zone hereby created unless a permit therefore shall have been applied for and granted. 
(1)  A permit for a tree or structure of less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground shall not be required in the horizontal and conical zones or in any approach and transitional zones beyond a horizontal distance of 4,200 feet from each end of the runway except when such tree or structure because of terrain, land contour, or topographic features, would extend above the height limit prescribed for the respective zone. 
(2)  Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired with sufficient particulars to determine whether the resulting use, structure, or tree would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted. No permit for a use inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter shall be granted unless a variance has been approved in accordance with subsection (d) of this section. 
(b)  Existing uses. No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an airport hazard or permit a nonconforming use, structure, or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or any amendments thereto, or than it is when the application for a permit is made. Except as indicated, all applications for such a permit shall be granted. 
(c)  Nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed. Whenever the mayor and board of aldermen of the town determines that a nonconforming tree or structure has been abandoned or more than 80 percent torn down, physically deteriorated, or decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations. 
(d)  Variances. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use his property not in accordance with the regulations prescribed in this chapter, may apply to the board of appeal for a variance from such regulations. The application for variance shall be accompanied by a determination from the Federal Aviation Administration as to the effect of the proposal upon the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace. Such variances shall be allowed where it is duly found that a literal application or enforcement of the regulations would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship and relief granted would not be contrary to the public interest, would not create a hazard to air navigation, but will do substantial justice and be in accordance with the spirit of this chapter. 
(e)  Hazard marking and lighting. Any permit or variance granted may, if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this chapter and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to permit the mayor and board of aldermen of the town, at its own expense, to install, operate, and maintain thereon such markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to pilots the presence of an airport hazard. 
(Code 1981, app. E, § VII)  
Sec. 135-8. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the mayor and board of aldermen of the town to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed herein. Applications for permits and variances shall be made to the mayor upon a form furnished by the town. Applications required by this chapter to be submitted to the mayor and board of aldermen of the town shall be promptly considered and granted or denied by them. Applications for actions by the board of appeal shall be forthwith transmitted by the mayor. 
(Code 1981, app. E, § VIII)  
Sec. 135-9. - Board of appeal. 
(a)  There is hereby created a board of appeal to have and exercise the following powers: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals from any order requirement, decision, or determination made by the mayor and board of aldermen of the town in the enforcement of this chapter; 
(2)  To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this chapter upon which such board of appeal under such regulations may be required to pass; and 
(3)  To hear and decide specific variances. 
(b)  The board of appeal shall consist of five members appointed by the mayor and board of aldermen and each shall serve for a term of three years and until his successor is duly appointed and qualified. Of the members first appointed, two shall be appointed for a term of three years, two for a term of two years and one for a term of one year. Members shall be removable by the appointing authority for cause, upon written charges, after a public hearing. 
(c)  The board of appeal shall adopt rules for its governance and in harmony with the provisions of this chapter. Meetings of the board of appeal shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the board of appeal may determine. The chairperson, or, in his absence the acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All hearings of the board of appeal shall be public. The board of appeal shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question; or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall immediately be filed in the office of the town clerk and on due cause shown. 
(d)  The board of appeal shall make written findings of facts and conclusions of law giving the facts upon which it acted and its legal conclusions from such facts in reversing, affirming, or modifying any order, requirement, decision, or determination which comes before it under the provisions of this chapter. 
(e)  The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the board of appeal shall be sufficient to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the mayor and board of aldermen of the town or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this chapter, or to effect variation in this chapter. 
(Code 1981, app. E, § IX)  
Sec. 135-10. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved or any taxpayer affected by any decision of the mayor and board of aldermen of the town made in their administration of this chapter may appeal to the board of appeal. 
(b)  All appeals hereunder must be taken within a reasonable time as provided by the rules of the board of appeal by filing with the mayor a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The mayor shall forthwith transmit to the board of appeal all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(c)  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in the furtherance of the action appealed from unless the mayor certifies to the board of appeal, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate, a stay would in the mayor's opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by order of the board of appeal on notice to the mayor, and on due cause shown. 
(d)  The board of appeal shall fix a reasonable time for hearing appeals, give public notice and due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(e)  The board of appeal may, in conformity with the provision of this chapter, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as may be appropriate under the circumstances. 
(Code 1981, app. E, § X)  
Sec. 135-11. - Judicial review. 
Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected by any decision of the board of appeal, may appeal to the district court of the parish having jurisdiction as provided in section 8 of Act 118 of the public laws of the state, enacted by the 1944 session of the legislature. 
(Code 1981, app. E, § XI)  
Sec. 135-12. - Penalties. 
Each violation of this chapter or of any regulation, order, or ruling promulgated hereunder shall constitute a misdemeanor and be punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both; and each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1981, app. E, § XII)  
Sec. 135-13. - Conflicting regulations. 
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this chapter and any other regulations applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be with respect to the height of structures or trees, the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail. 
(Code 1981, app. E, § XIII)  
Sec. 135-14. - Adoption and amendments. 
(a)  No airport zoning regulations shall be adopted, amended or changed under this chapter except by action of the mayor and board of aldermen, after a public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties of interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. Thirty days' notice of the hearing date, time and place shall be published in the official journal of the town. 
(b)  Such airport zoning regulations adopted by the mayor and board of aldermen after said public hearing is held shall have the consent and approval of the department of public works as provided for in R.S. 2:139. The department of public works is now a part of the state department of transportation and development (DOTD) under the provisions of Act 513 of 1976 and this operating responsibility is therefore transferred to DOTD. Any changes or amendments to this chapter shall have the consent and approval of the department of transportation and development prior to adoption by the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(Code 1981, app. E, § XV)  
Chapter 140 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Physical development of municipalities, R.S. 33:101 et seq.; regional planning commission, R.S. 33:131 et seq.; building and zoning regulations, R.S. 33:4721 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - AUTHORITY AND APPLICATION 
 
Sec. 140-1. - Authority. 
This chapter is adopted under authority of sections 4721 through 4732, title 33, Louisiana Revised Statues of 1950, as amended. The requirements set forth therein as prerequisite to the adoption of a zoning ordinance have been fulfilled. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(1), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 140-2. - Intent. 
It is the intent of this chapter to provide for the harmonious development of the town in accordance with the master plan heretofore made and adopted by the planning commission to lessen congestion in the public streets, secure safety from fire, provide adequate light and air, avoid undue concentration of population, promote health and general welfare and conserve the value of buildings by encouraging the most appropriate use of the land by districting according to the particular suitability of the land for particular purposes, all to create conditions favorable to health, safety, convenience and prosperity. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(2), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 140-3. - Area of jurisdiction. 
(a)  This chapter shall apply to all land within the corporate limits of the town as such corporate limits exist or may exist in the future. 
(b)  Territory hereafter annexed to the town shall be classified as being in an O-L district until and unless changed in accordance with the amendment procedure set forth in article VIII of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(3), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 140-4. - Application of regulations. 
Except as hereinafter provided: 
(1)  No land shall be used or occupied, no structure shall be erected, altered, used or occupied, and no use shall be operated unless in conformity with the regulations herein prescribed for the district in which such structure or land is located. 
(2)  No structure shall be erected, altered, used, or occupied to exceed the height limits herein established, to have less building site area, or to have narrower or smaller front, side and rear yards than therein prescribed for the district in which the structure is located. 
(3)  No part of a yard or other open space required about any structure for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be included as a part of the yard or other open space similarly required for another structure. 
(4)  No building site shall be so reduced or diminished that the building site area, yards, or other open spaces shall be smaller than prescribed by this chapter. 
(5)  Every structure, other than an accessory structure, hereafter erected, altered, used, or occupied shall have provided and continuously maintained for it a separate building site as herein defined. 
(6)  Every use, unless expressly exempted by this chapter, shall be operated entirely within a completely enclosed structure. 
(Code 1981, app. D, pt. I, § 4)  
Sec. 140-5. - Definitions. 
When used in this chapter, the following words and phrases have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, unless the context indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory structure means a detached subordinate building located on the same building site with the main building, the use of which is incidental to that of the main building, including detached garage, outdoor advertising system, storage building, etc. 
Accessory use means a use customarily incidental to the principal use of a building site or to a building and located upon the same building site with the principal use, including parking lots, open storage activity, etc. 
Alley means any public space or thoroughfare 20 feet or less in width which has been dedicated or deeded for public use. 
Alteration means any structural change in the supporting or load-bearing members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders. 
Board means the board of adjustments established by this chapter. 
Boardinghouse means a building where, for compensation and by prearrangement, five or more persons other than occasional or transient customers are provided with meals. 
Building means any covered structure intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels. The term "building" shall be construed to include the term structure. 
Building site means the land area occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory buildings and including such open spaces, yards, minimum area, off-street parking facilities and off-street truck loading facilities as are required by this chapter; every building site shall abut upon a street. 
Building site boundary means any line separating a building site from a street, an alley, another building site, or any land not part of the building site. 
Church means a building, together with its accessory building and uses, where persons regularly assemble for religious worship, and which building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship. 
Clinic, dental or medical, means a building in which a group of physicians, dentists, and allied professional assistants are associated for the purpose of carrying on their profession; the clinic may include a dental or medical laboratory but shall not include in-patient care or operating rooms for major surgery. 
Dwelling unit means one or more rooms in the same structure, connected together and constituting a separate, independent housekeeping unit for permanent residential occupancy and with facilities for sleeping and cooking. 
Dwelling, cluster, means a one-family detached dwelling, excluding mobile homes, built in a cluster subdivision according to design specifications in section 130-4. 
Dwelling, condominium, means a group of two or more dwellings, similar to an apartment complex or townhouse subdivision providing for joint ownership of the underlying land and physical facilities and for individual ownership of the living spaces within. 
Dwelling, one-family, means a detached building containing one dwelling unit and used exclusively by one family. 
Dwelling, townhouse, means one of a series of two or more individually owned, single-family dwellings, excluding mobile homes, attached in a row, distinguished from condominium units by the ownership of the underlying land resting with the dwelling's owner rather than in common ownership. 
Dwelling, two-family, means a detached building containing two dwelling units and used by two families living independently of each other. 
Dwelling, multiple-family, means a detached building containing three or more dwelling units and used by three or more families living independently of each other; the term "multiple-family dwelling" includes an apartment house. 
Family means one or more persons living together as a single housekeeping unit, which may include not more than four lodgers or boarders. 
Gross floor area means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building, including interior balconies and mezzanines; all horizontal dimensions shall be measured between the exterior faces of walls, including the walls of roofed porches having more than one wall. The gross floor area of a building shall include the floor area of accessory buildings on the same building site, measured the same way. 
Home occupations means an accessory use of a dwelling unit for gainful employment involving the manufacture, provision, or sale of goods and/or services within the limits imposed on such uses according to section 140-57(g). 
Hospital means an institution providing health services, primarily for in-patients, and medical and surgical care of the sick and injured including, as an integral part of the institution, such related facilities as laboratories, out-patient departments, training facilities, central service facilities, staff offices, and emergency evacuation heliports. 
Hotel means a building containing guest rooms in which lodging is provided, with or without meals, for compensation, and which is open to transient or permanent guests, or both, and where there is either no provision made for cooking in any guest room or provision made for cooking in not more than 25 percent of the guest rooms; the term "hotel" includes motel. 
Livestock keeping, raising, or breeding means the keeping, raising, or breeding of any animals, including fowl, of any type or nature whatsoever; however, the term "livestock keeping, raising, or breeding" does not include: 
(1)  Keeping common household pets such as dogs, cats, hamsters, or caged birds for personal comfort and not as a commercial activity or with any expectation of realizing any proceeds or otherwise profiting therefrom; 
(2)  The occasional sale of pet offspring; and 
(3)  Small animal veterinary clinics and kennels. 
Lot of record means a lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the clerk of court of the parish, or a lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been recorded in the office of the clerk of the parish. 
Mobile home , for purposes of this chapter, shall be categorized into the following: 
(1)  Class A. New mobile homes certified as meeting the mobile home construction and safety standards of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development and approved as meeting "acceptable similarity" appearance standards in accordance with section 140-57(f)(4). 
(2)  Class B. New mobile homes certified as meeting the mobile home construction and safety standards of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, but not approved as meeting appearance standards. 
(3)  Class C. All mobile homes not meeting the standards specified above but found by the building inspector to be in good condition. 
(4)  Class D. Mobile homes found by the building inspector to be in poor condition and un-safe for occupancy. 
Mobile home parks means a parcel of land under single ownership, whether public or private, which has been planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes for non-transient use. 
Nonconforming structure means a building or part thereof lawfully existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and which does not conform to all of the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
Nonconforming use means a use which lawfully occupied a building or land on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and which does not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
Off-premises sign means a permanently placed sign, other than an outdoor general advertising structure, not on the same premises with the establishment it advertises, identifies, or enhances. A sign identifying a planned residential or commercial development according to section 130-4(9) is considered to be an on-premises sign. 
On-premises sign means a sign serving to identify or enhance commercial or other establishments which is on the premises of the establishment being served. An on-premises sign is considered to be part and parcel of the use to which it is associated. 
Outdoor general advertising structure means a billboard or other off-premises sign larger than 35 square feet of sign-face area. 
Permitted structure means a structure meeting all the requirements established by this chapter for the district in which the structure is located. 
Permitted use means a use meeting all the requirements established by this chapter for the district in which the use is located. 
Roominghouse means a building, other than a hotel, where for compensation and by prearrangement, five or more persons other than occasional or transient customers are provided with lodging. 
Street means a public right-of-way which provides vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent properties. 
Street line means a line or boundary separating the public right-of-way from the land or property adjoining. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground or attached to something located on the ground, including, but not limited to, in-ground swimming pools, satellite reception antennas, etc.; however, utility poles, fences and freestanding walls shall not be considered to be structures. 
Vehicle, recreational, means a structure which: 
(1)  Is built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Contains 400 square feet or less of gross area measured at its largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Is designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a motorized vehicle; and 
(4)  Is designed not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Vehicle park, recreational, means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more lots or spaces for the temporary placement of recreational vehicles. For purposes of this definition, the term "temporary" means placement not to exceed 180 consecutive days. 
Yard, front, means an open, unoccupied space on the same building site with a main building, extending the full width of the building site and situated between the street line and the front line of the building projected to the side lines of the building site. The depth of the front yard shall be measured between the front line of the building and the street line. 
Yard, rear, means an open, unoccupied space on the same building site with a main building, extending the full width of the building site and situated between the rear line of the building site and the rear line of the building projected to the side lines of the building site. The depth of the rear yard shall be measured between the rear line of the building site and the rear line of the building. 
Yard, side, means an open, unoccupied space on the same building site with a main building, situated between the side line of the building and the adjacent side line of the building site and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard; if no front yard is provided, the front boundary of the side yard shall be the front line of the building site and, if no rear yard is provided, the rear boundary of the side yard shall be the rear line of the building site. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(5), 4-13-1999)  
Secs. 140-6—140-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 140-26. - General provisions. 
(a)  Types of districts. The town is hereby divided into the following types of districts: 
(1)  Residential districts. 
a.  R-1 districts: Single-family residential. 
b.  R-1H districts: High density single family residential. 
c.  R-2 districts: Multi-family residential. 
(2)  Business districts. 
a.  B-1 districts: Transitional business. 
b.  B-2 districts: General business. 
c.  B-3 district: Downtown business. 
(3)  Industrial districts. 
I-1 districts: Light to heavy industrial. 
(4)  Open land districts. 
O-L districts: Open land. 
(b)  Order of restriction. These districts shall be ranked with respect to degree of restriction, in descending order of restriction as follows: O-L, R-1, R1-H, R-2, B-3, B-1, B-2, and I-1. 
(c)  Zoning map. The districts and the boundaries of such districts are shown upon the zoning map of the town, which map together with all information shown thereon, is hereby made a part of this chapter. 
(d)  District boundaries. District boundaries are lot lines, the center lines of streets, alleys, or highways or such lines extended, railway right-of-way lines; the municipal corporation lines as they exist at the time of enactment of these regulations or may exist in the future, or natural boundary lines such as streams. 
(e)  Utility lines. Water, electric transmission, sanitary sewer, telephone, and telegraph, stormwater drainage, and natural gas lines, regardless of any other provision or regulation appearing in these regulations, shall not be deemed and shall not constitute uses requiring planned approval or special exception uses in any district insofar as their placement, erection, or construction on dedicated streets, alleys, and public ways is concerned; but on such streets, alleys and public ways, they shall constitute uses by right, and no permit, license or other document of approval for such use shall be required under these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(6), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 140-27. - Permitted uses in all districts. 
In all districts, uses are categorized into three groups: uses by right, uses requiring planning approval, and uses allowed only by special exception. These allowed uses are delineated in the table of allowed uses in section 140-184. 
(1)  Uses by right are permitted subject to the conditions specified: 
(2)  Uses requiring planning approval are permitted upon approval of the location and site plan thereof by the planning commission as being appropriate with regard to transportation and access, water supply, water disposal, fire and police protection, and other public facilities, as not causing undue traffic hazard, and as being in harmony with the orderly and appropriate development of the district in which the use is located. 
(3)  Special exception uses are subject to the same approval of location and site plan as uses requiring planning approval; in addition, these uses are declared to possess such characteristics of unique or special form that each specific use shall be considered an individual case and shall be subject to approval of the board of adjustments in accordance with the provisions of article VII of this chapter governing special exceptions. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(7), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 140-28. - R-1 districts; single-family residential districts. 
These districts are composed mainly of areas containing single-family dwellings and open areas where similar residential development seems likely to occur; few two-family and multiple-family dwellings are found in these areas. The district regulations are designed to protect the residential character of the areas by prohibiting all commercial activities; to encourage a suitable neighborhood environment for family life by including among the permitted uses such facilities as schools and churches, and to preserve the openness of the areas by requiring certain minimum yard and area standards to be met. 
(1)  Permitted uses in R-1 districts. See the table of permitted uses in section 140-184. 
(2)  Building site area. Except as provided in article III of this chapter, the minimum building site area shall be: 
For a single-family dwelling 	7,200 square feet 
For elect substation, gas regulator station, water or sewage pumping station 	none 
For any other permitted use 	10,000 square feet 
 
(3)  Building height limit. Except as provided in article III of this chapter, no structure shall be erected or altered to exceed 35 feet. 
(4)  Yards required. Except as provided in article III of this chapter, the minimum dimensions of yards shall be: 
Front yard 	25 feet 
Side yard 	5 feet 
Rear yard 	25 feet 
 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(8), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 140-29. - R-1H districts; higher density single-family residential districts. 
These districts are composed of areas containing only single-family detached and townhouse residential developments. It is anticipated that they will be established to encourage innovative planned residential developments, according to article IV of this chapter, of a higher density than in R-1 zones while maintaining a suitable neighborhood environment for family life. To foster a suitable family environment, these districts require certain minimum yard and area standards, allow only very specific nonresidential uses such as parks and senior citizen facilities, and exclude all commercial uses. 
(1)  Permitted uses in R-1H districts. See the table of permitted uses in section 140-184. 
(2)  Building site area. Except as provided in articles III and IV of this chapter, the minimum building site area shall be: 
For a single-family dwelling 	7,200 square feet 
For elect substation, gas regulator station, water or sewage pumping station 	none 
For any other permitted use 	10,000 square feet 
 
(3)  Building height limit. Except as provided in articles III and IV of this chapter, no structure shall be erected or altered to exceed 35 feet. 
(4)  Yards required. Except as provided in articles III and IV of this chapter, the minimum dimensions of yards shall be: 
Front yard 	25 feet 
Side yard 	5 feet 
Rear yard 	25 feet 
 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(9), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 140-30. - R-2 districts: multiple-family residence districts. 
These districts are composed mainly of areas containing a mixture of single-, two-, and multiple-family dwellings; in many of them there is evident a trend toward increased population density through conversion of large houses into duplexes or apartments and through use of remaining vacant land for apartment buildings. The district regulations are designed to protect the residential character of the areas by prohibiting all commercial activities; to encourage a suitable neighborhood environment for family life by including among the permitted uses such facilities as school and churches; to prevent overcrowding of the land by requiring certain minimum building site areas for dwelling units. 
(1)  Permitted uses in R-2 districts. See the table of permitted uses in section 140-184. 
(2)  Building site area. Except as provided in article III of this chapter, the minimum building site area shall be: 
For a single- or two-family dwelling 	7,200 square feet 
For a multiple-family dwelling: 
First two dwelling units 	7,200 square feet 
Each additional dwelling unit 	2,000 square feet 
For electric regulator, gas regulator, water or sewage pumping station 	none 
For other permitted use 	10,000 square feet 
 
(3)  Building height limit. Except as provided in article III of this chapter, no structure shall be erected or altered to exceed 45 feet. 
(4)  Yards required. Except as provided in article III of this chapter, the minimum dimensions of yards shall be: 
Front yard 	20 feet 
Side yard 	5 feet 
Rear yard 	20 feet 
 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(10), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 140-31. - B-1 district; transitional business districts. 
These districts are composed of land and structures occupied by or suitable for such uses as dwellings, offices, studios, and some retail goods and services to satisfy the daily household needs of the surrounding residential neighborhoods. Although usually located between residential areas and the main business areas, these districts are in some instances freestanding in residential areas, though never being less than two acres in size. The district regulations are designed to permit the development of the districts for these purposes and to protect the abutting and surrounding residential areas by requiring certain minimum yard and area standards to be met, standards that are comparable to those called for in the residential districts. The construction of new residences in these districts, while permitted, is not encouraged. 
(1)  Permitted uses in B-1 districts. See the table of permitted uses in section 140-184. 
(2)  Building site area. Except as provided in article III of this chapter, the minimum building site area shall be: 
For a single- or two-family dwelling 	7,200 square feet 
For a multi-family dwelling: 
First two dwelling units 	7,200 square feet 
For each additional unit 	2,000 square feet 
For electric regulator, gas regulator, water, or sewage pumping station 	none 
For other permitted uses 	7,200 square feet 
 
(3)  Building height limit. Except as provided in article III of this chapter, no structure shall be erected or altered to exceed 35 feet. 
(4)  Yards required. Except as provided in article III of this chapter, the minimum dimensions of yards shall be: 
Front yard 	25 feet 
Side yard 	5 feet 
Rear yard 	20 feet 
 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(11), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 140-32. - B-2 general business district. 
These districts are composed of land and structures occupied by or suitable for furnishing the range of retail goods and services required by the residents of the town and its greater trade area. The district regulations are designed to permit the development of the districts for their purposes subject to limitations designed to prevent congestion of the area that would result from over-intensive development. It is intended that additional general business districts will be created in accordance with the amendment procedures set forth herein as they are needed to serve new neighborhoods. To ensure that such districts that are created are actually developed to supply the business needs of the town and its neighborhoods, the amendment creating the district may set a time limit for its development. 
(1)  Permitted uses in B-2 districts. See the table of permitted uses in section 140-184. 
(2)  Building site area. There is no minimum building site area. 
(3)  Building height limit. Except as provided in article III of this chapter, no structure shall be erected or altered to exceed 100 feet. 
(4)  Yards required. Except as provided in article III of this chapter, the minimum dimensions of yards shall be: 
Front yards 	20 feet 
Side yards 	none 
Rear yards 	10 feet 
 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(12), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 140-33. - B-3 downtown development district. 
(a)  This district is composed of land and structures occupied by or suitable for furnishing a range of retail goods, entertainment, cultural, and personal services required by the residents of the town and its greater trade area. The regulations explicitly recognize the historical contexts within which the district's structures were designed and occupied, particularly during the era before the advent of the automobile, more modern circulation patterns, and construction techniques. The intent of the district's regulations is to encourage the close association of compatible and mutually beneficial uses and structures which: 
(1)  Encourage preservation of the district's unique architectural character; 
(2)  Promote pedestrian oriented traffic patterns; 
(3)  Invite patrons from beyond the district's boundaries; 
(4)  Discourage uses and structures deemed harmful to the overall prosperity of the district's residents and businesses; and 
(5)  Otherwise seek to accomplish the goals of the comprehensive plan as adopted by the town, including any amendments to said plan as may be from time to time adopted. 
(b)  Permitted uses in B-3 districts. See the table of permitted uses in section 140-184; however, all uses allowed in the B-3 district shall be subject to the limitations of subsections (c) and (d) of this section. 
(c)  Building and site area requirements. 
(1)  Site. The minimum building site area shall be 3,000 square feet. 
(2)  Height. Except as provided in article III of this chapter, no structure shall be erected or altered to exceed 100 feet in height. 
(3)  Yards. Except as provided in subsection (e) of this section, no yards are required. 
(4)  Parking. The requirements of article V of this chapter, concerning required off-street parking and loading, are waived in the downtown development district. 
(d)  District use regulations. 
(1)  Purpose. The placement of high-level pedestrian attractors are encouraged to be situated on ground-floor levels adjacent to pedestrian traffic areas to enhance the district as a healthy retail and personal service district. 
(2)  Standards. 
a.  Uses by right are encouraged in ground-floor locations adjacent to sidewalks and other pedestrian traffic lanes. 
b.  Uses shown as permitted by planning approval are encouraged to be situated in aboveground locations or other locations that are not immediately adjacent to high pedestrian traffic lanes as deemed appropriate by the planning commission. 
(3)  Compliance. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 140-130(f), the district use regulations in this section shall apply to all new construction, and to any re-establishment of any non-conforming use in any existing building if such non-conforming use has been abandoned or discontinued for any period of time, regardless of duration. Change of ownership alone shall not constitute abandonment or discontinuance. 
(e)  District structural regulations. 
(1)  Purpose. 
a.  Blank walls on the ground-floor level are limited: 
1.  To encourage continuity of retail and consumer service uses; 
2.  To encourage retail and commercial activities at street level; 
3.  To provide a pleasant, rich, and diverse experience for pedestrians by visually connecting activities occurring within a structure to adjacent sidewalk areas; 
4.  To enhance crime prevention by increasing opportunities for surveillance of the street from the interiors of buildings and vice versa; 
5.  To restrict unpleasant, blank-wall facades at the street level; and 
6.  To avoid a monotonous environment. 
b.  Building setbacks, shapes, and bulk are regulated to encourage a harmonious association of compatible buildings. 
(2)  Standards. 
a.  Transparency requirements. 
1.  At least 50 percent of the length and at least 25 percent of the area of ground-level exterior walls abutting sidewalks, plazas, or other public open spaces or rights-of-way must be devoted to windows affording views into retail, office, or lobby space, pedestrian entrances, or retail display windows. 
2.  This limitation on blank walls does not apply to sides of buildings having residential units located adjacent to the exterior ground-floor wall. 
3.  Buildings having less than 50 percent of their ground-level floor area in retail, office, or lobby use: 
(i)  Where a building contains other active uses found by the planning commission to be of visual interest to the pedestrian, windows affording views of that active use may be provided as an alternative to subsection (a)(2)a of this section. Examples of such uses are pressrooms, classrooms, kitchens, or manufacturing processes. Parking areas, truck loading areas, vehicular access ways, and storage areas are not to be considered active uses. 
(ii)  Artwork such as murals or reliefs may be substituted to meet the requirements of subsection (a)(2)a of this section, if the proposed artwork is found by the planning commission to meet the intent of this section. Artwork and displays relating to activities occurring within the building or historical subjects relating to the downtown area are encouraged. 
b.  Building setback limitations. 
1.  Along a street or pedestrian right-of-way, building walls must extend to the right-of-way line for at least 75 percent of said line. 
2.  As an alternative to (a)(2)b of this section, walls may extend to within 12 feet of said line with the remaining space between the building and line designed as an extension of the sidewalk and committed to active uses, including, but not limited to, sidewalk cafes, vendors' stands, public art, or pedestrian rest areas with street furniture. 
3.  Alleys unusable by the public for pedestrian access may not be created between buildings. 
c.  Exterior design compatibility (existing development). 
1.  Every reasonable effort shall be made to provide a compatible use for an existing building which requires minimal alteration of the building, structure, or site and its intended purpose. 
2.  The distinguishing original qualities or character of a building, structure, or site and its environment shall not be destroyed. The removal or alteration of any historic material or distinctive architectural features should be avoided when possible. 
3.  All buildings, structures, and sites shall be recognized as products of their own time. Alterations that have no historical basis and that seek to create an earlier or later appearance shall be discouraged. 
4.  Changes that may have taken place in the course of time are evidence of the history and development of a building, structure, or site and its environment. These changes may have acquired significance in their own right, and this significance shall be recognized and respected. 
5.  Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship which characterize a building, structure, or site shall be treated with sensitivity. 
6.  Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired rather than replaced wherever possible. In the event replacement is necessary, the new material should match the material being replaced in composition, design, color, texture, and other visual qualities. Repair or replacement of missing architectural features should be based on accurate duplications of features, substantiated by historic, physical, or pictorial evidence, rather than on conjectural designs or the availability of different architectural elements from other buildings or structures. 
7.  The surface cleaning of structures shall be undertaken with the gentlest means possible. Sandblasting and other cleaning methods that will damage the historic building materials shall not be undertaken. 
8.  Every reasonable effort shall be made to protect and preserve archaeological resources affected by, or adjacent to, any project. 
9.  Contemporary design for alterations and additions to existing properties shall not be discouraged when such alterations and additions do not destroy significant historical, architectural, or cultural material, and such design is compatible with the size, scale, color, material, and character of the property, neighborhood, or environment. 
10.  Wherever possible, new additions or alterations to structures shall be done in such a manner that, if such additions or alterations were to be removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the structure would be unimpaired. 
d.  New development or additions. Any new or existing building, structure, and appurtenances thereof, that is moved, reconstructed, materially altered, or expanded shall be visually compatible with buildings, public ways, and places to which it is visually related in terms of the following characteristics: 
1.  Its height; the relationship of width to height of its elevation; the relationship of width to height of its windows; the number, frequency and intervals of its windows, doors, and other appurtenances; the relationship of solids to voids on its exterior facades; 
2.  Its relationship to any open space between it and adjoining buildings or structures; the relationship of its entrances and other projections to sidewalks, the relationships of the materials, textures, and colors of its facade; 
3.  The shape of its roof line; the bulk and arrangement of associated walls, fences, landscape masses, entryways, signs, awnings, porches, and balconies; and 
4.  Its directional orientation, whether this be vertical, horizontal, or nondirectional. 
e.  Balconies and awnings. Only cloth awnings or banners shall project into rights-of-way, alleys, or other public access ways; however, the planning commission may approve balconies that encroach into public rights-of-way, provided the design of such a balcony does not violate the requirements of subsection (e)(2)c of this section. 
(3)  Compliance. 
a.  Notwithstanding the requirements of section 140-130(f), district structural regulations in this section shall apply to all new construction and all major remodeling projects in the downtown development district. 
b.  A major remodeling project is any remodeling or reconstruction where the building floor area is being increased by 15 percent or more or when the cost of the remodeling is greater than 50 percent of the fair market value of the existing improvements on the site (fair market value for purposes of this provision being defined as that value used to calculate the assessed value of the site on the assessment rolls of the town for the most recent year). 
c.  Multiple remodeling projects undertaken over a period of five years or less where the cumulative effect is to accomplish a major remodeling shall be considered a major remodeling project for purposes of this section. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(13), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 140-34. - I-1 districts; industrial districts. 
These districts are composed of land and structures used for manufacturing or wholesaling, or suitable for such uses, where the use and its operation do not directly, adversely affect nearby residential and commercial uses. These districts are usually separated from residential areas by commercial areas or by natural barriers. The district regulations are designed to allow a wide range of industrial activities subject to limitations designed to protect nearby residential and commercial districts. 
(1)  Permitted uses in I-1 districts. See the table of permitted uses in section 140-184. 
(2)  Building site area. The minimum building site area shall be 10,000 square feet. 
(3)  Building height limit. Except as provided in article III of this chapter, no structure shall be erected or altered to exceed 45 feet. 
(4)  Yards required. Except as provided in article III of this chapter, the minimum dimensions of yards shall be: 
Front yards 	25 feet  
Side yards 	10 feet  
Rear yards 	10 feet* 
 
*However, a rear yard abutting on a lot in a district with a higher level of restriction as defined in section 140-26(b) shall have the same minimum depth as the yards required in the higher level district. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(14), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 140-35. - O-l districts; open land districts. 
These districts are composed mainly of large open unsubdivided lands that are vacant or in agricultural or forestry uses. The regulations are designed to protect the essentially open character of the districts, until such time as plans for development are prepared by prohibiting the establishment of scattered residential, business, industrial and other uses that are unrelated to any general plan of development and that might inhibit the best future urban utilization of the land. It is intended that land in these districts will be reclassified to its appropriate residential, commercial or industrial category in accordance with the amendment procedures set forth herein whenever such land is subdivided into urban building sites. 
(1)  Permitted uses in O-L districts. See the table of permitted uses in section 140-184. 
(2)  Building site area. The minimum building site area shall be: 
For electric substation, gas regulator station, water or sewerage pumping station 	none 
For any other permitted use 	10,000 square feet 
 
(3)  Building height limit. Except as provided in article III of this chapter, no structure shall be designed, erected or altered to exceed 35 feet. 
(4)  Yards required. Except as provided in article III of this chapter, the minimum dimensions of yards shall be: 
Front yard 	25 feet 
Side yard 	10 feet 
Rear yard 	25 feet 
 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(15), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 140-36. - Extended occupancy. 
(a)  No recreational vehicle as defined in section 140-5, located anywhere within the town zoned R-1, R-1H or R-2 shall be connected to town water, town sewer and/or commercially-supplied electricity unless said recreational vehicle is located within a recreational vehicle park, as defined in section 140-5. 
(b)  No recreational vehicle, as defined in section 140-5, located anywhere within the town zoned R-1, R-1H or R-2, unless the same is located within a recreational vehicle park as defined by section 140-5, shall be occupied, unless a permit for such occupancy has been obtained from the town. 
(c)  No recreational vehicle as defined in section 140-5, located anywhere within the town zoned R-1, R-1H or R-2 shall be occupied by any individual who has rented the same from the owner of said recreational vehicle, it being the intention of this chapter to prohibit the rental of recreational vehicles within the town. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a recreational vehicle, as defined in section 140-5, located within the town zoned R-1, R-1H or R-2 but outside of any recreational vehicle park, as defined in section 140-5, may be occupied for a period of more than 30 days, provided that: 
(1)  An application has been made to the board of aldermen seeking permission for such extended occupancy, said application having been made prior to any provision of this chapter being violated; and 
(2)  The board of aldermen has, by a unanimous vote, granted permission for such extended occupancy. 
Any period of extended occupancy granted by the board of aldermen under the provisions of this section shall not be for a period in excess of 30 consecutive calendar days; each request for a period of extended occupancy shall require a new application and approval; and at no time shall a period of extended occupancy be granted for more than a single recreational vehicle on a single tract or lot of land. 
(e)  Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this section shall be fined, upon conviction, not less than $10.00 and not more than $25.00 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both, for each offense. Each day that a violation occurs will be considered as a separate offense. The imposition of any penalty hereunder shall not preclude the building inspector, zoning administrator, town attorney or other appropriate authority of the town, or any adjacent or neighboring property owner who would be specifically damaged by such violation, from instituting injunction, mandamus or other appropriate actions or proceedings to prevent such unlawful activity. 
(Ord. No. 720, § I, 5-27-2014)  
Secs. 140-37—140-56. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 140-57. - Supplementary use regulations. 
(a)  Areas subject to inundation. On any areas subject to periodic inundation, making them unsafe for human habitation, no building or portion thereof which is designated for dwelling use or as a place of public assembly shall be erected or altered unless protected from inundation. 
(b)  Natural production uses. In any district, the extraction of oil, gas or other natural mineral deposit, including sod, sand, clay or gravel, may be permitted upon the approval of the board of adjustments and subject to such terms and conditions as the board may fix for the protection of adjacent property and uses. 
(c)  Noise. There shall be no production by any use of noise which at any boundary of the building site is in excess of the average intensity of street and traffic noise at that boundary. 
(d)  Heat, glare and vibration. There shall be no emission by any use of objectionable heat, glare or vibration which is perceptible beyond any boundary of the building site on which the use is located. 
(e)  Hazard. There shall not be created or maintained by any use any unusual fire, explosion or safety hazard beyond the boundary of the lot on which the use is located. 
(f)  Mobile homes class determinations. 
(1)  Intent. It is the intent of these regulations to encourage the provision of affordable housing in a general residential environment by permitting the use of Class A mobile homes (as defined herein) in all residential districts of the town subject to limitations in size, shape and foundation as specified below. 
(2)  Effect of approval. Mobile homes approved as Class A either individually or by specific model shall be allowed in all residential districts subject to the requirements for all structures in the same district. Certification shall be contingent upon all requirements of subsection (e)(4) of this section being met. 
(3)  Application for Class A determination. Applications for approval of mobile homes as Class A shall be submitted to the zoning administrator in such form as he may reasonably require to make determinations of suitability as specified herein. Applications shall include descriptions of, but not be limited to, exterior dimensions, roof slopes, exterior finish, skirting materials and the like. 
(4)  Standards for determinations of Class A status. Minimum width as measured across the narrowest portion of the dwellings main structure shall be 12 feet. The pitch of the main roof shall be not less than one foot of rise for each four feet of horizontal run; minimum distance from eave to ridge shall be ten feet. Exterior finish materials shall not reflect light of greater intensity than would be reflected from a surface painted with clean, white, gloss enamel. All Class A mobile homes shall be skirted to obscure from view all wheels, undercarriages, framing, extensions, etc., with a material similar in appearance to the mobile home's exterior surfaces. 
(5)  Placement of mobile home; application, approval. 
a.  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the placement and use of a mobile home defined in Article 3, Section 2 of the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Jonesboro as set forth in Ordinance No. 532, which is less than 12 feet in width as measured across the narrowest portion of the dwelling's main structure may be allowed within the town provided that prior to the placement of that mobile home permission for the placement of that mobile home on the property on which it is to be placed has been obtained from the board of aldermen as set forth in ii-iii of this sub-section. No moving permit may be issued prior to the permission of the board of aldermen. 
b.  Any individual or entity seeking permission to place a mobile home within the town, as authorized by subsection (f)5a of this section, shall first be required to make a written application for such placement directly to the board of aldermen by filing the original and six copies of that application with the town clerk. The application shall include the following: 
1.  The year, make, model number and serial number of the mobile home; 
2.  The VIN or serial number of the mobile home; 
3.  The size of the mobile home listing both its width and its length; 
4.  The number of bedrooms in the mobile home; 
5.  Proof of the applicant's ownership of the mobile home and the applicant's mailing address; 
6.  Photographs of the mobile home; 
7.  A $50.00 fee to pay for notification of property owners within 300 feet of the property line; 
8.  Certification of intent to install skirting on the mobile home. 
c.  Upon receipt of the application referred to in subsection (f)(5)b of this section, the clerk shall distribute to all members of the board of aldermen a copy of the application and all attachments. The board of aldermen shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the date, time and place of the meeting of the board of aldermen at which the application will be considered. 
d.  The board of aldermen may, in granting approval for the placement of a mobile home in accordance with the provisions of subsection (f)(5)a of this section, make that approval conditioned upon the applicant's compliance with such conditions as the board of aldermen believe appropriate. 
e.  An application under this subsection need not be submitted to any other entity, including, but not limited to, the planning commission and any placement of a mobile home authorized by this subsection shall be lawful, regardless of any other provision of chapter 120. 
f.  The applicant shall be notified, in writing, of the decision of the board of aldermen on the application at the address listed therein. 
(g)  Home occupations provisions. 
(1)  Intent. It is the intent of these regulations to encourage only those home occupations which can be so located and conducted that they preserve the essential characteristics of residential neighborhoods, cause no undue hazards to other residences or to the public, place no additional burdens on public facilities or services beyond what would normally be associated with residential uses, and to not have the effect of discriminating against commercial uses properly located in commercial districts. 
(2)  Performance standards. 
a.  Home occupations shall be conducted solely by residents of, entirely within, incidental to the residential use of, and utilizing not more than 25 percent of the dwelling. No articles or services are to be sold or offered for sale on the premises except those that are produced by residents of the dwellings themselves. 
b.  No home occupation shall require internal or external features or the use of electrical or mechanical equipment which would change the fire rating of the structure or the fire district in which the structure is located. No home occupation shall cause an increase in the use of any public utilities beyond the average for residences in the neighborhood, nor shall it create noise, dust, vibrations, smog, smoke, glare, electrical interference, fire hazard, or nuisance to any greater or more frequent extent than is usually experienced under normal circumstances wherein no home occupation exists. The creating of noise from tools, equipment, machinery, or other devices associated with the otherwise legal conduct of any home occupation in a residential neighborhood which can be heard beyond the property lines of the property where such occupation is conducted shall be considered a nuisance. 
c.  There shall be no storage of equipment, tools, goods, supplies, or implements or display of goods related to the home occupation which is visible beyond the borders of the property upon which the home occupation is conducted, nor shall any related combustibles, explosives, or hazardous chemicals be stored on the premises. 
d.  The home occupation shall not generate hazardous vehicular or pedestrian traffic. A home occupation which requires recurrent on-site transactions or consultations must provide one additional off-street parking space for each 200 square feet of floor space devoted to the occupation; said parking spaces shall not be located in any required front yard. 
e.  One non-illuminated name plate is allowed attached to the main structure, not to exceed two square feet in size. 
f.  The premises may not be used to park occupation-related vehicles larger than two tons in weight. 
(3)  Exclusions. Home occupations, as the term is defined herein, specifically excludes certain uses that have a pronounced tendency to rapidly increase beyond the limits permitted, thereby impairing the use and value of a residentially zoned area for residential purposes as follows: 
a.  Animal services or grooming. 
b.  Appliance repair and services. 
c.  Beauty/barber shop w/more than one operator. 
d.  Carpentry work (on-premises). 
e.  Dance instruction. 
f.  Dental or medical treatment. 
g.  Food sales (on-premises). 
h.  Metal product fabricating. 
i.  Private schools with organized classes. 
j.  Small engine repair. 
k.  Upholstering (auto and furniture). 
l.  Vehicle restoration. 
m.  Vehicle service, repair, or painting. 
These uses are specifically excluded along with all other uses not meeting the standards otherwise set forth in this chapter. 
(h)  Permanent yard sales. 
(1)  No owner or occupant of property in the town shall conduct a permanent garage or yard sale. 
(2)  For purposes of this section, the term "garage sale" or "yard sale" is defined as the sale of personal or household items by a person not licensed as a retailer operating lawfully according to this chapter. 
(3)  For purposes of this section, the term "permanent" is defined as: 
a.  Having a duration in excess of 72 hours; 
b.  Having regularly scheduled hours of operation each day for more than three days; or 
c.  Having regularly scheduled days of operation each week for more than two weeks. 
(4)  The town may issue 30-day permits to licensed retailers which will allow them to display goods outside of the confines of their approved structures. Any permit for a period in excess of 30 days must be approved by the board of aldermen in legal session convened. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(17), 4-13-1999; Ord. No. 794, § I, 11-6-2017)  
Sec. 140-58. - Supplementary area regulations. 
(a)  Small lots. Where a lot has an area less than the area required herein and was a lot or record on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, such lot, if used for dwelling purposes, shall be used only for a single-family dwelling. If located in a district permitting commercial or industrial use, the lot may be used for any use permitted in the district in which the lot is located. 
(b)  Reduced lot area. No lot shall be so reduced in area that any required yard will be smaller than prescribed for the district in which the lot is located. 
(c)  Visibility at intersections. On a corner lot in any residential district no fence, wall, hedge or other structure or planting more than two feet in height shall be erected, placed or maintained within the triangular area formed by the intersecting street lines and a straight line joining such street lines at points which are 30 feet distance from the point of intersection measured along such street lines. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(18), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 140-59. - Supplementary height regulations. 
(a)  Excess height. In any district, any main building may be erected or altered to a height in excess of that specified for the district, provided each front, side and rear yard is increased one foot for each two feet of such additional height; this provision includes areas where no yard is required. 
(b)  Height exceptions. Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, the height limitations for the various districts shall not apply to structures not used for human habitation such as church spires, belfries, cupolas, domes, chimneys, ventilators, skylights, water tanks, parapet walls, cornices, or necessary mechanical appurtenances usually carried above the roof level, provided that such features are limited to that height necessary for their proper functioning. 
(c)  Towers. Free standing radio, television, microwave, cellular telephone, and other types of antenna towers and outdoor general advertising structures as defined in section 140-5 are not exempt from the height limitations specified in the district regulations of article II of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(19), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 140-60. - Supplementary yard regulations. 
(a)  Front yard depth. Any lot lying between two lots adjacent thereto and having structures erected upon them on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall have a front yard equal in depth at least to the average depth of the front yards of the lots adjacent thereto; provided, however, that no front yard shall be less than ten feet in depth, nor shall any front yard have a greater depth than 35 feet. 
(b)  Additional side yard requirements. Where the side of a lot in a commercial district abuts upon the side of a lot in a residential district, there shall be provided on the lot in the commercial district a side yard not less than 20 feet in width on the side next to the residential district. 
(c)  Accessory buildings. 
(1)  No accessory building shall occupy any part of a required front or side yard or occupy more than 30 percent of a required rear yard. 
(2)  No accessory building shall be erected or altered so that it is closer to any lot line than five feet, except that in a B-3 district an accessory building may be as close to an interior, side lot line as the primary building on the site. 
(3)  No accessory building shall be closer to any right-of-way line than the primary building on the site. 
(4)  Accessory structures (other than buildings) shall meet the same requirements as accessory buildings, except that commercial, on-premises signs in commercial districts are allowed to occupy a required front or side yard, provided the sign structure is no closer to any right-of-way line than ten feet. 
(d)  Future street lines. Front yard depth and, in the case of corner lots, side yard width shall be measured from the future street right-of-way line where such lines have been established by the master plan. 
(e)  Corner lot. In any district a corner lot shall have provided on the side adjoining the side street, a side yard of 20 feet in width; provided, however, that this regulation shall not be applied to reduce the buildable width of the corner lot to less than 30 feet. 
(f)  Projecting architectural features. Every part of a required yard shall be open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky except for permitted accessory structures and for the ordinary projections of sills, belt courses, open fire escapes, cornices, buttresses, eaves and similar architectural features, provided that such projections shall not extend more than two feet into any required yard. 
(g)  Fences and walls. No fence or wall that obstructs sight shall be erected or altered in any required front yard to exceed a height above street level of three feet; and no fence or wall, other than the wall of a permitted structure, shall be erected or altered in any required side or rear yard to exceed a height of seven feet. 
(h)  Buffer protection. Wherever the boundary of a residential district is conterminous with the boundary of a commercial or industrial district, and residential lots abut commercial or industrial lots, there shall be provided and maintained, on the commercial or industrial land abutting the residential district, adequate buffer protection as follows: 
(1)  A masonry wall at least eight feet in height; or 
(2)  Screen planting accompanied by a permanent board or chain link type fence, both of which are at least eight feet in height. Screen planting shall be of sufficient density to afford protection from the glare of lights, from blowing papers, dust and debris, from visual encroachment, and from excessive transmission of noise and shall be maintained in a clean and healthy condition. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(20), 4-13-1999)  
Secs. 140-61—140-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 140-81. - Planned unit developments; planned building groups. 
Except as set out in this article, these regulations require a separate lot for each structure other than an accessory structure. To allow and encourage greater design flexibility for location for buildings comprising a planned group, the requirement for a separate lot for each building is waived and two or more buildings may be erected and maintained on the same lot only when certain conditions, as described in this article, are met. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(21), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 140-82. - Planned unit residential developments. 
(a)  The following policy statement is in regard to the planned residential development provisions of the subdivision regulations in chapter 130: 
(1)  It is intended to permit, on application and approval of detailed plans, creation of new higher density, single ownership residential projects where tracts suitable in location and character for the uses and structures proposed are to be planned and developed as units. Suitability of such tracts for the plans and development proposed shall be determined by the existing and prospective character of surrounding development, and by reference to the comprehensive plan. 
(2)  In view of the substantial public advantages of planned unit development, it is the intent of this article to promote and encourage development in this form where appropriate in location and character. 
(3)  Higher density, single ownership residential developments represent a special plan for a minimum of two and a maximum of six acres permitting the development of smaller building sites than otherwise permitted by this chapter and the subdivision regulations in chapter 130. Certain modifications of the general subdivision requirements are permitted when, in the opinion of the planning commission, adequate provisions are made for circulation, recreation, light, air and service needs of the tract when fully developed and populated. 
(b)  Factors to be considered by the commission in review of planned residential development projects include: 
(1)  Deed covenants for the development should include provisions for the maximum coverage of building sites and other design specifications in accordance with the provisions of chapter 130. 
(2)  Deed covenants must include adequate provisions for the perpetual maintenance of common areas such as courts and playgrounds. 
(3)  Plans for the development must include concrete curb and gutter streets, sidewalks, underground drainage, adequate spacing of structures to ensure access by emergency vehicles, and adequate off-street parking and access by residents. The planning commission may approve street rights-of-way of less than 50 feet in width with vehicular turnarounds of less than 100 feet in diameter, provided the street is no longer than 500 feet in unbroken length and, further provided that the proposed street is part of a cluster, townhouse, or condominium development according to specifications in chapter 130. 
(4)  Consideration must be given to reservation of recreation space to serve the project's population. This required open space is in addition to other required open space and must exceed five percent of the gross area of townhouse, or condominium development. 
(5)  Planned residential development projects will be required to follow subdivision regulation review procedures of sketch plan, general subdivision plan and final plat reviews as well as: 
a.  Evidence of provision for operation and maintenance of such areas, improvements, facilities, and service as will be for common use by some or all of the occupants of the development, but will not be provided, operated, or maintained at general expense; and 
b.  A preliminary traffic analysis indicating the probable effect of the proposed development on traffic patterns and capabilities of adjacent streets in the immediate area. 
(6)  Other than the specific requirements listed above, planned residential development projects will comply with the general design and improvement standards of the subdivision regulations and this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(22), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 140-83. - Standards for mini-warehouse developments. 
(a)  Definitions. When used in this section, the following words and phrases have the meaning ascribed to them in this subsection, unless the context indicates a different meaning: 
Impervious surface means a surface on the ground which does not allow passage of water, including, but not limited to, buildings and structures, and concrete, gravel, stone, and shell parking areas, driveways, and walkways. 
Impervious surface ratio means the ratio of all impervious surfaces on a lot to the total area of said lot. 
Mini-warehouse developments means a commercial enterprise consisting of rented storage space with individual unit areas not exceeding 350 square feet. 
(b)  Setbacks required. Notwithstanding the lesser setback requirements specified in the various districts, the following setback requirements shall apply to all mini-warehouse developments: 
Front yards 	25 feet 
Side yards 	5 feet 
Rear yards 	10 feet 
 
except that a side yard abutting on a public street shall equal or exceed 20 feet. 
(c)  Height limitations. Notwithstanding the height limitations of the various districts, all mini-warehouse developments shall be limited in height to 35 feet, said height limitation shall apply to all structures on the site including signs. 
(d)  Surfaces. The impervious surface ratio for any mini-warehouse development shall not exceed 65:1; however, the ratio may be increased to 75:1 if all pervious surfaces are in the front yard of the development. 
(e)  Residences. The planning commission may approve one on-premises residence in a mini-warehouse development provided the structure and placement of the residence meets all regulations pertaining to both residential uses and mini-warehouse developments. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(23), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 140-84. - Conditions to be met by special plans for building groups. 
(a)  District regulations. All buildings groups shall comply with all of the regulations established for the district in which the building group is located except the regulation requiring a separate lot to be provided for each principal structure. Such building group may be considered as one building for the purpose of complying with the required lot area, height, yard and other structural regulations; however, planned building groups must comply with all use limitations of the district within which it is located. 
(b)  Site plan and improvements. A special plan for a building group may be required to show the following: 
(1)  Drainage. Adequate facilities for the drainage of surface water, including storm sewers, gutters, paving and the proper design of finished grades; 
(2)  Circulation. Adequate facilities for the safe and convenient circulation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, including walks, driveways, off-street parking areas, off-street loading areas, and landscaped separation spaces between pedestrian and vehicular ways; 
(3)  Plan areas. In residential or mixed use developments, adequate and safely located play areas for small children. 
(c)  Building spacing and orientation. The following spacing between buildings shall be measured perpendicularly between exterior walls: 
(1)  Spacing of buildings. A building wall shall be located no closer to another building than a distance equal to the height of the taller building of the two; provided further, that for a building containing dwelling units, such distance shall not be less than 15 feet in the case of a wall having no windows. 
(2)  Access by emergency vehicles. The building in a planned building group shall be so arranged that every building is accessible by emergency vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(24), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 140-85. - Procedure on special plans for building groups. 
(a)  Application for approval. An application for approval of a special plan for a building group shall be filed with the zoning administrator and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Interest and ownership. The applicant's name (and all others represented by the applicant, address and interest in the application, the concurrence of the owner of the entire land area included in the special plan and all incumbrances of such land, and evidence of the right and actual intent to develop the designated area. 
(2)  Plans for building group. Plans showing the land area included within the special plan, with its boundaries and dimensions, all public and private easements and rights-of-way, both existing and proposed, within or bounding the designated area and the adjoining properties, the location, number of stories, and gross floor area of proposed principal buildings and accessory buildings, curb cuts, driveways, off-street parking areas, off-street loading areas, walks, open areas to be set aside for special purposes, the location and height of proposed walls, fences, and screen planting, the types of paving or other surfacing to be used in the various areas, and such other site information as may be necessary to describe completely the proposed building group. 
(b)  Administrative examination. Upon receipt of an application for approval of a special plan for a building group, and after assuring that the application is properly and completely made out, the zoning administrator shall transmit the application to the planning commission. 
(c)  Review by planning commission. The planning commission shall review each application and approve or disapprove the special plan; approval may establish conditions and limitations. The planning commission shall then return the application, together with its report of approval or disapproval to the zoning administrator, who shall notify the applicant of action taken. 
(d)  Filing and recording of special plan. Upon approval of a special plan, a copy of such plan shall be filed among the records of the town and shall thereafter be binding upon the applicants, their heirs, successors, and assigns, shall limit and control the issuance and validity of permits and certificates, and shall restrict and limit the use and operation of all land and structures within the area designated in such special plan to all conditions and limitation specified in such special plan and the approval thereof. 
(e)  Amendment or withdrawal of special plan. Pursuant to the same procedure and subject to the same limitations and requirements by which the special plan was approved and registered, any special plan may be amended or withdrawn. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(25), 4-13-1999)  
Secs. 140-86—140-105. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - OFF-STREET PARKING 
 
Sec. 140-106. - Provision of off-street parking required. 
The off-street parking facilities herein required shall be provided in at least the amount and maintained in the manner herein set forth, provided that off-street parking facilities need be neither provided nor maintained for land actually used or for structures actually existing (whether occupied or vacant) on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, unless after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived such land, structures, or uses are enlarged, expanded or changed in which event, the land, structures and uses hereby excluded shall not be used, occupied or operated unless there is provided for the increment only of such land, structures and use, and maintained as herein required at least the amount of off-street parking facilities that would be required hereunder if the increment were a separate land, structure or use. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(26), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 140-107. - Off-street parking standards. 
Off-street parking facilities shall be constructed, maintained and operated in accordance with the following specifications: 
(1)  Size, location, and access. 
a.  Size. Each off-street parking space shall be an area of appropriate dimensions, of not less than 180 square feet net, exclusive of access area; however, handicapped spaces shall meet the requirements of public law 101-336 as specified in 28 CFR 36 and other applicable federal regulations. 
b.  Location. Off-street parking facilities shall be located on the lot on which the use or structure for which they are provided is located. 
c.  Vehicular access. Vehicular access to individual parking spaces shall be provided by aisles as follows: 
Angle of Space 	Width of Aisle 
90 degrees 	25 feet 
60 degrees 	18 feet 
45 degrees 	14 feet 
30 degrees 	12 feet 
 
(2)  Design and construction. 
(3)  Drainage and surfacing. Parking facilities shall be properly graded for drainage, surfaced with concrete or asphaltic concrete and maintained in good condition, free of weeds, dust, trash and debris. 
(4)  Entrances and exits. 
a.  Parking facilities shall be provided with entrances and exits so located as to minimize traffic congestion as determined by the zoning administrator. 
b.  Vehicle access isles to the street from the development shall not exceed the number and size needed for efficient traffic flow to and from the development. 
c.  The exterior periferies of parking facilities shall be defined by landscaped strips at least two feet in width. Each such landscaped strip shall be raised and protected by curbs and shall contain grass, shrubbery, and two trees for every automobile access to the street. 
(5)  Parking bays. 
a.  Parking bays containing not more than 100 parking spaces shall be established. 
b.  Such blocks shall be defined by landscaped strips at least 15 feet wide. Each such landscaped strip shall be raised and protected by curbs and shall contain: 
1.  Grass and shrubs; 
2.  A four-foot wide pedestrian walk extending the full length of the strip; and 
3.  One tree for every 50 parking spaces. 
c.  Vehicular access aisles within the block shall be connected to one or more roadways at least 24 feet wide or such greater width as may be required to accommodate the volume of traffic anticipated and along which no parking spaces shall be provided or allowed. 
(6)  Lighting. Lighting shall be provided in all parking facilities accommodating ten or more vehicles and such lighting shall be so arranged that the source of light does not shine directly into adjacent residential properties and does not interfere with traffic. 
(7)  Other uses. Other uses such as the sale, repair, dismantling, or servicing of vehicles, equipment, materials or supplies shall not be conducted within required off-street parking facilities. Retail sales shall not be conducted in store parking lots; however, the occasional display of goods for sale may occur in parking areas provided the display occupies available space in excess of required parking spaces. 
(8)  Residential areas. In residential districts off-street parking facilities shall be used only by vehicles up to 8,000 pounds gross vehicle weight, manufacturer's capacity rating, and having wheels not exceeding 17 inches in diameter. 
(9)  Residential. Required off-street parking facilities for dwelling uses shall not occupy any part of a required front yard. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(27), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 140-108. - Amount of off-street vehicle facilities required. 
(a)  Parking. At least the following amount of off-street parking facilities shall be provided. The classifications of uses shall be deemed to include and apply to all uses, and if the classification of any use for the purpose of determining the amount of off-street parking facilities to be provided is not readily determinable hereunder, the classification of the use shall be fixed by the zoning administrator. 
Use Classifications 	Spaces Required 
Adult educational institutions 	1 per 3 students 
Automobile, truck, RV, or boat dealership 	1 per 900 square feet gross (but never less than 2 spaces) 
Bank 	1 space per 200 square feet gross (plus adequate vehicle queue lanes to prevent off-site lines) 
Broadcasting studio 	1 per 400 square feet gross 
Churches 	1 per 2 seats (in the main worship area) 
Dwellings 	2 per dwelling 
Funeral homes 	1 per 3 chapel seats 
Furniture, appliance, machinery, or heavy equipment store 	1 per 700 square feet gross 
General service or repair establishments 	1 per 2 employees 
Hospitals and sanitariums 	1 per bed (plus 1 per 200 square feet gross of out-patient and emergency room service areas) 
Hotels 	1 per guest room 
Industrial and manufacturing establishments; creameries; bottling plants; warehouse and distribution establishments 	1 per 2 employees 
Mini-warehouse developments 	1 per 200 square feet (office and living space only) 
Mobile home parks 	1 per mobile home 
Nursing homes 	1 per 4 beds 
Retail stores, personal service establishments, commercial amusements, offices, repair shops, medical, dental, and veterinary clinics, libraries, art galleries 	1 per 200 square feet gross 
Restaurants, bars, night clubs, private clubs and lodges 	1 per 100 square feet gross. (includes outdoor service areas of drive-in restaurants) 
Schools, elementary 	2 per teaching station 
Schools, senior high 	1 per 2 students 
Theaters, auditoriums, gyms, halls, and stadiums 	1 per 2 seats 
 
(b)  Loading. In addition to required off-street parking spaces, a minimum of one off-street loading facility shall be provided for all structures devoted to commerce, industry, manufacturing, storage, warehousing, professionally-purposed hospitals, and similar uses exceeding 10,000 square feet of gross floor area. Said loading facilities must allow loading and unloading access by large vehicles such as transport trucks without blocking traffic on or near the facility being served. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(28), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 140-109. - Special provisions for location or sharing of facilities. 
Pursuant to the procedure set forth in this section, either part or all of the required off-street parking facilities may be located on another site a distance no greater than 400 feet from the one occupied by the use or structure for which the facilities are provided; also, two or more uses may share the same off-street parking facilities and each of such uses may be considered as having provided such shared space individually. 
(1)  Applications for approval of special plan. An application for the approval of a special provision hereunder shall be filed with the zoning administrator by the owner of the entire land area to be included within the special plan, and all encumbrances of such land area and structures. The application shall contain such information required by this chapter or deemed necessary by the zoning administrator and shall include plans showing the location of the uses or structures for which off-street parking facilities are required and the location at which the off-street parking facilities are proposed to be located. 
(2)  Review of application. Applications hereunder shall be reviewed by the zoning administrator and either approved by him or disapproved. Any approval may establish conditions and limitations, and be registered among the records of the town and shall thereafter be binding upon the applicants, their heirs, successors and assigns, shall limit and control the issuance and validity of permits and certificates and shall restrict and limit the use and operation of all land and structures included within such special plans to all conditions and limitations specified in such plans and the approval thereof. 
(3)  Amendment or withdrawal of special plan. Pursuant to the same procedure and subject to the same limitations and requirements by which the special plan was approved and registered, any special plan may be amended or withdrawn. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(29), 4-13-1999)  
Secs. 140-110—140-129. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES 
 
Sec. 140-130. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Continuance of a nonconforming use. Except as hereinafter provided the lawful operation of a nonconforming use, as such existed on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or on the effective date of any amendment hereto by which the use became a nonconforming use, may be continued. 
(b)  Number of dwellings. The number of dwellings in a nonconforming multifamily residential building may be increased provided the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The building shall not be enlarged or extended. 
(2)  The number of dwellings shall not be increased to more than the number of dwellings permitted in districts where the use would be conforming. 
(c)  Expansion or enlargement of a nonconforming use. The land area occupied by a nonconforming use shall not be increased except to provide one off-street parking space or open off-street loading space for the nonconforming use, such space to be maintained in accordance with the regulations herein established. 
(d)  Extension of a nonconforming use in a structure. A nonconforming use in a structure may be extended throughout the structure provided no structural alterations, except those required by law or ordinance, are made therein. 
(e)  Change in use. A nonconforming use shall not be changed to another use of lower or less restrictive classification; however, a nonconforming use may be changed to another use by right of the same or higher classification. 
(f)  Termination of a nonconforming use. Except as hereinafter provided, any nonconforming use that has been abandoned or discontinued for a period of 12 months shall not thereafter be reestablished. Change of ownership alone shall not constitute abandonment. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(30), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 140-131. - Nonconforming structures. 
(a)  Continuance of a nonconforming structure. Except as hereinafter provided, any nonconforming structure may be occupied and operated and maintained in a state of good repair. 
(b)  Enlargement or extension of a nonconforming structure. 
(1)  A nonconforming structure in which a nonconforming use is operated shall not be enlarged or extended. 
(2)  A nonconforming structure in which only permitted uses are operated may be enlarged or extended if the enlargement or extension can be made in compliance with all of the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Restoration of damaged nonconforming structures. A nonconforming structure damaged in any manner and from any cause whatsoever to the extent of not more than 60 percent of its replacement cost may be restored, provided: 
(1)  Restoration is begun within one year and completed within two years of the date of the damage; 
(2)  A structure damaged as the result of fire, flood, windstorm, earthquake or other unforeseen cause, which was a conforming structure at the time of its erection but which structure has since become nonconforming as the result of a change in this chapter or the zoning map, may be restored regardless of the extent of the damage thereto and the nonconforming use of the structure continued; and 
(3)  If such structure can be legally restored under other applicable laws and ordinances. 
(d)  Restoration of obsolete nonconforming structures. A nonconforming structure which becomes obsolete or substandard under any applicable ordinance and for which the cost of replacing such structure in lawful compliance with the applicable ordinance exceeds 60 percent of the replacement cost shall not be restored. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(31), 4-13-1999)  
Secs. 140-132—140-151. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - ADMINISTRATION; ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 140-152. - Department of zoning. 
(a)  There is hereby created a department in the town to be designated as the zoning department. 
(b)  The head of said department of zoning shall be the zoning administrator who shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the board in accordance with law and who will serve at the pleasure of the mayor and the board. 
(c)  The zoning administrator so appointed by the mayor and approved by the board shall have had at least five years' experience in a responsible administrative field. 
(d)  The zoning department shall be under the supervision and administration of the zoning administrator, whose duty and responsibility it shall be to coordinate and administer the affairs of the zoning department, the planning commission, and the board of adjustments and to maintain all official records necessary to the administration of the zoning ordinance and its related bodies. 
(e)  The zoning administrator shall be responsible to require that no building or other permit, license, or other document necessary to be approved by the zoning commission, any of which may be subject to the zoning code, shall be issued by any department, agency, or board of this town until he has certified that the use to be made of the permit, license, or other document is in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(pt. VII, 2), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 140-153. - General provisions. 
(a)  Permits and licenses. No building or other permit, license, or other document of approval, the use of which may be subject to the provisions of this chapter shall be issued by any department, agency or board of the municipality until the zoning administrator shall have certified that the use to be made of the permit, license, or other document is in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Plans required. Each application for a new structure or for the alteration of an existing structure shall be accompanied by a drawing, in duplicate, showing the site plan, the location of the building on the site, accurate dimensions of the building and site, location of off-street parking and off-street loading spaces required, and such other information as may be necessary for the enforcement of these regulations. 
(c)  Construction begun or authorized prior to effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of a structure the construction of which shall have legally and actually begun prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or, if a building permit shall have been issued within ninety days of the date of such permit, and which entire structure shall be completed within six months after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(d)  Violations. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined upon conviction not less than $10.00 and not more than $25.00 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both, for each offense; each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. The imposition of any penalty hereunder shall not preclude the building inspector, zoning administrator, municipal counsel, or other appropriate authority of the municipality, or any adjacent or neighboring property owner who would be specifically damaged by such violation, from instituting injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance, or use, or to correct or abate such violation, or to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure, or land. 
(e)  Occupancy of buildings. 
(1)  Certificate of occupancy. 
a.  Required. Any nonresidential use or home occupation either newly established, relocating from one place to another, or substantially altering its activities must obtain certificate of occupancy in a form prescribed by the zoning administrator in advance. 
b.  Before issuing said certificate, the facilities to be occupied must be approved by the building inspector and the state fire marshal as meeting their regulatory requirements. Utility services may be denied by the town for failure or refusal to acquire said certificate. 
(2)  Acknowledgement of vacancy required. 
a.  Should any building upon which a certificate of occupancy has been issued become vacated for a period of 30 days or more, it shall be considered as though there has been a change in occupancy and in the nature and use of the building, unless the owner, lessee or other lawful occupant applies for an acknowledgement of vacancy, which shall entitle the building to continue receiving electrical, gas, and other utility service during such period of vacancy. 
b.  An acknowledgement of vacancy: 
1.  Shall not allow the storage of any item other than those properly existing on the premises during the occupancy prior to the vacancy; 
2.  Shall not allow any restoration or renovation of the building without all other requirements of this Code and issuance of all necessary permits and licenses otherwise required; and 
3.  Shall require continued maintenance of all fire protection equipment and standards at that level required prior to the vacancy. 
Upon their request, the state fire marshal and/or the building inspector shall be granted access to the building by the owner, lessee, or other lawful occupant in order to verify these requirements. 
c.  An acknowledgement of vacancy shall be in amounts as established by the mayor and board of aldermen from time to time and shall be valid for so long as the building remains vacated. 
d.  In addition to any other penalty provided for any other violation of town ordinances, any material violation of this subsection shall entitle the state fire marshal and/or the building inspector to immediately withdraw the acknowledgement of vacancy and to require the utility service to the building be terminated. 
(f)  Abatement procedures. 
(1)  General procedures. In the event that any person, including, but not limited to, the property owner, general agent of such property, leasee or tenant shall fail or neglect to comply with the provisions of this chapter, the town is authorized, empowered, and directed to cause the violation to be corrected and abated and to assess the charges against the person responsible. 
(2)  Abatement notice. 
a.  If the town undertakes abatement action, the property owner shall be notified of the town's intent to abate the violation and shall be given no less than ten days to voluntarily abate the violation. The town may serve notice on the owner by registered or certified mail, addressed to the owner at his last-known address or through personal delivery by any employee of the town. 
b.  Notice of the town's intent to abate a violation shall identify the nature and location of the violation, including the legal property description, the owner thereof who is responsible, the length of time allowed for voluntary correction, and the violator's administrative review rights. 
c.  The town may extend the time limit for compliance or voluntary abatement through the execution of an abatement contract, signed and duly executed, specifying the actions to be taken and the time limit allowed. 
(3)  Abatement charges. All charges, costs, and expenses for abatement or correction of the violations incurred by the town shall be assessed to the person responsible; and, if said person refuses to reimburse the town's costs within 30 days, the amount thereof may be collected through civil proceedings directed against such person. 
(4)  Administrative review. Any person notified of proposed correction or abatement action by the town shall have the right for ten days from the date of receipt of such notice to request in writing an administrative review according to section 140-156(1). 
(g)  Abatement actions taken by the town under this chapter shall not preclude the imposition of criminal penalties as otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(32), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 140-154. - Board of adjustments; establishment and membership. 
(a)  The board of adjustments shall consist of five members, and may include two alternate members, all of whom shall be land owners and qualified voters. The membership of the first board shall serve respectively, one for one year, one for two years, one for three years, one for four years and one for five years. Thereafter, members shall be appointed for terms of five years each. 
(b)  Of the two alternate members first appointed, one alternate member shall be appointed for a term of three years and the other for a term of two years. Thereafter, each alternate member shall be appointed for a term of three years. Alternate members shall serve only when called upon to form a quorum and when so serving shall have all of the powers and duties of regular members. 
(c)  All members and alternate members of the board of adjustments shall be appointed by the mayor and board of aldermen. All members shall be removable for cause by the mayor and board of aldermen upon written charges and after public hearings. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. The board shall elect its own chairperson, who shall serve in that capacity for one year. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(33), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 140-155. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)  Rules adopted. The board of adjustments shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of any ordinance of the town adopted pursuant to R.S. 33:4721 through 33:4729; however, any rules adopted by a board of adjustments shall not be effective until approved in writing by the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(b)  Hearings. Hearings and meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the board may determine. The chairperson, or, in his absence, the acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(34), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 140-156. - Powers of the board. 
The board shall have and exercise the following powers: 
(1)  Administrative review. To hear and decide appeal where it is alleged that there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of R.S. 33:4721 through 33:4729 or of any ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. In passing upon appeals, where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the regulations, to vary or modify the application of any of the regulations or provisions of the regulations relating to the use, construction, or alteration of buildings or structures or the use of land so that the spirit of the law shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. In exercising all of its aforementioned and following described powers the board may, in conformity with R.S. 33:4721 through 33:4729, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all of the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. 
(2)  Interpretation. To interpret the zoning map and to pass upon disputed questions as they arise in the administration of the zoning regulations. 
(3)  Special exceptions. To hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, requests for special exceptions, subject to such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the board. No exception shall be authorized unless the board shall find that all of the following conditions exists: 
a.  That the exception will not authorize the operation of a use other than those uses specifically enumerate for the district in which is located the property for which the exception is sought; 
b.  That the exception is essential to maintain the functional design and architectural integrity of the development; and will be in harmony with the spirit and purposes of this chapter; 
c.  That the exception will not substantially or permanently injure the appropriate use of adjacent conforming property in the same district; and 
d.  That the exception will not weaken the general purposes of this chapter or adversely affect the public health, safety, or welfare, or the master plan. 
(4)  Variances. Where, by reasons of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape of a specified piece of property at the time of enactment of this chapter, or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary and exceptional characteristics of such piece of property, the strict application of any regulation in this chapter would result in peculiar and exceptional or undue hardship upon the owner of such property, to authorize, upon an appeal relating to such property, a variance from such strict application so as to relieve such difficulties or hardship, provided such relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of the zoning ordinance. Variances shall be subject to such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the board of adjustments. No variance shall be authorized unless the board shall find that all of the following conditions exists: 
a.  That the variance will not authorize the operation of a use other than those uses specifically enumerated for the district in which is located the property for which the variance is sought; 
b.  That the development or use of the property for which the variance is sought, if limited by a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, cannot yield a reasonable return in services; 
c.  That the plight of the owner of the property for which the variance is sought is due to unique circumstances existing on the property; 
d.  That the variance will not substantially or permanently injure the appropriate use of adjacent conforming property in the same district; 
e.  That the variance will not alter the essential character of the district in which is located the property for which the variance is sought and will be in harmony with the spirit and purposes of this chapter; 
f.  That the variance will not weaken the general purposes of this chapter or adversely affect the public health, safety, or welfare, or the master plan. 
(5)  Appeals. Appeals to the board of adjustments may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the municipality affected by any decision of the zoning administrator or of his office. 
a.  Appeals shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the board of adjustments, by tiling with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the board of adjustments a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board all of the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
b.  An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of adjustments after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril of life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order that may be granted by the board of adjustments or by a court of record on application or notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
c.  The board of adjustments shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the interested parties and decide the appeal within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(35), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 140-157. - Records. 
The board of adjustments shall keep minutes of its hearing and meetings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating that fact and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be filed immediately in the office of the board of adjustments and shall be public records. All testimony, objections thereto, and rulings thereon shall be taken down by a reporter employed by the town for the purpose. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(36), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 140-158. - Decisions. 
The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the board present and voting shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of any administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter on which it is required to pass upon any ordinance, or to effect any variation in the ordinance. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to empower the board to change the terms of this chapter, to effect changes in the zoning map, or to add to the specific uses permitted in any district. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(37), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 140-159. - Appeals from the board of adjustments. 
Any person aggrieved or any officer or department may have a decision of the board reviewed in the manner provided by R.S. 33:4727. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(38), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 140-160. - Application fees. 
The application and inspection fees to be charged upon application to the board of adjustments and/or the planning commission for their approval of an applicant's request shall be in amounts as established by the mayor and board of aldermen from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(39), 4-13-1999)  
Secs. 140-161—140-180. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - AMENDMENTS; INTERPRETATION 
 
Sec. 140-181. - Amendment policy. 
(a)  Reason for amendment. This chapter, including the zoning map, is based on comprehensive planning studies and is intended to carry out the objective of a sound, stable and desirable development. It is therefore declared to be the public policy to amend this chapter only when one or more of the following conditions prevail: 
(1)  Error. There is a manifest error in the chapter. 
(2)  Change in conditions. Changed or changing conditions in a particular area, or in the planning area generally, make a change in the chapter necessary and desirable. 
(3)  Increase in need for sites for commerce or industry. Increased or increasing needs for commercial or industrial sites, in addition to sites that are available, make it necessary and desirable to rezone an area or to extend the boundaries of an existing district. 
(4)  Subdivision of land. The subdivision or imminent subdivision of open land into urban building sites makes reclassification necessary and desirable. 
(b)  Limitations on proposed amendments. All proposed amendments to this chapter shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  Minimum sizes for new districts. No amendment changing the classification of an area shall be adopted unless the area meets the following requirements as to minimum size: 
a.  B-1, B-2, and I-1 districts. A proposed new B-1, B-2, or I-1 district shall contain at least two acres of gross area; except that a B-1 district which abuts a B-2 or B-3 district shall have no minimum size requirement. 
b.  No new B-3 districts are anticipated, though the existing B-3 district may be expanded. 
c.  O-L, R-1 and R-2 districts. There is no requirement of minimum size for new O-L or R-1 districts. 
d.  R-1H districts. New R-1H districts may be created according to the provisions of section 130-4 and section 140-82. 
(2)  Additions to existing districts. An enlargement of or an addition to an existing district shall not be considered a new district and shall be exempt from any requirement as to minimum size; however, this subsection shall not apply to expansions of existing R-1H districts. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(40), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 140-182. - Amendment procedure. 
(a)  By whom initiated. Amendment to this chapter may be requested by the town, by the planning commission, or by any person, firm, or corporation. 
(b)  Amendment application. An application for amendment to this chapter submitted by any person, firm, or corporation other than the town or the planning commission shall contain at least the following: 
(1)  Interest and ownership. The applicant's name, address, and interest in the application, the concurrence of the owner of the entire land area and structures to be included within the proposed district with evidence that the applicant actually intends to develop the designated area and has both the means and ability to do so. 
(2)  Plat. A plat showing the land area which would be affected, the proposed zoning classification of the area. 
(3)  Error. The error in this chapter that would be corrected by the proposed amendment. 
(c)  Administrative examination. Upon receipt of a completed application for amendment, the zoning administrator shall examine the application and shall make such investigation as is necessary. Within ten days of the receipt of an application, the zoning administrator shall transmit the application, together with its report to the planning commission. 
(d)  Preliminary hearing by planning commission. The planning commission shall hold a preliminary hearing on each application for amendment to this chapter and shall notify the applicant and the zoning administrator of the time and place of such preliminary hearing. After holding a preliminary hearing, the commission shall certify the application for public hearing. No later than seven days before the public hearing date the applicant shall: 
(1)  Furnish the commission with such additional information as it may request; 
(2)  Furnish the commission with the name, description of property owned and mailing address of each owner of property lying within a distance of 300 feet of all of the fronting sides of the property the classification of which is sought to be changed. 
(e)  Public hearing by planning commission. The planning commission shall fix a reasonable time for a public hearing and shall give public notice thereof according to law specifically according to R.S. 33:4726, as well as notice to the applicant and to the zoning administrator. The commission may also notify the owners of surrounding property by mail. The commission shall prepare a record of its proceedings for each case to be filed in the office of the commission which is to remain a public record. A copy of the record or proceedings shall be transmitted to the mayor and board of aldermen containing their decisions and recommendations. 
(f)  Legislative disposition. The mayor and board of aldermen shall examine all applications and shall take further action. Before enacting any amendment, the board of aldermen shall hold a public hearing and shall give public notice, as required by law, specifically R.S. 33:4724. 
(1)  Conditions. Conditions fixed in amendments relating to rezoning shall be construed to be covenants running with the land in the area involved and shall be binding upon applicants for amendments, their heirs, successors, and assigns. 
(2)  Reconsideration. No land for which an application for reclassification has been acted upon in a public hearing by the board of aldermen and mayor shall be considered again by the planning commission for the same classification until at least six months from the date such application was acted upon. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(41), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 140-183. - Interpretation; validity; effective date; repealer. 
(a)  Interpretation. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. Whenever the provisions of this chapter require a greater width or size of yards or other open spaces, a lower height of buildings, a greater percentage of lot be left unoccupied, or other higher standards than are required in any other applicable statute, ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. 
(b)  Validity. The requirements and provisions of this chapter are severable, and should any section or article thereof be declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, the decision of the court shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole or any section or article thereto other than the section or article thereof so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(c)  Effective date. This chapter shall become effective after its adoption and publication according to law. 
(d)  Repealer. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with or inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(42), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 140-184. - Table of allowed uses. 
Permitted Uses and Conditions 	R-1 	R-1H 	R-2 	B-1 	B-2 	B-3 	I-1 	O-L 
Abrasive manufacture 							R 	
Accessory use 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	SE 	R 	R 
Acetyene gas manufacture and or service 							R 	
Acid manufacture (hydrochloric, nitric, pieric, sulphuric, sulphanous, carbolic) 							SE 	
Air conditioning sales and service 					R 		R 	
Air products manufacture 							R 	
Airport and/or dusting service (need not be enclosed within structure) 							R 	R 
Alcohol distillation and/or storage 							R 	
Alcoholic beverage sales (carry-out only, not to be consumed on premises) 				PA 	R 			
Altering and repairing of wearing apparel 				R 				
Ambulance service 					R 			
Ammonia bleaching powder and chlorine manufacture 							R 	
Amusements, commercial 					R 			
Amusements, commercial (indoor) 						R 		
Animal black, lamb black, or bone black manufacture 							SE 	
Animal reduction 							SE 	
Antique shop 				R 	R 	R 		
Apothecary (limited to the sale of pharmaceuticals and medical supplies) 				R 	R 	R 		
Apparel and accessory store 				R 	R 	R 		
Appliance store 					R 	R 		
Archery range (need not be enclosed within structure) 								R 
Armory 					R 		R 	
Art gallery or museum 	SE 		SE 	R 	R 	R 		
Auditorium 					R 	PA 		
Automobile and truck body repair (enclosed, no salvage or wrecking). 					SE 		R 	
Automobile and truck filling station (no repair, salvage, or body work) 				R 				
Automobile and truck filling station and/or repair (no salvage, wrecking or body 					R 		R 	
Automobile and truck laundry, provided: 					R 		R 	
Automobile and truck laundry, not to include mechanically operated rotating brushes. 				SE 				
Automobile and truck parts store, retail (excluding all mechanical operation) 				R 	R 			
Automobile and truck sales, rentals, repair (need not be enclosed within structure). 					R 		R 	
Automobile and truck salvage yard (all vehicles obscured from view by a fence or wall). 							SE 	
Automobile and truck storage (commercial) (need not be enclosed within structure) 					R 		R 	
Automobile and truck tire store (sales and installation of tires and accessories) 					R 			
Aviary (need not be enclosed within structure) 							R 	
Bait store or sales (live bait) (need not be enclosed within structure) 					R 			
Bakery, retail 				R 	R 	R 		
Bakery, wholesale 					R 		R 	
Bank 				R 	R 	PA 		
Barber and beauty supplies and equipment sales 					R 			
Barber shop or beauty shop 				R 	R 	R 		
Battery manufacture 							R 	
Beverage manufacture (not including alcoholic) 							R 	
Bicycle and/or lawn mower sales and repair 					R 			
Bingo parlor (state regulated) 					R 			
Blueprinting and photostating 					R 			
Boat body repair (metal and non-metal) 					SE 		R 	
Boat body repair (non-metal) 					R 			
Boilder or tank works 							R 	
Bones, distillation 							SE 	
Book store 				R 	R 	R 		
Brewery 							R 	
Building specialties store 					R 			
Business college 				PA 	R 	R 		
Business incubator provided: 					R 	SE 		
Business machines sales and service 					R 			
Butane and other liquefied petroleum gas products storage and sales 							SE 	
Cabinet or carpenter shop 					R 			
Camera and photographic supplies store 				R 	R 	R 		
Candy, nut, and confectionery store 				R 	R 	R 		
Canvas products manufacture 							R 	
Carnival or circus, as a temporary use (three-day) permit issued by the zoning administrator 							R 	
Carting, express, crating, hauling and storage 							R 	
Catering shop 				R 	R 	PA 		
Caustic soda manufacture 							R 	
Celluloid manufacture 							R 	
Cement, lime, gypsum and plaster manufacture 							SE 	
Cemetery (need not be enclosed within structure 	SE 		SE 					R 
Chemicals (heavy or industrial), manufacture and/or processing 							R 	
Church, including parish house, community house, and educational buildings 	PA 	PA 	PA 	PA 	PA 	PA 		PA 
Clay and clay products manufacture (need not be enclosed within structure) 							SE 	
Clinic, dental or medical 				R 	R 	PA 		
Clothing manufacture 							R 	
Club or lodge (private) not including any service customarily carried on as a business 				R 	R 	PA 		
Coffee roasting 							R 	
Cold storage plant 							R 	
College fraternity or sorority house 				PA 				
College or university 								PA 
College or university 	SE 	SE 	SE 	R 				
Computer sales and service 					R 	PA 		
Concrete and concrete products manufacture (need not be enclosed within structure) 							R 	
Contractor's, storage yard (need not be enclosed within structure) 							R 	
Convalescent home 	SE 	SE 	SE 	R 	R 			
Corrections facility, jail, or prison 							R 	R 
Cosmetics (compounding only) 							R 	
Cosmetics (compounding only) 					R 			
Cotton compress 							R 	
Cotton ginning and baleing 							R 	
Counseling center 	SE 	SE 		R 				
Creamery 					R 		R 	
Dairy equipment sales 					R 		R 	
Dairy products sales (retail or wholesale) 						R 		
Dairy products sales (retail) 				R 	R 	R 		
Delicatessen 				R 	R 	R 		
Department store (limited to the sale of products independently permitted in the district. 					R 	R 		
Detergents, soaps, and by-products using animal fat manufacture 							R 	
Diesel engine repair 							R 	
Disinfectant, insecticide, or poison manufacture 							R 	
Dog pound (need not be enclosed within structure) 							R 	
Drug manufacture 							R 	
Drug store 				R 	R 	R 		
Dry cleaning pick-up station only 				R 		R 		
Dry cleaning with noninflammable cleaning agent only 					R 			
Dry cleaning, laundry, linen, diaper and/or uniform service 					R 		R 	
Dry goods store, retail 				R 	R 	R 	R 	
Dry goods, wholesale 							R 	
Dwelling, cluster (according to provisions of section 130-4(9)) 		R 	R 	R 				
Dwelling, condominium 						PA 		
Dwelling, condominium (according to provisions of section 130-4(9)) 			R 	R 				
Dwelling, multi-family 			R 	R 		PA 		
Dwelling, one-family 	R 	R 	R 	R 		PA 		
Dwelling, townhouse (according to provisions of section 130-4(9)) 		R 	R 	R 				
Dwelling, two-family 			R 	R 		PA 		
Dyestuff manufacture 							R 	
Electric equipment repair shop 					R 		R 	
Electric power generating station 							R 	
Electric substation or gas regulator station (enclosed by wall or fence w/ screen planting) 	SE 	SE 	SE 	R 	R 		R 	SE 
Electroplating 							R 	
Elevator maintenance service 							R 	
Excursion boat and dock (not to be used as dwelling) 								SE 
Explosives, fireworks and gunpowder manufacture and/or storage 							SE 	
Exterminators 					R 			
Fairgrounds 					PA 			R 
Farm equipment and supplies sales (need not be enclosed within structure) 					R 		R 	
Farming and truck gardening (need not be enclosed within structure) 	R 		R 					R 
Fee-charged parking lots (privately-owned) 						SE 		
Feed store 					R 		R 	
Felt manufacture 							R 	
Fertilizers manufacture or processing 							SE 	
Fire station 	PA 	PA 	PA 	R 	R 		R 	PA 
Fix-it-shop 				R 	R 			
Fixture sales 					R 		R 	
Floor covering sales 					R 			
Floral shop 					R 	PA 		
Food locker plant renting only individual lockers for home customer storage of food 					R 		R 	
Food products, manufacture 							R 	
Food products, wholesale storage and sales 					R 		R 	
Food vendor (on street, licensed) 						R 		
Foundry 							R 	
Freight depot, railway and/or truck 							R 	
Frozen food plant 							R 	
Fruit and produce, wholesale 					R 		R 	
Fruit store 					R 			
Funeral home, mortuary or undertaking establishment 				R 	R 			R 
Fungicides manufacture 							R 	
Fur dyeing, finishing and storage, no tanning 					R 		R 	
Furniture refinishing, repair, and/or upholstering 					R 	SE 		
Furniture store, retail 					R 	R 		
Garbage and trash collection service (need not be enclosed within structure) 							R 	
Garden supplies store (handling pre-packaged fertilizers) 				R 	R 			
Gift shop 				R 	R 	R 		
Glass manufacture 							R 	
Glass products manufacture (from glass stock) 							R 	
Glass store 					R 			
Glue, size, or gelatin manufacture 							SE 	
Golf course (not commercial miniature amusement) (need not be enclosed in structure) 	PA 		PA 					R 
Golf driving range (need not be enclosed within structure) 					R 			
Grain drying or feed manufacture from refuse, mash or grain 							R 	
Grain milling, storage and elevators 							R 	
Graphite manufacture 							R 	
Grocery store, retail 				R 	R 	R 		
Gymnasium, commercial 					R 			
Hair products manufacture or processing 							R 	
Hardware manufacture 							R 	
Hardware store, retail 				R 	R 	R 		
Hardware, wholesale storage and sales 							R 	
Hatchery 							R 	
Health food store 				R 	R 	R 		
Hobby supply store 				R 	R 	R 		
Hosiery mill 							R 	
Home occupation 	R 	R 	R 	R 		PA 		
Hospital or sanitarium 				R 	R 			
Hotel, motel, tourist home provided 					R 	R 		
Ice cream manufacture 					R 		R 	
Ice cream store 				R 	R 	R 		
Ice manufacture 							R 	
Incinerator 							R 	
Institution for children or the aged 	SE 	SE 	SE 	R 	R 			SE 
Insulation manufacture or fabrication 							R 	
Interior decorating service 				R 	R 	PA 		
Jewelry Store 				R 		R 		
Laboratory 							R 	
Laboratory, dental or medical 					R 			
Landscape garden sales (need not be enclosed within structure) 					R 			
Laundry 					R 		R 	
Laundry, self-service only 				R 				
Leather or luggage store 					R 			
Library (public) 	PA 	PA 	PA 					
Library or reading room 				R 	R 	PA 		
Linoleum manufacture 							R 	
Livestock keeping, raising, breeding (animals must be 150 feet away from other uses) 								R 
Loan office 					R 	PA 		
Locksmith 					R 			
Lumber yard and building materials (need not be enclosed within structure) 				SE 	R 		R 	
Machinery, tools and construction equipment, sales and service 					R 		R 	
Mail order house 							R 	
Marine store 				PA 	R 		R 	
Matches manufacturing 							SE 	
Mattress manufacturing and rebuilding 							R 	
Meat slaughtering and/or packaging 							SE 	
Metal ingots, pigs, castings, sheets or bars manufacture 							SE 	
Metal products fabrication 							R 	
Metal sharpening 							R 	
Millinery manufacture 							R 	
Millwork and similar wood products manufacture 							R 	
Mini-warehouses (as regulated in section 140-23) 					R 			
Miniature golf course 					R 			
Mobile home park (must conform to mobile home park ordinance regulations) 			R 	PA 				
Mobile home sales (need not be enclosed within structure) 					R 			
Mobile home, Class A 	R 	R 	R 	R 				
Mobile home, Class B 	SE 		R 	R 				
Motorcycle sales and service 					R 			
Music store 					R 	R 		
Name plate, unlighted, not exceeding two square feet, must be attached to the structure 	R 	R 	R 					
News stand 					R 	R 		
Novelty and souvenir manufacture 							R 	
Nursery, day care, or kindergarten 	SE 	SE 	SE 	R 	R 	PA 		
Office 				R 	R 	PA 	R 	
Office equipment and supplies manufacture or distribution 							R 	
Office equipment and supplies, retail 					R 	R 		
Oil well supplies and machinery (need not be enclosed within structure) 							R 	
Oils and fats (animal and vegetable manufacture) 							R 	
Optician 				R 	R 	PA 		
Packing and gasket manufacture 							R 	
Paint and wallpaper store 					R 			
Painting and decorating contractor 					R 		R 	
Paper products manufacture 							R 	
Paper supplies, wholesale 					R 		R 	
Paper, pulp, cellulose and rayon manufacture 							R 	
Parcel service (e.g.: UPS, Fedex) 						R 		
Park, playground, or recreation center (public) (need not be enclosed within structure) 	R 	R 	R 	R 		R 		R 
Passenger depot, railway or bus 					R 	R 	R 	
Pawn shop 				SE 	R 			
Pet shop 				PA 	R 	R 		
Petroleum and petroleum products manufacture, processing or storage 							SE 	
Photographic studio and/or processing 				R 	R 	R 		
Picture framing 				R 	R 	R 		
Picture framing and/or mirror silvering 					R 			
Pipe line or electric transmission line (need not be enclosed within structure) 	PA 	PA 	PA 	PA 	PA 	PA 	PA 	PA 
Pipe storage (need not be enclosed within structure) 							R 	
Plastic fabrication 							R 	
Plastic manufacture 							R 	
Plumbing shop 					R 		R 	
Police Substation 					R 	PA 		
Post office 				R 	R 	R 		
Potash shop 							R 	
Poultry processing, storage, and/or dressing 							R 	
Printing inks manufacture and fabrication 							R 	
Printing, publishing, and copying services 				R 	R 	PA 	R 	
Radio and television broadcasting studio 				R 	R 	PA 		
Radio and television broadcasting transmitter 							R 	SE 
Radio and television store and repair shop 					R 	R 		
Railroad facilities, including shops, yards, and team tracks 							R 	
Railroad right-of-way (not including shops, yards, and team tracks) 	PA 	PA 	PA 	PA 	PA 	PA 	R 	PA 
Record shop 					R 	R 		
Recording studio 					R 	PA 		
Recreation center (indoor, publicly-owned) 		R 						
Recreation vehicle sales (need not be enclosed within structure) 					R 			
Recreational vehicle park (RVs) 						SE 		
Reducing salon 				R 	R 	PA 		
Respite care facility 	SE 	SE 	SE 	R 				
Restaurant (indoor seating) 				R 	R 	R 		
Restaurant supplies and equipment sales 					R 		R 	
Restaurant, drive-in (need not be enclosed within structure) 					R 			
Revival church (temporary) on a one week permit issued by the zoning administrator. 				PA 	PA 		R 	PA 
Riding academy (need not be enclosed within structure) 							R 	R 
Rock crusher 							R 	
Roofing and gravel storage (need not be enclosed within structure) 							R 	
Roofing and sheetmetal shop 							R 	
Rooming house and boarding house 					R 			
Rubber or gutta percha manufacture processing or reclaiming 							SE 	
Rug Cleaning 					R 		R 	
Salvage yard, including storage, baling or sale of rags, paper, metal, or junk (obscured) 							SE 	
Sand and gravel storage yard (need not be enclosed within structure) 							R 	
Sawmill and planing mill 							R 	
School, elementary and/or secondary (meets all compulsory education laws of the state). 	SE 	SE 	SE 	R 	R 			PA 
Seafood store, retail 					R 			
Seed store 					R 		R 	
Sewage disposal plant 							R 	
Shoe manufacture 							R 	
Shoe repair shop 					R 	PA 	R 	
Shoe sales, retail 				R 	R 	R 		
Shoe sales, wholesale and retail 							R 	
Sign shop 					R 		R 	
Sign, off-premises 					R 		R 	
Sign, on-premises 				R 	R 	R 	R 	
Sign, outdoor general advertising structure (need not be enclosed within structure) 					R 		R 	PA 
Skeet, trap, and target shooting range (need not be enclosed within structure) 								R 
Small animal clinic (no kennels) 				PA 	R 		R 	
Small animal clinic (with kennels) 					R 		R 	
Small business development center 						SE 		
Small engine repair 					R 		R 	
Soda and washing compound manufacture 							R 	
Sporting goods store, retail 				R 	R 	R 	R 	
Sporting goods store, wholesale 							R 	
Stockyards (need not be enclosed within structure) 							SE 	
Stone cutting 							R 	
Stone monument sales, retail (need not be enclosed within structure) 					R 			
Studio for professional work or teaching of any form of fine arts 				R 	R 	PA 		
Sugars and starches manufacture 							R 	
Surgical or dental supplies store 					R 			
Syrup manufacture 							R 	
Tailor shop 					R 	PA 		
Tannery, including curing of hides 							SE 	
Tar distillation or manufacture 							R 	
Taxidermy 					PA 		R 	
Telephone exchange (not including shops or garages) 	PA 		PA 	R 	R 	PA 	R 	SE 
Telephone exchange (including shops and garages) 				R 	R 		R 	SE 
Theater, indoor 					R 	R 		
Theater, outdoor (need not be enclosed within structure) 					PA 			
Tile shop 					R 			
Tobacco store 					R 	R 		
Tobacco, wholesale 					R 			
Tool manufacture 							R 	
Town hall, police station, courthouse, federal building 					R 	R 		
Toy manufacture 							R 	
Toy store 				R 	R 	R 		
Trade school 							R 	
Trailer manufacture 							R 	
Trailer sales (need not be enclosed within structure) 							R 	
Transit vehicle storage and servicing (need not be enclosed within structure) 							R 	
Truck shop (as defined by state law) 					SE 			
Truck wash 					SE 			
Variety store 					R 	R 		
Vegetable store 					R 			
Vending machines operations 					R 			
Venetian blind and metal awning fabrication and cleaning 					R 		R 	
Vulcanizing shop 					R 			
Water distillation 					R 		R 	
Water or sewage pumping station 	SE 	SE 	SE 	R 	R 	PA 	R 	SE 
Water storage (need not be enclosed within structure) 	PA 	PA 	PA 	R 	R 		R 	R 
Welding shop 							R 	
Well drilling company 							R 	
Wholesale and warehousing 							R 	
Wood finishing products manufacture such as paints, enamels, lacquers, and varnishes 							R 	
Wood preserving by creosote or other impregnation treatment (outdoors) 							R 	
YMCA, YWCA and similar institutions 				R 	R 	PA 		
 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(43), 4-13-1999)  
Secs. 140-185—140-204. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - MISCELLANEOUS RELATED SECTIONS 
 
Sec. 140-205. - Litter receptacles. 
(a)  Placement requirements. 
(1)  Any owner or person in control of any property which is held out to the public as a place for parking consisting of 15 or more parking spaces shall be responsible for the procurement, placement, and maintenance of litter receptacles according to the following: 
a.  Parks, recreation areas, campgrounds, and transient vehicle parks: one at each restroom, concession stand, picnic pavilion, and trail head; 
b.  Retail stores, shopping centers, and theaters: one for the first 15 parking spaces, plus one for every 50 additional parking spaces; 
c.  Gasoline service stations: one per pump island with a minimum of one on each side of the station where pumps are located; 
d.  Restaurants, drive-ins, fast-food outlets, taverns and convenience stores: one per establishment; 
e.  Marinas or piers: one per pier plus one additional for each 15 boat slips; 
f.  Festivals and other outdoor events: one for each special restroom, one every 200 feet of walking area, one for each special parking area of 150 spaces, and one at each food service area; 
g.  Construction sites: Contractors engaged in new construction or substantial rehabilitation of buildings or other large scale public works projects shall provide at least one litter receptacle at the construction site with additional receptacles as needed to prevent scattering of litter by workers. 
(2)  Parking facilities utilized on a shared basis by more than one business, person, group or institution consisting of 30 or more parking spaces shall be provided with receptacles by those entities on a shared basis, with responsibility falling jointly upon them regardless of proximity. 
(b)  Receptacle design standards. Litter receptacles procured and placed in public places as required by this article shall meet the following minimum standards: 
(1)  General specifications. 
a.  The body of each litter receptacle shall be constructed of a minimum of 24-gauge galvanized metal or other material of equivalent strength, that will withstand normal wear and tear and reasonably resist corrosion and acts of vandalism. 
b.  Receptacles should be constructed, covered, or used in such a manner as to prevent or preclude the blowing of litter from the receptacle. 
c.  Openings in covered litter receptacles shall be readily identifiable and readily accessible for the deposit of litter. 
d.  Construction and general configuration of litter receptacles shall be in conformance with all pertinent laws, ordinances, resolutions or regulations pertaining to fire, safety, public health, or welfare. 
e.  Litter receptacles shall have a 15-liquid-gallon capacity. 
(2)  Color and marking. 
a.  The entire outer surface of each litter receptacle shall be white, navy blue, dark brown, or tan, if painted, however, if construction consists of aggregate concrete or wood, its natural color is acceptable. 
b.  Each litter receptacle may bear the official state anti-litter logo as described in state law. 
c.  When the official state logo is used, no commercial advertisement shall be placed on any litter receptacle within eight inches of the official logo; and any such advertising may not exceed the logo in area. The owner of the receptacle may place a single line on the receptacle identifying ownership, and a single credit line designating any donor of the litter receptacle other than the owner. That lettering may not exceed one-half inch in height and may not interfere with or distract from the prominence of the anti-litter symbol. 
(3)  Maintenance. 
a.  Compliance with these minimum standards shall include disposal of waste matter deposited, proper upkeep, maintenance and repair of litter receptacles sufficient to permit such receptacles to serve the functions for which they were designed and to prevent the appearance of such receptacles from becoming unsightly. Inadequately maintained or unsightly litter receptacles shall be a violation of these minimum standards. 
b.  Whenever litter receptacles are placed in any public place other than where required by these rules and regulations, such receptacles shall conform to the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(44), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 140-206. - Livestock keeping, raising, or breeding. 
(a)  No person shall establish or maintain any animal pen, stable, barnyard, rabbit hutch, chicken house or other place for the raising or breeding of livestock as defined in section 140-5. 
(b)  Any place for the keeping or housing of animals shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition at all times, such that no vermin, insects, or other pests will find it a suitable habitat within which to propagate. 
(c)  Any place where animals are kept or housed shall not exude any unpleasant odors. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(45), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 140-207. - Moving mobile homes. 
No mobile home shall be placed on any site within the town's limits to be used for residential or commercial purposes without the selling dealer and mover, or either of them, first obtaining a permit from the zoning administrator and building inspector for the placement of that mobile home, and assuming responsibility for its placement in accordance with all laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(46), 4-13-1999)  
Sec. 140-208. - Mobile sign permit required. 
(a)  No mobile sign shall be located or utilized for display purposes on any site or premises unless a sign permit has been issued by the building inspector for that location. 
(b)  No permit for the erection or placement of mobile signs shall be issued without prior approval of the zoning administrator that its placement is or will be in conformance with this Code. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 2(47), 4-13-1999)  
Appendix A - FRANCHISES[1] 
Ord. No. 	Adopted 	Subject 	Franchisee 	Term 
(Years) 	Expiration 
Date 
341 		CATV 	Jackson Parish Broadcasters 		1989 
344 	10-13-1964 	GAS 	La. Gas Service Co. 	25 	1989 
478 	11-10-1987 	CATV 	Telecable, Inc. 	15 	2002 
488 	6-13-1989 	GAS 	La. Gas Service Co. 	25 	2014 
722 	5-17-2014 	GAS 	Atmos Energy Corp. 	25 	2039 
 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Power of mayor and board of aldermen to grant franchises, R.S. 33:401(A)(11), (12). 
 
Appendix B - TOWN OF JONESBORO FEE SCHEDULE[1] 
Code 
Section 	Description 	Fee 
Chapter 2—Administration 
2-70 	Board of aldermen compensation, monthly, per member 	$500.00 
2-71 	Mayor, annual salary 	$52,000.00 
Chapter 6—Animals and Fowl 
6-49 	Impounded animals, standard boarding, per day 	$3.00 
	Impounded animals, rabies observation boarding, per day 	$5.00 
6-50 	Unclaimed animal, adoption fee 	$7.00 
6-76 	License tax, dog or cat, annually 	$3.00 
6-79 	Dog or cat license, duplicate tag 	$1.50 
Chapter 16—Licenses and Taxation 
16-2 	Public safety fee, per month: 
	Each residence situated inside municipal limits 	$2.00 
	Each business located inside municipal limits 	$3.00 
Chapter 20—Nuisances 
20-4 	Abandoned vehicle disposal fee 	$15.00 
20-53 	Service charge for excessive police calls 	Varies 
20-53 	Unpaid service charge, administrative collection cost 	$250.00 
Chapter 24—Peddlers and Solicitors 
24-35 	Application fee 	$5.00 
24-36 	License fee 	$100.00 
Chapter 32—Utilities 
32-2 	Plumbing contractor, annual registration fee 	$25.00 
32-104 	Water service, residential, monthly 
	Inside corporate limits, single use connection: 
	First 2,000 gallons (minimum charge) 	$6.75 
	All over 2,000 gallons, per thousand gallons or portion thereof 	$3.25 
	Inside corporate limits, multiple use connection: 
	First 2,000 gallons (minimum charge), per meter 	$11.00 
	Plus, all over 2,000 gallons, per thousand gallons, or portion thereof 	$3.75 
	Outside corporate limits, single use connection: 
	First 2,000 gallons (minimum charge) 	$11.00 
	All over 2,000 gallons, per thousand gallons or portion thereof 	$3.50 
	Outside corporate limits, multiple use connection: 
	First 2,000 gallons (minimum charge), per meter 	$13.50 
	All over 2,000 gallons, per thousand gallons or portion thereof 	$3.50 
32-104 	Water service, commercial and business structures (except industrial facilities), monthly 
	Inside corporate limits, single use connection: 
	First 4,000 gallons (minimum charge) 	$14.00 
	All over 4,000 gallons, per thousand gallons or portion thereof 	$3.25 
	Inside corporate limits, multiple use connection: 
	First 4,000 gallons (minimum charge) 	$25.00 
	Plus, all over 4,000 gallons, per thousand gallons, or portion thereof 	$3.25 
	Outside corporate limits, single use connection: 
	First 4,000 gallons (minimum charge) 	$19.00 
	All over 4,000 gallons, per thousand gallons or portion thereof 	$3.25 
	Outside corporate limits, multiple use connection: 
	First 4,000 gallons (minimum charge) 	$35.00 
	All over 4,000 gallons, per thousand gallons or portion thereof 	$3.25 
32-104 	Water service, industrial facilities, monthly 
	First 500,000 gallons (minimum charge), per meter 	$751.00 
	Plus, all over 500,000 gallons, per thousand gallons, or portion thereof 	$2.75 
32-104 	Meter deposits 
	¾" meter, renter 	$100.00 
	¾" meter, owner 	$75.00 
	1" meter 	$100.00 
	2" or larger meter 	$125.00 
32-104 	Tapping charges 
	Water taps, inside corporate limits: 
	¾" tap 	$200.00 or actual cost, whichever is greater 
	1" tap 	$350.00 or actual cost, whichever is greater 
	2" or larger tap 	$600.00 or actual cost, whichever is greater 
	Sewer taps, inside corporate limits 	$100.00 or actual cost, whichever is greater 
	Water and sewer taps outside corporate limits are charged the same rates as inside limits, plus any charges for additional labor, road and repair work and permits 
32-104 	Sewer charges, private homes, monthly 
	Inside corporate limits: 
	1 service connection (minimum) 	$5.50 
	Plus, add per commode 	$1.25 
	Outside corporate limits: 
	1 service connection (minimum) 	$6.50 
	Plus, add per commode 	$1.30 
32-104 	Sewer charges, business houses, stores, office buildings, apartment houses and other premises not classified as private home or industrial user, monthly 
	1 service connection (minimum) 	$9.50 
	Plus, for 2 to 5 commodes, add per commode 	$1.50 
	Plus, for 6 or more commodes, add per commode 	$1.25 
32-104 	Sewer charges, industrial users, monthly 
	First 250,000 gallons of metered water (minimum) 	$510.00 
	Plus, all over 250,000 gallons, per thousand gallons 	$1.30 
32-104 	Additional sewer use charge (not applicable to industrial users) 
	Inside corporate limits: 
	Per thousand gallons of water after 2,000 for all months except June, July and August 	$1.30 
	Per thousand gallons of water after 2,000 for months of June, July and August 	$1.10 
	Outside corporate limits: 
	Per thousand gallons of water after 2,000 for all months except June, July and August 	$1.60 
	Per thousand gallons of water after 2,000 for months of June, July and August 	$1.30 
32-104 	Connect/disconnect charge 	$10.00 
32-104 	Reconnection charge 
	Daily 	$20.00 
	After hours, weekends and holidays 	$35.00 
32-104 	Moving meter 	$20.00 
32-104 	Returned check (insufficient funds) 	$25.00 
32-104 	Garbage pickup, monthly fee 	Contractor rates 
32-104 	Garbage pickup administrative fee, per residence 	=$0.25 
Chapter 115—Electricity 
115-57 	Electrical contractor license, annual fee 	$100.00 
115-57 	Journeymen electrician license, annual fee 	$15.00 
Chapter 120—Planning and Development 
120-53 	Plan review fee (final plan) 	$25.00 
Chapter 125—Plumbing 
125-3 	Plumbing license fee 	$100.00 
125-3 	Indemnity bond or insurance certificate amount 	$1,000.00 
Chapter 140—Zoning 
140-153 	Acknowledgement of vacancy 	$10.00 
140-160 	Application and inspection fees: 
	Annexation 	$70.00 
	Planning approval 	$30.00 
	Planned building group 	$30.00 
	Resubdivision 	$30.00 
	Zoning map amendment 	$80.00 
	Plus, for every acre above 1 	$20.00 
	Special exception 	$80.00 
	Mobile home park approval, each review 	$40.00 
	Subdivision, each review 	$40.00 
	Ordinance amendment 	$50.00 
	Variance 	$30.00 
	Revocation or dedication 	$30.00 
	Appeal of decision 	None 
 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein are the municipal fees for the City of Jonesboro, Louisiana. The fees were adopted by the board of aldermen through individual ordinances, which are designated in the parenthetical history note following the section of the Code containing that specific fee. Amendments to an ordinance adopting a specific fee are also indicated in the parenthetical history note following the section of the Code containing the amended provision. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. Additions made for purposes of clarity are indicated by brackets. The designation "TBD" in the fee schedule means that the fee is to be determined by subsequent ordinance or resolution of the board of aldermen of the City of Jonesboro, Louisiana. 

